
[[p1]]

[[p2]]
Medicine
Davidson’s
Principles and Practice of

[[p3]]
Sir Stanley Davidson (1894–1981)
This famous textbook was the brainchild of one of the great Professors of 
Medicine of the 20th century. Stanley Davidson was born in Sri Lanka and 
began his medical undergraduate training at Trinity College, Cambridge; 
this was interrupted by World War I and later resumed in Edinburgh. He 
was seriously wounded in battle, and the carnage and shocking waste of 
young life that he encountered at that time had a profound effect on his 
subsequent attitudes and values.
In 1930 Stanley Davidson was appointed Professor of Medicine at 
the University of Aberdeen, one of the rst full-time Chairs of Medicine 
anywhere and the rst in Scotland. In 1938 he took up the Chair of 
Medicine at Edinburgh and was to remain in this post until retirement 
in 1959. He was a renowned educator and a particularly gifted teacher 
at the bedside, where he taught that everything had to be questioned 
and explained. He personally gave most of the systematic lectures in 
Medicine, which were made available as typewritten notes that empha-
sised the essentials and far surpassed any textbook available at the time.
Principles and Practice of Medicine was conceived in the late 1940s 
with its origins in those lecture notes. The rst edition, published in 1952, 
was a masterpiece of clarity and uniformity of style. It was of modest 
size and price, but sufciently comprehensive and up to date to provide 
students with the main elements of sound medical practice. Although 
the format and presentation have seen many changes in 23 subsequent 
editions, Sir Stanley’s original vision and objectives remain. More than 
half a century after its rst publication, his book continues to inform and 
educate students, doctors and health professionals all over the world.

[[p4]]
24th Edition
Edited by
Ian D Penman
BSc(Hons), MBChB, MD, FRCPE
Consultant Gastroenterologist, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh; 
Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of Edinburgh, UK
Stuart H Ralston
MBChB, MD, FRCP, FMedSci, FRSE, FFPM(Hon)
Professor of Rheumatology, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine,  
Institute of Genetics and Cancer University of Edinburgh; 
Honorary Consultant Rheumatologist, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, UK
Mark WJ Strachan
BSc(Hons), MBChB(Hons), MD, FRCPE
Consultant Endocrinologist, Metabolic Unit, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh; Honorary Professor, University of Edinburgh, UK
Richard P Hobson
MBBS, LLM, PhD, MRCP(UK), FRCPath
Consultant Microbiologist, Harrogate and District NHS Foundation Trust; 
Honorary Senior Lecturer, University of Leeds, UK
Illustrations by Robert Britton
London   New York   Oxford   Philadelphia   St Louis   Sydney   2023
Medicine
Davidson’s
Principles and Practice of

[[p5]]
© 2023, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
Illustrations and boxes in Chapter 11 © Julian White.
First edition 1952
Second edition 1954
Third edition 1956
Fourth edition 1958
Fifth edition 1960
Sixth edition 1962
Seventh edition 1964
Eighth edition 1966
Ninth edition 1968
Tenth edition 1971
Eleventh edition 1974
Twelfth edition 1977
Thirteenth edition 1981
Fourteenth edition 1984
Fifteenth edition 1987
Sixteenth edition 1991
Seventeenth edition 1995
Eighteenth edition 1999
Nineteenth edition 2002
Twentieth edition 2006
Twenty-rst edition 2010
Twenty-second edition 2014
Twenty-third edition 2018
Twenty-fourth edition 2022
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and 
our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than 
as may be noted herein).
Notices
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any 
information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein.Because of rapid advances in the medical 
sciences, in particular, independent verication of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.To the fullest extent 
of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any 
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-7020-8347-1
International ISBN: 978-0-7020-8348-8
Printed in the UK
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Content Strategist: Jeremy Bowes
Content Development Specialist: Siân Jarman
Project Manager: Anne Collett
Design: Miles Hitchen
Illustration Manager: Narayanan Ramakrishnan
Marketing Manager: Kathleen Patton

[[p6]]
Contents
Preface 
ix
Contributors 
xi
International Advisory Board 
xv
Acknowledgements 
xvii
Introduction 
xix
PART 1 
 FUNDAMENTALS OF MEDICINE 
1
 
1. 
Clinical decision-making 
1
N Cooper, AL Cracknell
 
2. 
Clinical therapeutics and good prescribing 
13
SRJ Maxwell
 
3. 
Clinical genetics 
37
K Tatton-Brown
 
4. 
Clinical immunology 
59
SL Johnston
 
5. 
Population health and epidemiology 
87
H Campbell, DA McAllister
 
6. 
Principles of infectious disease 
97
JAT Sandoe, DH Dockrell
 
7. 
Oncology 
127
S Clive, M Stares
 
8. 
Pain and palliative care 
153
LA Colvin, M Fallon
PART 2 
 EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE 
175
 
9. 
Acute medicine and critical illness 
175
VR Tallentire, MJ MacMahon
 
10. 
Poisoning 
219
SHL Thomas

[[p7]]
vi    CONTENTS
 
11. 
Envenomation 
239
J White
 
12. 
Medicine in austere environments 
251
AC Baker
PART 3 
 CLINICAL MEDICINE 
261
 
13. 
Infectious disease 
261
DH Dockrell, S Sundar, BJ Angus
 
14. 
HIV infection and AIDS 
349
G Maartens
 
15. 
Sexually transmitted infections 
369
DJ Clutterbuck
 
16. 
Cardiology 
385
DE Newby, NR Grubb
 
17. 
Respiratory medicine 
479
IJ Clifton, DAB Ellames
 
18. 
Nephrology and urology 
557
B Conway, PJ Phelan, GD Stewart
 
19. 
Clinical biochemistry and metabolic medicine 
613
A Mather, DR Sullivan, E Miller-Hodges
 
20. 
Endocrinology 
647
JDC Newell-Price, FW Gibb
 
21. 
Diabetes mellitus 
703
JR Petrie, JG Boyle
 
22. 
Nutritional factors in disease 
755
AG Shand, MEJ Lean
 
23. 
Gastroenterology 
781
A Rej, TS Chew, DS Sanders
 
24. 
Hepatology 
859
MJ Williams, TT Gordon-Walker
 
25. 
Haematology and transfusion medicine 
921
HG Watson, DJ Culligan, LM Manson
 
26. 
Rheumatology and bone disease 
989
GPR Clunie, SH Ralston
 
27. 
Dermatology 
1063
SH Ibbotson
 
28. 
Neurology 
1119
DPJ Hunt, MD Connor

[[p8]]
CONTENTS    vii
 
29. 
Stroke medicine 
1201
W Whiteley, R Woodeld
 
30. 
Medical ophthalmology 
1217
JA Olson
 
31. 
Medical psychiatry 
1235
RM Steel, SM Lawrie
 
32. 
Maternal medicine 
1263
L Mackillop, FEM Neuberger
 
33. 
Adolescent and transition medicine 
1281
RJ Mann
 
34. 
Ageing and disease 
1295
TJ Quinn
 
35. 
Laboratory reference ranges 
1309
SJ Jenks
Index 
1317
Get the most out of your Davidson’s!
Redeem your unique e-content PIN code today (see inside front cover) to access:
The complete, downloadable eBook – for quick reference, anytime access
BONUS NEW self-assessment material – 166 interactive questions and answers  
supplement each chapter, to help test your understanding of key points and aid exam 
preparation

[[p9]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p10]]
Preface
Well over 2.5 million copies of Davidson’s Principles and Practice of 
Medicine have been sold since it was rst published in 1952. Now in 
its 24th Edition, Davidson’s is regarded as a ‘must-have’ textbook for 
thousands of medical students, doctors and health professionals across 
the world, describing the pathophysiology and clinical features of the 
most important conditions encountered in the major specialties of adult 
medicine and explaining how to investigate, diagnose and manage 
them. The book is the winner of numerous prizes and awards and has 
been translated into many languages. Taking its origins from Sir Stanley 
Davidson’s much-admired lecture notes, the book has endured because 
it continues to keep pace with how modern medicine is taught and to 
provide a wealth of information in an easy-to-read, concise and beauti-
fully illustrated format.
Davidson’s strives to ensure that readers can not only recognise the 
clinical features of a disease, but also understand the underlying causes. 
To achieve this, each chapter begins with a summary of the relevant 
pre-clinical science, linking pathophysiology with clinical presentation 
and treatment so that students can use the book from the start of their 
medical studies right through to their nal examinations and beyond.
The regular introduction of new authors and editors is important for 
maintaining freshness. On this occasion, 21 new authors have joined 
our existing contributors to make up an outstanding team of authorities 
in their respective elds. As well as recruiting authors from around the 
globe, particularly for topics such as infectious diseases, HIV and enven-
omation, we welcome members from 10 countries on to our International 
Advisory Board. These leading experts provide detailed comments that 
are crucial to our revision of each new edition. A particularly important 
aspect in planning the revision is for the editors to meet students and 
faculty in medical schools in those countries where the book is most 
widely read, so that we can respond to the feedback of our global read-
ership and their tutors. We use this feedback, along with the information 
we gather via detailed student reviews and surveys, to craft each edition. 
The authors, editors and publishing team aim to ensure that readers all 
over the world are best served by a book that integrates medical science 
with clinical medicine to convey key knowledge and practical advice in 
an accessible and readable format. The amount of detail is tailored to the 
needs of medical students working towards their nal examinations, as 
well as candidates preparing for Membership of the Royal Colleges of 
Physicians (MRCP) or its equivalent.
With this new edition we have introduced several changes in both 
structure and content. The opening eight chapters provide an account of 
the principles of genetics, immunology, infectious diseases, population 
health, oncology and pain management, along with a discussion of the 
core principles behind clinical decision-making and good prescribing. 
Subsequent chapters discuss medical emergencies in poisoning, enven-
omation and medicine in austere environments, while common presenta-
tions in acute medicine, including recognition and management of the 
critically ill patient, are also addressed. The disease-specic chapters 
that follow cover the major medical specialties, each one thoroughly 
revised and updated to ensure that readers have access to the ‘cutting 
edge’ of medical knowledge and practice. As we publish the 24th edi-
tion, the world is in the grip of the COVID-19 pandemic and while our 
knowledge of virology, epidemiology, clinical impact and management 
of SARS-CoV-2 is still evolving, we have dedicated a new section on 
core aspects of this hugely important topic in Chapter 13, but also in 
Chapter6 and, as appropriate, elsewhere throughout the book.
The innovations introduced in recent editions have been maintained 
and, in many cases, developed. The highly popular ‘Clinical Examination’ 
overviews have been extended and updated. The ‘Presenting Problems’ 
sections continue to provide an invaluable overview of the most common 
presentations in each disease area. The ‘Emergency’ and ‘Practice Point’ 
boxes have been retained along with the ‘In Old Age’, ‘In Pregnancy’ 
and ‘In Adolescence’ boxes, which emphasise key practical points in 
the presentation and management of the older adult, women with medi-
cal disorders who are pregnant or planning pregnancy, and adolescents 
transitioning between paediatric and adult services.
Education is achieved by assimilating information from many sources 
and readers of this book can enhance their learning experience by using 
several complementary resources. We developed a self-testing compan-
ion book entitled Davidson’s Assessment in Medicine, containing over 
1250 multiple choice questions specically tailored to the contents of 
Davidson’s for the 23rd edition and have added more new online MCQs 
to accompany this edition. The long-standing association of Davidson’s
with its sister books, Macleod’s Clinical Examination and Principles and 
Practice of Surgery, still holds good. Our ‘family’ has also expanded with 
the publication of Davidson’s Essentials of Medicine, a pocket-sized 
version of the main text, now in its 3rd edition; and Macleod’s Clinical 
Diagnosis, which describes a systematic approach to the differential 
diagnosis of symptoms and signs. We congratulate the editors and 
authors of these books for continuing the tradition of easily digested and 
expertly illustrated texts.
We all take immense pride in continuing the great tradition rst estab-
lished by Sir Stanley Davidson and in producing an outstanding book for 
the next generation of doctors.
IDP, SHR, MWJS, RPH
Edinburgh 2022

[[p11]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p12]]
Contributors
Brian J Angus MD, FRCP, DTM&H
Associate Professor, Nufeld Department of Medicine,  
Oxford University, Oxford, UK
Adam C Baker BM, BMedSci(Hons), MSc ExMed
Pre-Hospital Emergency Medicine Fellow, Honorary Senior Clinical 
Research Fellow, Department of Emergency Medicine,  
University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust, Devon Air Ambulance, 
University of Exeter, Devon, UK
James G Boyle MBChB, MD, MSc, FRCP
Consultant Diabetologist, Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Clinical Pharmacology, Glasgow Royal Inrmary; Honorary Associate 
Clinical Professor, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing,  
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
Harry Campbell MBChB, MD, FRCPE, FFPH, FRSE, FMedSci
Professor of Genetic Epidemiology and Public Health,  
Centre for Global Health, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK
Thean Soon Chew MBChB, MRCP, PhD
Consultant Gastroenterologist and Honorary Senior Lecturer in 
Gastroenterology, Academic Unit of Gastroenterology,  
University of Shefeld, Shefeld, UK
Ian J Clifton MD, FRCP
Consultant Respiratory Physician and Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, St James’s University Hospital, 
Leeds, UK
Sally Clive BMedSci(Hons), MBChB, MD, FRCPE
Consultant Medical Oncologist, Edinburgh Cancer Centre, Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK
Gavin PR Clunie MD, FRCP
Consultant Rheumatologist and Metabolic Bone Physician,  
Department of Rheumatology, Cambridge University Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK
Daniel J Clutterbuck BSc(Hons), FRCP
Consultant in Genitourinary and HIV Medicine, NHS Lothian;  
Chalmers Sexual Health Centre, Edinburgh, UK
Lesley A Colvin MBChB, PhD, FRCA, FFPMRCA, FRCPE
Professor of Pain Medicine, Division of Population Health  
and Genomics, University of Dundee School of Medicine,  
Dundee, UK
Myles D Connor MBBCh, FCP(SA), FCNeurol(SA), PhD, FRCPE
Consultant Neurologist, Department of Neurology, NHS Borders, 
Melrose, UK; Honorary Senior Lecturer, Centre for Clinical Brain 
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; Honorary Senior 
Researcher, School of Public Health,  
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
Bryan Conway MB, MRCP, PhD
Senior Lecturer and Honorary Consultant Nephrologist, Department of 
Renal Medicine, University of Edinburgh and Edinburgh Royal Inrmary, 
Edinburgh, UK
Nicola Cooper MBChB, MMedSci, FRCPE, FRACP, FAcadMEd, 
SFHEA
Consultant Physician and Clinical Associate Professor in Medical 
Education, Department for Acute Internal Medicine, University Hospitals 
of Derby & Burton NHS Foundation Trust, Derby, UK
Alison L Cracknell MBChB, FRCP
Consultant in Medicine for Older People, Department of Medicine for 
Older People, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust; Honorary Clinical 
Associate Professor, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
Dominic J Culligan BSc, MD, FRCP, FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist and Honorary Senior Lecturer,  
Department of Haematology, Aberdeen Royal Inrmary,  
Aberdeen, UK
David H Dockrell MD, FRCPI, FRCPG, FACP
Chair of Infection Medicine, Centre for Inammation Research, 
University of Edinburgh; Professor of Infection Medicine,  
UoE Centre for Inammation Research, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK
Deborah AB Ellames BSc(Hons), MBChB
Consultant Physician in Respiratory Medicine, Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK
Marie Fallon MBChB, MD, FRCPG, FRCPE, DCH, DRCOG, 
MRCGP
St Columba’s Hospice Chair of Palliative Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer 
Research Centre, Institute for Genetics and Cancer, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Fraser W Gibb MBChB, BSc(Hons), FRCP, PhD
Consultant Physician/Honorary Clinical Reader, Edinburgh Centre for 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh/ 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

[[p13]]
xii    CONTRIBUTORS
Timothy T Gordon-Walker MBChB, PhD, MRCP
Consultant Hepatologist, Department of Gastroenterology and  
Scottish Liver Transplant Unit, The Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK
Neil R Grubb MD, FRCP
Consultant in Cardiology and Cardiac Electrophysiology,  
Department of Cardiology, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
David PJ Hunt MB BChir, PhD, FRCP
Wellcome Senior Clinical Fellow, Department of Clinical Brain Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Sally H Ibbotson BSc(Hons), MD, FRCPE
Professor of Photodermatology, University of Dundee; Honorary 
Consultant Dermatologist and Head of Photobiology Unit,  
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK
Sara J Jenks MBChB, MRCP, FRCPath
Consultant in Metabolic Medicine, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, 
Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Sarah L Johnston FRCP, FRCPath
Consultant Immunologist, Department of Immunology and 
Immunogenetics, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK
Stephen M Lawrie MD(Hons), FRCPsych, Hon FRCPE, FRSE
Professor of Psychiatry and Neuroimaging, Division of Psychiatry, 
Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh,  
Edinburgh, UK
Michael EJ Lean MA, MB, BChir, MD, FRCP, FRSE
Professor of Human Nutrition, Human Nutrition, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK
Gary Maartens MBChB, MMed, FCP(SA)
Chair of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine,  
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
Lucy H Mackillop BM BCh, MA(Oxon), FRCP
Consultant Obstetric Physician, Oxford University Hospitals,  
NHS Foundation Trust; Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer,  
Nufeld Department of Women’s and Reproductive Health,  
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Michael J MacMahon FRCA, EDIC
Consultant Intensivist, Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 
Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy, UK
Rebecca J Mann BMedSci, BMBS, MRCP, FRCPCh
Consultant Paediatrician, Department of Paediatrics, Taunton and 
Somerset NHS Foundation Trust, Taunton, UK
Lynn M Manson MBChB, MD
Consultant Haematologist, Department of Transfusion Medicine,  
Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Amanda Mather MBBS, FRACP, PhD
Renal Staff Specialist, Department of Renal Medicine, Royal North 
Shore Hospital; Conjoint Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Medicine,  
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Simon RJ Maxwell MD, PhD, FRCP, FRCPE, FBPhS
Professor of Student Learning (Clinical Pharmacology and Prescribing), 
Clinical Pharmacology Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
David A McAllister MBChB, MPH, MD, MRCP, MFPH
Wellcome Trust Intermediate Clinical Fellow and Beit Fellow and 
Honorary Consultant in Public Health Medicine, Institute of Health and 
Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
Eve Miller-Hodges MBChB, PhD
Senior Clinical Lecturer and Honorary Consultant in Inherited Metabolic 
Disorders and Renal Medicine, Centre for Cardiovascular Science & 
Scottish IMD Service, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Francesca EM Neuberger MBChB, FRCP
Consultant Physician in Acute and Obstetric Medicine, Medical Division, 
North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK
David E Newby BA BSc(Hons), PhD, BM DM DSc, FRSE, FESC, 
FACC, FMedSci
British Heart Foundation Duke of Edinburgh Chair of Cardiology, Centre 
for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
John DC Newell-Price MA, PhD, FRCP
Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Oncology and Metabolism, 
University of Shefeld, Shefeld, UK
John A Olson MD, FRCPE, FRCOphth
Consultant Ophthalmic Physician, Aberdeen Royal Inrmary; Honorary 
Reader, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
John R Petrie BSc, MBChB, PhD, FRCPE, FRCPG
Professor of Diabetic Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
Paul J Phelan MD, FRCPE
Consultant Nephrologist and Renal Transplant Physician,  
Department of Nephrology, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Terence J Quinn FRCP, MD, MBChB, BSc
Senior Clinical Lecturer and Honorary Consultant in Geriatric Medicine, 
Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
Stuart H Ralston MBChB, MD, FRCP, FFPM(Hon), FMedSci, FRSE
Professor of Rheumatology, Centre for Genomic and Experimental 
Medicine, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of Edinburgh, 
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK
Anupam Rej MBChB, BMedSci(Hons), MRCP(UK)
Clinical Research Fellow, Academic Unit of Gastroenterology,  
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld, UK
David S Sanders MBChB, MD, FACG
Professor of Gastroenterology, Academic Unit of Gastroenterology, 
Royal Hallamshire Hospital and University of Shefeld, Shefeld, UK
Jonathan AT Sandoe FRCPath, PhD
Associate Clinical Professor, Consultant Microbiologist,  
Department of Microbiology, University of Leeds and  
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK
Alan G Shand MD, FRCPE
Consultant Gastroenterologist, Gastrointestinal Unit,  
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK
Mark Stares MBBS, MD(Res), MRes, BSc, MRCP
Medical Oncologist, Edinburgh Cancer Centre, Western General 
Hospital, NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, UK

[[p14]]
CONTRIBUTORS    xiii
Robby M Steel MA, MD, FRCPsych
Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist and Honorary (Clinical) Senior Lecturer 
in Psychiatry, Department of Psychological Medicine, Royal Inrmary of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Grant D Stewart BSc, MBChB, PhD Edin, MA Cantab,  
FRCSE (Urol)
Professor of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery,  
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, and Honorary Consultant 
Urological Surgeon, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK
David R Sullivan MBBS, FRACP, FRCPA, FCSANZ
Head of Department, Department of Chemical Pathology,  
NSW Health Pathology, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Shyam Sundar MD, FRCP, FAMS, FASc, FNA
Distinguished Professor, Department of Medicine, Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India
Victoria R Tallentire MBChB, MD, FRCP
Consultant Acute Physician and Associate Postgraduate Dean, 
Medical Directorate, NHS Education for Scotland, Edinburgh, UK
Katrina Tatton-Brown BM BCh, BA, MD
Professor of Clinical Genetics and Genomic Education and Consultant 
in Clinical Genetics, South West Thames Regional Genetics Service,  
St George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
Simon HL Thomas BSc, MD, FRCP, FRCPE, FEAPCCT, FACCT
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,  
Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
Henry G Watson MD, FRCP, FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist and Honorary Professor of Medicine, 
Department of Haematology, Aberdeen Royal Inrmary, Aberdeen, UK
Julian White MD, FACTM
Clinical Toxinologist and Head of Toxinology, Toxinology Department 
and University of Adelaide Department of Paediatrics,  
Women’s & Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia
William Whiteley BA, BM BCh, MSc, PhD, FRCP
Reader in Neurology, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences,  
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK;  
Senior Research Fellow, Nufeld Department of Population Health, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Michael J Williams BM BCh, PhD
Consultant Hepatologist, Scottish Liver Transplant Unit, Royal Inrmary 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Rebecca Woodeld MA, MB BChir, MRCP, PhD
Consultant Geriatrician and Stroke Physician, Department of Medicine 
for the Elderly, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK

[[p15]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p16]]
International Advisory Board
ABM Abdullah MRCP(UK), FRCPE
UGC Professor, Department of Medicine, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib 
Medical University, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Amitesh Aggarwal MD, FRCPE, FACP(USA), FRCPG, FICP, 
FIACM, FIMSA, FISE, FIAMS, FUPDA, FGSI, FISH, FRSSDI
Professor, Department of Medicine, University College of Medical 
Sciences (University of Delhi) and GTB Hospital, Delhi, India
Matthew A Brown MBBS, MD, FRACP, FAHMS, FAA
Director, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and King’s 
College London NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, King’s College 
London, London, UK
Arnold N Cohen MD, FACP, FACG, AGAF
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medical Education and Science, 
Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine of Washington State University; 
Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Spokane, Washington, USA
Mradul Kumar Daga MD, FRCP, FCCP
Professor of Medicine and In-Charge Medical ICU, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India
D Dalus MD, PhD, FRCP, FRCPE, FRCPG
Professor of Medicine and Senior Consultant, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Cosmopolitan Hospitals, Trivandrum, Kerala, India
Sydney C Dsouza MD
Professor and Head, Department of Internal Medicine, Yenepoya 
Medical College, Mangaluru, Karnataka, India
Tarun K Dutta MBBS, MD
Emeritus Professor, Department of General Medicine, Mahatma Gandhi 
Medical College and Research Institute, Puducherry, India
M Abul Faiz MBBS, FCPS, PhD
Professor of Medicine (Retired), Department of Medicine, Sir Salimullah 
Medical College and Dev Care Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Albert G Frauman MD, FRACP, FACP, FACCP, FBPhS
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, The University 
of Melbourne; Director, Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics, Austin Health, Victoria, Australia
Sujoy Ghosh MD, DM, FRCP, FRCPE, FRCPG, FACE
Professor, Department of Endocrinology, Institute of Post Graduate 
Medical Education and Research, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Hadi Goubran MBBCh, MSc, MD, FACP, FRCPE
Professor, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Saskatoon Cancer 
Centre and College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
Rajiva Gupta MD, MRCP, FRCP
Vice Chairman and Head, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical 
Immunology, Medanta The Medicity, Gurgaon, India
Quazi T Islam FCPS, FRCP, FRCPE, MACP
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Popular Medical 
College, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Saroj Jayasinghe MBBS, MD, MRCP(UK), PhD, FRCP, FCCP, 
FNASSL
Consultant Physician and former Chair Professor of Medicine, 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo,  
Sri Lanka
AL Kakrani MD, FICP
Professor of Clinical Eminence and Director of Academic 
Collaborations, Department of Medicine, Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College, 
Hospital and Research Centre, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Vasantha Kamath MD, FICP
Senior Professor in Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
MVJ Medical College and Research Hospital, Hoskote, Bangalore, 
Karnataka, India
Ammar F Mubaidin MD, FRCPE, FRCPG
Professor of Clinical Neurology, Department of Neurology, Al Khalidi 
Medical Centre, Amman, Jordan
Milind Y Nadkar MD, FICP, FACP
Additional Dean (Academic) and Professor and Head, Department of 
Medicine and Rheumatology Services, Seth G S Medical College and 
KEM Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Viswanathan Neelakantan MBBS, DNB, FRCPG, FRCP,  
FACP, AB
Senior Professor of Medicine and Consultant in Tropical Medicine, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Sri Manakula Vinayagar Medical 
College Hospital, Puducherry, India
Matthew Ng FRCP, FRCPE
Honorary Clinical Professor, Department of Medicine, University of Hong 
Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong

[[p17]]
xvi    INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD
Ami Prakashvir Parikh MD
Professor and Head, Department of Medicine, Smt. NHL Municipal 
Medical College and SVP Hospital, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Medha Y Rao MBBS, MD, PGDHHM
Senior Professor of Internal Medicine and Principal and Dean, 
Department of General Medicine, M.S. Ramaiah Medical College, 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
NR Rau MD, FICP
Consultant Physician, Anugraha Medical Center, Udupi, Karnataka, India;
Consultant Physician and Head, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Adarsh Hospital, Udupi, Karnataka, India; Former Professor and  
Head, Department of Medicine, Kasturba Medical College,  
Manipal, India
Jacek Rozanski MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Department of Nephrology, Transplantology, and 
Internal Medicine, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland
Sarkar Nirmalendu MD
Honorary Professor, Department of General Medicine, Ramakrishna 
Mission Sevapratishthan and Vivekananda Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Surendra K Sharma MD (Internal Medicine), PhD
Adjunct Professor, Department of Molecular Medicine, Jamia Hamdard 
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Hamdard University, Hamdard Nagar, 
Delhi, India
Arvind K Vaish MD, FICP
Professor and Head, Department of Medicine, Hind Institute of Medical 
Sciences; Former Professor and Head of Medicine, King George’s 
Medical University, Lucknow, India
Josanne Vassallo MD, PhD, FRCP, FACP, FACE
Professor and Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Medicine, 
Division of Endocrinology, University of Malta Medical School, Msida, 
Malta
Special Content Advisor for the Indian 
National Medical Commission undergraduate 
curriculum
Professor Dilip R Karnad MD, FRCPG, FACP
Senior Consultant in Critical Care, Jupiter Hospital, Thane, India

[[p18]]
Acknowledgements
The editors would like to acknowledge and offer grateful thanks for the 
input of all previous editions’ contributors, without whom this new edition 
would not have been possible.
In particular we are indebted to those former authors who step down 
with the arrival of this new edition. They include Quentin M Anstee, 
Leslie Burnett, Mark Byers, Graham G Dark, Richard J Davenport, Emad 
El-Omar, David R FitzPatrick, J Alastair Innes, David EJ Jones, Peter 
Langhorne, John Paul Leach, Sara E Marshall, Rory J McCrimmon, 
Mairi H McLean, Ewan R Pearson, Peter T Reid, Gordon R Scott, Peter 
Stewart, John PH Wilding and Miles D Witham.
We are grateful to members of the International Advisory Board, all 
of whom provided detailed suggestions that have improved the book. 
Several members have now retired from the Board and we are grate-
ful for their support during the preparation of previous editions. They 
include Ragavendra Bhat, Khalid I Bzeizi, Piotr Kuna, Pravin Manga, 
Moffat Nyirenda, Tommy Olsson, KR Sethuraman, Ibrahim Sherif, Ian J 
Simpson, SG Siva Chidambaram and Josanne Vassallo. We are equally 
grateful to new members of our International Advisory Board, who have 
given us valuable advice as we prepared this new edition, including ABM 
Abdullah, Quazi T Islam, Viswanathan Neelakantan and Jacek Rozanski.
We would like to extend special thanks to Professor Dilip Karnad, 
Jupiter Hospital, Thane, India, who thoroughly reviewed all chapters of 
this 24th edition in draft form, to help ensure the coverage of this edition 
is more relevant than ever to our large readership in India, Pakistan and 
Bangladesh. He provided invaluable advice to the editorial team dur-
ing preparation of the 24th edition and exhaustive feedback on how the 
content aligns with competencies in the current Indian National Medical 
Commission undergraduate curriculum. Readers of the International 
Edition of this book can now access a comprehensive Competency 
Mapping Guide with full page references for the rst time as a result of 
this thorough review.
Detailed chapter reviews were commissioned to help plan this new 
edition and we are grateful to all those who assisted, including Professor 
Rustam Al-Shahi, Dr Daniel Beckett, Dr Helen Cohen, Dr Ian Edmond, 
Dr David Enoch, Professor Tonks Fawcett, Dr Colin Forfar, Professor 
Richard Gilson, Dr Helena Gleeson, Dr Peter Hall, Dr Greg Heath, 
Dr Richard Herriot, Dr Robert Lindsay, Dr Catherine Nelson-Piercy and 
Dr Alex Rowe.
The Editors and Publisher would like to thank all those who have pro-
vided valuable feedback on this textbook and whose comments have 
helped shape this new edition. We would particularly like to extend 
our thanks to the many readers who contact us with suggestions for 
improvements. This input has been invaluable and is much appreciated; 
we regret the names are too numerous to mention individually.
The authors of Chapter 20 would like to thank Dr Drew Henderson, 
who reviewed the ‘Diabetic nephropathy’ section, and we are indebted 
to Dr Ruth Darbyshire for assistance with the Ophthalmology multiple 
choice questions to accompany Chapter 30.
Two short sections in Chapter 3 on array comparative genomic 
hybridisation and single-molecule sequencing are adapted from Dr K 
Tatton-Brown’s Massive Open Online Course for FutureLearn. We would 
like to thank the Open University and St George’s, University of London, 
for permission to use this material.
We are especially grateful to Laurence Hunter and Wendy Lee from 
Elsevier for their endless support and expertise in the shaping, collation 
and publication of Davidson’s over many years and who have now retired. 
We have thoroughly enjoyed working with a new team including Jeremy 
Bowes, Siân Jarman and Anne Collett who have seamlessly taken over 
the reins. We are delighted that Robert Britton continues to work on the 
book and illustrate it beautifully. We are proud of this new edition and are 
condent it will remain an essential and invaluable resource for readers 
the world over.

[[p19]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p20]]
Introduction
The opening chapters of the book, making up Part 1 on ‘Fundamentals 
of Medicine’, provide an account of the principles of genetics, immunol-
ogy, infectious diseases and population health, oncology and pain man-
agement, along with a discussion of the core principles behind clinical 
decision-making and good prescribing. Subsequent chapters in Part 2, 
‘Emergency and Critical Care Medicine’, discuss medical emergencies 
in poisoning, envenomation and medicine in austere environments, while 
Chapter 9 explores common presentations in acute medicine, as well 
as the recognition and management of the critically ill. The third part, 
‘Clinical Medicine’, is devoted to the major medical specialties. Each 
chapter has been written by experts in the eld to provide the level of 
detail expected of trainees in their discipline. To maintain the book’s virtue 
of being concise, care has been taken to avoid unnecessary duplication 
between chapters.
The system-based chapters in Part 3 follow a standard format, begin-
ning with an overview of the relevant aspects of clinical examination, 
followed by an account of functional anatomy, physiology and investi-
gations, then the common presentations of disease, and details of the 
individual diseases and treatments relevant to that system. In chapters 
that describe the immunological, cellular and molecular basis of disease, 
this problem-based approach brings the close links between modern 
medical science and clinical practice into sharp focus.
The methods used to present information are described below.
Clinical examination overviews
The value of good clinical skills is highlighted by a two-page overview 
of the important elements of the clinical examination at the beginning 
of most chapters. The left-hand page includes a mannikin to illustrate 
key steps in examination of the relevant system, beginning with simple 
observations and progressing in a logical sequence around the body. 
The right-hand page expands on selected themes and includes tips on 
examination technique and interpretation of physical signs. These over-
views are intended to act as an aide-mémoire and not as a replacement 
for a detailed text on clinical examination, as provided in our sister title, 
Macleod’s Clinical Examination
Presenting problems
Medical students and junior doctors must not only assimilate a great many 
facts about various disorders, but also develop an analytical approach to 
formulating a differential diagnosis and a plan of investigation for patients 
who present with particular symptoms or signs. In Davidson’s this is 
addressed by incorporating a ‘Presenting Problems’ section into all rel-
evant chapters. Nearly 250 presentations are included, which represent 
the most common reasons for referral to each medical specialty.
Boxes
Boxes are a popular way of presenting information and are particularly 
useful for revision. They are classied by the type of information they 
contain, using specic symbols.
 General Information
These include causes, clinical features, investigations, treatments and 
other useful information.
 Practice Point
There are many practical skills that students and doctors must master. 
These vary from inserting a nasogastric tube to reading an ECG or X-ray, 
or interpreting investigations such as arterial blood gases or thyroid func-
tion tests. ‘Practice Point’ boxes provide straightforward guidance on 
how these and many other skills can be acquired and applied.
 Emergency
These boxes describe the management of many of the most common 
emergencies in medicine.
 In Old Age
Life expectancy is increasing in many countries and older people are 
the chief users of health care. While they contract the same diseases 
as those who are younger, there are often important differences in the 
way they present and how they are best managed. Chapter 34, ‘Ageing 
and disease’, concentrates on the principles of managing the frailest 
group, who suffer from multiple comorbidity and disability, and who tend 
to present with non-specic problems such as falls or delirium. Many 
older people, though, also suffer from specic single-organ pathology. ‘In 
Old Age’ boxes are thus included in each chapter and describe common 
presentations, implications of physiological changes of ageing, effects of 
age on investigations, problems of treatment in old age, and the benets 
and risks of intervention in older people.
 In Pregnancy
Many conditions are different in the context of pregnancy, while some 
arise only during or shortly after pregnancy. Particular care must be taken 
with investigations (for example, to avoid radiation exposure to the fetus) 
and treatment (to avoid the use of drugs that harm the fetus). These 
issues are highlighted by ‘In Pregnancy’ boxes distributed throughout the 
book, which complement Chapter 32, ‘Maternal medicine’.

[[p21]]
xx    INTRODUCTION
 In Adolescence
Although paediatric medicine is not covered in Davidson’s, many chronic 
disorders begin in childhood, and physicians who look after adults 
often contribute to multidisciplinary teams that manage young patients 
‘in transition’ between paediatric and adult health-care services. This group 
of patients often presents a particular challenge, due to the physiological 
and psychological changes that occur in adolescence, and which can 
have a major impact on the disease and its management. Adolescents 
can be encouraged to take over responsibility from their parents/carers in 
managing their disease, but are naturally rebellious and often struggle to 
adhere to the impositions of chronic treatment. Chapter 33, ‘Adolescent 
and transition medicine’, highlights these issues, alongside the ‘In 
Adolescence’ boxes that appear in relevant chapters.
Terminology
The recommended International Non-proprietary Names (INNs) are used 
for all drugs, with the exception of adrenaline and noradrenaline. British 
spellings have been retained for drug classes and groups (e.g. amphet-
amines not amfetamines).
Units of measurement
The International System of Units (SI units) is the recommended means 
of presentation for laboratory data and has been used throughout 
Davidson’s. We recognise, however, that many laboratories around 
the world continue to provide data in non-SI units, so these have been 
included in the text for the commonly measured analytes. Both SI and 
non-SI units are also given in Chapter 35, which describes the reference 
ranges used in laboratories in Edinburgh. It is important to appreciate that 
these reference ranges may vary from those used in other laboratories.
Finding what you are looking for
A contents list is given on the opening page of each chapter. In addi-
tion, the book contains cross-references to help readers nd their way 
around, along with an extensive index. A list of up-to-date reviews and 
useful websites with links to management guidelines appears at the end 
of each chapter.
Giving us your feedback
The Editors and Publisher hope that you will nd this edition of 
Davidson’s informative and easy to use. We would be delighted to 
hear from you if you have any comments or suggestions to make 
for future editions of the book. Please contact us by e-mail at: 
davidson.feedback@elsevier.com. All comments received will be 
much appreciated and will be considered by the editorial team.

[[p22]]
Clinical decision-making
1
N Cooper
AL Cracknell
Introduction 2
The problem of diagnostic error 2
Clinical reasoning: denitions 2
History and physical examination 2
Use and interpretation of diagnostic tests 3
Normal values 3
Factors other than disease that inuence test results 4
Operating characteristics 4
Sensitivity and specicity 4
Prevalence of disease 5
Dealing with uncertainty 5
Problem representation 5
Cognitive biases 6
Type 1 and type 2 thinking 6
Common cognitive biases in medicine 7
Thinking about thinking 7
Human factors 7
Shared decision-making 9
Patient-centred evidence-based medicine 9
Effective team communication 9
Using clinical prediction rules and other decision aids 9
Reducing errors in clinical decision-making 9
Deliberate practice 9
Cognitive debiasing strategies 9
Clinical decision-making: putting it all together 10
Answers to problems 11

[[p23]]
2    CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING
Introduction
A great deal of knowledge and skill is required to practise as a doctor. 
Physicians in the 21st century need to have a comprehensive knowl-
edge of basic and clinical sciences, have good communication skills, be 
able to perform procedures, work effectively in a team and demonstrate 
 professional and ethical behaviour. But how doctors think, reason and 
make decisions is arguably their most critical skill. Knowledge is neces-
sary, but not sufcient on its own for good performance and safe care. 
This chapter describes the principles of clinical decision-making, also 
known as ‘clinical reasoning’.
The problem of diagnostic error
It is estimated that diagnosis is wrong 10%–15% of the time in spe-
cialties such as emergency medicine, internal medicine and general 
practice. Diagnostic error is associated with greater morbidity than other 
types of medical error, and the majority is considered to be preventable. 
For every diagnostic error there are usually several root causes. Studies 
identify three main categories, shown in Box 1.1. However, ‘human cog-
nitive error’ appears to play a signicant role in the majority of diagnostic 
errors.
Human cognitive error occurs when the clinician has all the information 
necessary to make the diagnosis, but then makes the wrong diagnosis. 
Why does this happen? Three main reasons have been identied:
 knowledge gaps
 misinterpretation of diagnostic tests
 cognitive biases.
Examples of errors in these three categories are shown in Box 1.2. 
Clearly, clinical knowledge is required for sound clinical reasoning, and 
an incomplete knowledge base or inadequate experience can lead to 
diagnostic error. However, this chapter will focus on some other aspects 
of knowledge that are important for effective clinical reasoning, including 
use and interpretation of diagnostic tests, cognitive biases and human 
factors.
Clinical reasoning: denitions
‘Clinical reasoning’ describes the thinking and decision-making  processes 
associated with clinical practice. Our understanding of clinical reason-
ing derives from the elds of education, cognitive psychology, studies of 
expertise and the diagnostic error and health systems literature.
Clinical reasoning can be conceptualised as a process with different 
components, each requiring specic knowledge, skills and behaviours. 
The UK Clinical Reasoning in Medical Education group (see ‘Further 
information’) broadly lists these components as:
 history and physical examination
 use and interpretation of diagnostic tests
 problem identication and management
 shared decision-making.
Not all of these components are necessary for effective clinical rea-
soning and they do not necessarily happen in this order. They also occur 
in contexts that impact on decision-making, which will be explored later. 
Underpinning all of this is formal and experiential knowledge of basic 
sciences and clinical medicine. The knowledge required for effective clin-
ical reasoning includes factual knowledge, but also conceptual knowl-
edge (how things t together) as well as procedural knowledge (how 
to do something, what techniques to use) plus an awareness of and 
an ability to think about one’s own thinking (also known as metacogni-
tive knowledge). This is where an understanding of cognitive biases and 
human factors is important.
Fig. 1.1 shows the key components involved in clinical reasoning that 
will be explored further in this chapter.
History and physical examination
Even with major advances in medical technology, the history remains 
the most important part of the clinical decision-making process. Studies 
show that physicians make a diagnosis in 70%–90% of cases from the 
history alone. It is important to remember that the history is explored 
not only with the patient, but also (and with consent if required) from all 
available sources if necessary: for example, paramedic and emergency 
department notes, eye-witnesses, relatives and/or carers.
However, clinicians need to be aware of the diagnostic usefulness of 
clinical features in the history and physical examination. For example, 
students are often taught that meningitis classically presents with the 
following features:
 headache
 fever
 meningism (photophobia, neck stiffness and other signs of menin-
geal irritation, such as Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs).
However, knowing the frequency with which patients present with 
certain features and the diagnostic weight of each feature are impor-
tant in clinical decision-making. Many patients with meningitis do not 
1.1  Root causes of diagnostic error in studies
Error category
Examples
No fault
Unusual presentation of a disease
Missing information
System error
Inadequate diagnostic support
Results not available
Error-prone processes
Poor supervision of inexperienced staff
Poor team communication
Human cognitive error
Inadequate data-gathering
Errors in reasoning
Adapted from Graber M, Gordon R, Franklin N. Reducing diagnostic errors in medicine: what is 
the goal? Acad Med 2002; 77:981–992.
1.2  Reasons for errors in clinical reasoning
Source of error
Examples
Knowledge gaps
Telling a patient she cannot have 
biliary colic because she has had her 
gallbladder removed – gallstones can 
form in the bile ducts in patients who 
have had a cholecystectomy
Misinterpretation of diagnostic 
tests
Deciding a patient has not had a 
stroke because his brain scan is 
normal – computed tomography and 
even magnetic resonance imaging, 
especially when performed early, may 
not identify an infarct
Cognitive biases
Accepting a diagnosis handed over 
to you without question (the ‘framing 
effect’) instead of asking yourself 
‘What is the evidence that supports 
this diagnosis?’

[[p24]]
Use and interpretation of diagnostic tests    3
1
have classical signs of meningism and the clinical presentation varies 
among different patient populations and in different parts of the world. 
In one prospective study conducted in the United States, nearly all adult 
patients with meningitis had headache and a fever, but less than half 
had neck stiffness on examination and only 5% of patients had Kernig’s 
and Brudzinski’s signs. All three signs had a likelihood ratio of around 1, 
meaning their presence or absence was of little use in deciding whether 
a patient had meningitis or not (Fig. 1.2).
Likelihood ratios (LR) are clinical diagnostic weights. An LR of greater 
than 1 increases the probability of disease (the higher the value, the 
greater the probability). Similarly, an LR of less than 1 decreases the 
probability of disease. LRs are developed against a diagnostic standard 
(in the case of meningitis, lumbar puncture results), so do not exist for all 
clinical ndings. LRs illustrate how an individual clinical nding changes 
the probability of a disease. For example, in a person presenting with 
headache and fever, the clinical nding of neck stiffness may carry little 
weight in deciding whether to perform a lumbar puncture because LRs 
do not determine the prior probability of disease; they reect only how a 
single clinical nding changes it. Clinicians have to take all the available 
information from the history and physical examination into account. If 
the overall clinical probability is high to begin with, a clinical nding with 
an LR of around 1 does not change this.
‘Evidence-based history and examination’ is a term used to describe 
how clinicians incorporate knowledge about the prevalence and diag-
nostic weight of clinical ndings into their decision-making. In studies, 
students who are taught the probabilities of features being present in 
specic diseases rather than lists of features have better diagnostic 
accuracy. This is improved further by understanding the basic science 
explanation for symptoms and signs: bedside signs of meningism iden-
tify patients with severe meningeal inammation but do not pick up those 
with early or mild inammation.
Evidence-based history and examination is important because esti-
mating the clinical (pre-test) probability is vital not only for diagnostic 
accuracy, but also in the use and interpretation of diagnostic tests.
Use and interpretation of diagnostic tests
There is no such thing as a perfect diagnostic test. Test results give us 
test probabilities, not real probabilities. Test results have to be interpreted 
because they are affected by the following:
 how ‘normal’ is dened
 factors other than disease
 operating characteristics
 sensitivity and specicity
 prevalence of disease in the population.
Normal values
Most tests provide quantitative results (i.e. a value on a continuous 
numerical scale). In order to classify quantitative results as normal or 
abnormal, it is necessary to dene a cut-off point. Many quantitative 
measurements in populations have a Gaussian or ‘normal’ distribution. 
By convention, the normal range is dened as those values that encom-
pass 95% of the population, or 2 standard deviations above and below 
the mean. This means that 2.5% of the normal population will have 
values above, and 2.5% will have values below the normal range. For this 
reason, it is more appropriate to talk about the ‘reference range’ rather 
than the ‘normal range’ (Fig. 1.3).
Test results in abnormal populations also have a Gaussian distribution, 
with a different mean and standard deviation. In some diseases there is 
no overlap between results from the abnormal and normal population. 
However, in many diseases there is overlap; in these circumstances, the 
greater the difference between the test result and the limits of the refer-
ence range, the higher the chance that the person has the disease.
However, there are also situations in medicine when ‘normal’ is abnor-
mal and ‘abnormal’ is normal. For example, in the context of a severe 
asthma attack a ‘normal’ PaCO2 is abnormal and means the patient has 
life-threatening asthma. Conversely, a low ferritin in a young menstruating 
woman is not considered to be abnormal at all.
Laboratory results (e.g. cholesterol, thyroid-stimulating hormone) also 
vary from day to day in the same person in the absence of a real change 
because of biological variation and laboratory variation. The extent to 
which a blood test is allowed to vary before it has truly changed is called 
Clinical
reasoning
(knowledge, skills
and behaviours)
History and
physical
examination
Cognitive biases
and human
factors
Thinking about
thinking
Shared
decision-making
Use and
interpretation of
diagnostic
tests
Problem
representation
Fig. 1.1 Elements of clinical reasoning.
Change in
probability
of disease
10
Infinity
Zero
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
+ 45%
+ 30%
+ 15%
Kernig’s sign
Brudzinski’s sign
Nuchal rigidity
Increase
probability
LR
Decrease
probability
– 15%
– 30%
– 45%
Fig. 1.2 Likelihood ratio (LR) of Kernig’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign and nuchal 
rigidity in the clinical diagnosis of meningitis.
LRs are also used for diagnostic tests; here a physical examination nding can be 
considered a diagnostic test. Data from Thomas KE, Hasbun R, Jekel J, et al. The 
diagnostic accuracy of Kernig’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign, and nuchal rigidity in adults 
with suspected meningitis. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 35:46–52.
LR =
probability of finding in  patients with disease
probability of finding in patients without disease

[[p25]]
4    CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING
the ‘critical difference’. The critical difference is different for each test, 
and can be high – 17% in the case of cholesterol and higher for some 
other tests.
Factors other than disease that inuence test 
results
A number of factors other than disease inuence test results:
 age
 ethnicity
 pregnancy
 sex
 spurious (in vitro) results.
Box 1.3 gives some examples.
Operating characteristics
Tests are also subject to operating characteristics. This refers to the 
way the test is performed. Patients need to be able to comply fully with 
some tests, such as spirometry (p. 501), and if they cannot, the test 
result will be affected. Some tests are very dependent on the skill of 
the operator and are also affected by the patient's body habitus and 
clinical state; ultrasound of the heart and abdomen are examples. A 
common mistake is when doctors refer to a test result as ‘no abnor-
mality detected’ when, in fact, the report describes a technically dif-
cult and incomplete scan that should more accurately be described as 
‘non-diagnostic’.
Some conditions are paroxysmal. For example, around half of patients 
with epilepsy have a normal standard electroencephalogram (EEG). A 
normal EEG therefore does not exclude epilepsy. On the other hand, 
around 10% of patients who do not have epilepsy have epileptiform 
discharges on their EEG. This is referred to as an ‘incidental nding’. 
Incidental ndings are common in medicine, and are increasing in inci-
dence with the greater availability of more sensitive tests. Test results 
should always be interpreted in the light of the patient’s history and phys-
ical examination.
Sensitivity and specicity
Diagnostic tests have characteristics termed ‘sensitivity’ and ‘specicity’. 
Sensitivity is the ability to detect true positives; specicity is the ability to 
detect true negatives. Even a very good test, with 95% sensitivity, will 
miss 1 in 20 people with the disease. Every test therefore generates 
‘false positives’ and ‘false negatives’ (Box 1.4).
A very sensitive test will detect most disease but may generate abnor-
mal ndings in healthy people. A negative result will therefore reliably 
exclude disease but a positive result does not mean the disease is pres-
ent – it means further evaluation is required. On the other hand, a very 
specic test may miss signicant pathology but is likely to establish the 
diagnosis beyond doubt when the result is positive. All tests differ in their 
sensitivity and specicity, and clinicians require a working knowledge of 
the tests they use in order to accurately interpret them.
In choosing how a test is used to guide decision-making there is a 
trade-off between sensitivity versus specicity. For example, dening 
an exercise electrocardiogram (p. 393) as abnormal if there is at least 
0.5 mm of ST depression would ensure that very few cases of coronary 
artery disease are missed but would generate many false-positive results 
(high sensitivity, low specicity). On the other hand, a cut-off point of 
2.0 mm of ST depression would detect most cases of important coronary 
artery disease with far fewer false positives. This trade-off is calculated 
using the receiver operating characteristic curve of the test (Fig. 1.4).
An extremely important concept in clinical decision-making is this: the 
probability that a person has a disease depends on the pre-test proba-
bility, and the sensitivity and specicity of the test. For example, imagine 
an older woman has fallen and hurt her left hip. On examination, the hip is 
extremely painful to move and she cannot stand. However, her hip X-rays 
are normal. Does she have a fracture?
The sensitivity of plain X-rays of the hip performed in the emergency 
department for suspected hip fracture is around 95%. A small percent-
age of fractures are therefore missed. If our patient has (or is at risk of) 
osteoporosis, has severe pain on hip movement and cannot bear weight 
on the affected side, then the clinical probability of hip fracture is high. If, 
on the other hand, she is unlikely to have osteoporosis, has no pain on 
Normal
population
Number of people
having each value
Abnormal
populations
Mean
– 2SD
Mean
+ 2SD
Mean
‘Reference range’
Value
Fig. 1.3 Normal distribution and reference range. For many tests, the frequency 
distribution of results in the normal healthy population (red line) is a symmetrical 
bell-shaped curve. The mean ±2 standard deviations (SD) encompasses 95% of the 
normal population and usually denes the ‘reference range’; 2.5% of the normal 
population have values above, and 2.5% below, this range (shaded areas). For some 
diseases (blue line), test results overlap with the normal population or even with the 
reference range. For other diseases (green line), tests may be more reliable because 
there is no overlap between the normal and abnormal population.
1.3  Examples of factors other than disease that inuence test 
results
Factor
Examples
Age
Creatinine is lower in old age (due to 
relatively lower muscle mass) – an older 
person can have a signicantly reduced 
eGFR with a ‘normal’ creatinine
Ethnicity
Healthy people of African ancestry have 
lower white cell counts
Pregnancy
Several tests are affected by late 
pregnancy, due to the effects of a growing 
fetus, including:
Reduced urea and creatinine 
(haemodilution)
Iron deciency anaemia (increased 
demand)
Increased alkaline phosphatase (produced 
by the placenta)
Raised D-dimer (physiological changes in 
the coagulation system)
Mild respiratory alkalosis (physiological 
maternal hyperventilation)
ECG changes (tachycardia, left axis 
deviation)
Sex
Males and females have different reference 
ranges for many tests, e.g. haemoglobin
Spurious (in vitro) results
A spurious high potassium is seen 
in haemolysis and in thrombocytosis 
(‘pseudohyperkalaemia’)
(ECG = electrocardiogram; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate, a better estimate of renal 
function than creatinine)

[[p26]]
Problem representation    5
1
hip movement and is able to bear weight, then the clinical probability of 
hip fracture is low.
Doctors are continually making judgements about whether something is 
true, given that something else is true. This is known as ‘conditional prob-
ability’. Bayes’ Theorem (named after English clergyman Thomas Bayes, 
1702–1761) is a mathematical way to describe the post-test probability 
of a disease by combining pre-test probability, sensitivity and specicity. 
In clinical practice, doctors are not able to make complex mathematical 
calculations for every decision they make. In practical terms, the answer 
to the question of whether there is a fracture is that in a high-probability 
patient a normal test result does not exclude it, but in a low-probability 
patient it (virtually) does. This principle is illustrated in Fig. 1.5
Sox and colleagues (see ‘Further information’) state a fundamental 
assertion, which they describe as a profound and subtle principle of clin-
ical medicine: the interpretation of new information depends on what you 
believed beforehand. In other words, the interpretation of a test result 
depends on the probability of disease before the test.
Prevalence of disease
Consider this problem that was posed to a group of Harvard doctors. 
The problem originates from a 1978 article in the New England Journal 
of Medicine (Casscells et al, see ‘Further information’): if a test to detect 
a disease whose prevalence is 1:1000 has a false-positive rate of 5%, 
what is the chance that a person found to have a positive result actually 
has the disease, assuming you know nothing about the person’s symp-
toms and signs? Assume the test generates no false negatives and take 
a moment to work this out. In this problem, we have removed clinical 
probability and are only considering prevalence. The answer is at the end 
of the chapter (p. 11).
Predictive values combine sensitivity, specicity and prevalence. 
Sensitivity and specicity are characteristics of the test; the population 
does not change this. However, as doctors, we are interested in the 
question, ‘What is the probability that a person with a positive test actu-
ally has the disease?’ This is illustrated in Box 1.5
Post-test probability and predictive values are different. Post-test 
probability is the probability of a disease after taking into account new 
information from a test result. Bayes’ Theorem can be used to calculate 
post-test probability for a patient in any population. The pre-test prob-
ability of disease is decided by the doctor; it is a judgement based on 
information gathered prior to ordering the test. Predictive value is the 
proportion of patients with a test result who have the disease (or no 
disease) and is calculated from a table of results in a specic population 
(see Box 1.5). It is not possible to transfer this value to a different popula-
tion. This is important to realise because published information about the 
performance of diagnostic tests may not apply to different populations.
In deciding the pre-test probability of disease, clinicians often neglect 
to take prevalence into account and this distorts their estimate of proba-
bility. To estimate the probability of disease in a patient more accurately, 
clinicians should anchor on the prevalence of disease in the subgroup to 
which the patient belongs and then adjust to take the individual factors 
into account.
Dealing with uncertainty
Clinical ndings are imperfect and diagnostic tests are imperfect. It is 
important to recognise that clinicians frequently deal with uncertainty. By 
expressing uncertainty as probability, new information from diagnostic 
tests can be incorporated more accurately. However, subjective estimates 
of probability can sometimes be unreliable. As the section on cognitive 
biases will demonstrate (see below), intuition can be a source of error.
Knowing the patient’s true state is often unnecessary in clinical deci-
sion-making. Sox and colleagues (see ‘Further information’) argue that 
there is a difference between knowing that a disease is present and act-
ing as if it were present. The requirement for diagnostic certainty depends 
on the penalty for being wrong. Different situations require different levels 
of certainty before starting treatment. How we communicate uncertainty 
to patients will be discussed later in this chapter (see Fig. 1.9).
The ‘treatment threshold’ combines factors such as the risks of the 
test, and the risks versus benets of treatment. The point at which the 
factors are all evenly weighed is the threshold. If a test or treatment for 
a disease is effective and low risk (e.g. giving antibiotics for a suspected 
urinary tract infection), then there is a lower threshold for going ahead. 
On the other hand, if a test or treatment is less effective or high risk 
(e.g. starting chemotherapy for a malignant brain tumour), then greater 
condence is required in the clinical diagnosis and potential benets of 
treatment rst. In principle, if a diagnostic test will not change the man-
agement of the patient, then careful consideration should be given to 
whether it is necessary to do the test at all.
In summary, test results shift our thinking, but rarely give a ‘yes’ or a 
‘no’ answer in terms of a diagnosis. Sometimes tests shift the probability 
of disease by less than we realise. Pre-test probability is key, and this 
is derived from the history and physical examination, combined with a 
sound knowledge of medicine and an understanding of the prevalence 
of disease in the particular care setting or the population to which the 
patient belongs.
Problem representation
Many students are taught to formulate a differential diagnosis after the 
history, physical examination and initial test results, but the ability to 
accurately articulate a ‘problem representation’ (or problem list) rst and 
then construct a prioritised differential diagnosis based on this, including 
relevant ‘must-not-miss’ diagnoses, is a key step in the clinical reasoning 
process. A problem representation refers to how information about a 
problem is mentally organised. Studies show that expert clinicians spend 
far more time on dening a problem before trying to solve it compared 
with novices, and novices are more likely to be unsuccessful in solving 
1.4  Sensitivity and specicity
Disease
No disease
Positive test
A (True positive)
B (False positive)
Negative test
C (False negative)
D (True negative)
Sensitivity = A/(A+C) × 100
Specicity = D/(D+B) × 100
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.01.0
0.8
0.6
Specificity
0.4
0.2
0
Sensitivity
Fig. 1.4 Receiver operating characteristic graph illustrating the trade-off 
between sensitivity and specicity for a given test. The curve is generated by 
‘adjusting’ the cut-off values dening normal and abnormal results, calculating the 
effect on sensitivity and specicity and then plotting these against each other. The 
closer the curve lies to the top left-hand corner, the more useful the test. The red line 
illustrates a test with useful discriminant value and the green line illustrates a less 
useful, poorly discriminant test.

[[p27]]
6    CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING
a problem because they have not accurately represented the problem 
in the rst place. The ability to synthesise all the available information 
and encapsulate it into a problem representation using precise medical 
language is an important skill that helps to organise and retrieve knowl-
edge from long-term memory relevant to the case and is associated with 
signicantly higher diagnostic accuracy, particularly in complex cases 
(Bordage, 1994; see ‘Further information’).
Formulating a problem representation (e.g. a 30-year-old pregnant 
woman with acute left-sided pleuritic chest pain and breathlessness) or a 
problem list (e.g. persistent vomiting, hypokalaemia, acute kidney injury), 
not only helps to organise and retrieve knowledge relevant to the case 
which helps in diagnosis, it also helps to formulate an action plan while 
further information is being gathered when a diagnosis is not yet possible.
Cognitive biases
Advances in cognitive psychology in recent decades have demonstrated 
that human thinking and decision-making are prone to error. Cognitive 
biases are subconscious errors that lead to inaccurate judgement and 
illogical interpretation of information. They are prevalent in everyday life; 
as the famous saying goes, ‘to err is human’.
Take a few moments to look at this simple puzzle. Do not try to solve 
it mathematically but listen to your intuition:
A bat and ball cost £1.10.
The bat costs £1 more than the ball.
How much does the ball cost?
The answer is at the end of the chapter. Most people get the answer 
to this puzzle wrong – even though they have all the knowledge and 
experience they need to solve this problem. Why? British psychologist 
and patient safety pioneer James Reason said that, ‘Our propensity 
for certain types of error is the price we pay for the brain’s remarkable 
ability to think and act intuitively – to sift quickly through the sensory 
information that constantly bombards us without wasting time trying to 
work through every situation anew.’ This property of human thinking is 
highly relevant to clinical decision-making.
Type 1 and type 2 thinking
Decades of studies in cognitive psychology and, more recently, func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging demonstrate two distinct types of 
processes when it comes to decision-making: humans have a fast, intu-
itive, pattern-recognising way of thinking which uses little cognitive effort 
(known as type 1 thinking) and a more deliberate, analytical one which 
engages our working memory (known as type 2 thinking). This is known 
as ‘dual process theory’ and Box 1.6 explains this in more detail.
Psychologists estimate that we spend 95% of our daily lives engaged in 
type 1 thinking – the intuitive, fast, subconscious mode of decision-mak-
ing. Imagine driving a car, for example: it would be impossible to function 
efciently if every decision and movement were as deliberate, conscious, 
slow and effortful as in our rst driving lesson. With experience, complex 
procedures become automatic, fast and effortless. The same applies to 
medical practice. There is evidence that expert decision-making is well 
served by intuitive thinking. The problem is that although intuitive process-
ing is highly efcient in many circumstances, in others it is prone to error.
Clinicians use both type 1 and type 2 thinking, and both types are 
important in clinical decision-making. When encountering a problem 
that is familiar, clinicians employ pattern recognition and reach a work-
ing diagnosis or differential diagnosis quickly (type 1 thinking). When 
encountering a problem that is more complicated, they use a slower, 
systematic approach (type 2 thinking). Both types of thinking interplay – 
they are not mutually exclusive in the diagnostic process. Fig. 1.6 illus-
trates the interplay between type 1 and type 2 thinking in clinical practice.
Errors can occur in both type 1 and type 2 thinking. For example, 
people can apply the wrong rules or make errors in their application while 
using type 2 thinking. However, it has been argued that the common 
cognitive biases encountered in medicine tend to occur when clinicians 
are engaged in type 1 thinking.
For example, imagine being asked to see a young woman who is 
drowsy. She is handed over to you as a ‘probable overdose’ because she 
has a history of depression and a packet of painkillers was found beside 
her at home. Her observations show she has a Glasgow Coma Scale 
score of 10/15, heart rate 100 beats/min, blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, 
respiratory rate 14 breaths/min, oxygen saturations 98% on air and tem-
perature 37.5°C. Already your mind has reached a working diagnosis. 
It ts a pattern (type 1 thinking). You think she has taken an overdose. At 
Patient A
90% chance
of having the
disease before
the test is done
34.6% chance
of having the
disease if the
test is negative
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentage probability of having the disease
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
98.3% chance
of having the
disease if the
test is positive
Patient B
50% chance
of having the
disease before
the test is done
86.4% chance
of having the
disease if the 
test is positive
5.6% chance
of having the
disease if the
test is negative
Fig. 1.5 The interpretation of a test result depends on the probability of the disease before the test is carried out. In the example shown, the test being carried out 
has a sensitivity of 95% and a specicity of 85%. Patient A has very characteristic clinical ndings, which make the pre-test probability of the condition for which the test 
is being used very high – estimated as 90%. Patient B has more equivocal ndings, such that the pre-test probability is estimated as only 50%. If the result in Patient A is 
negative, there is still a signicant chance that he has the condition for which he is being tested; in Patient B, however, a negative result makes the diagnosis very unlikely.
1.5  Predictive values: ‘What is the probability that a person with 
a positive test actually has the disease?’
Disease
No disease
Positive test
A (True positive)
B (False positive)
Negative test
C (False negative)
D (True negative)
Positive predictive value = A/(A+B) × 100
Negative predictive value = D/(D+C) × 100

[[p28]]
Cognitive biases    7
1
this point you can stop to think about your thinking (rational override in 
Fig. 1.6): ‘What is the evidence for this diagnosis? What else could it be?’
On the other hand, imagine being asked to assess a patient who has 
been admitted with syncope. There are several different causes of syn-
cope and a systematic approach is required to reach a diagnosis (type 2 
thinking). However, you recently heard about a case of syncope due to a 
painless leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm. At the end of your assess-
ment, following evidence-based guidelines, it is clear the patient can be 
discharged. Despite this, you decide to observe the patient overnight 
just in case (irrational override in Fig. 1.6). In this example, your intuition 
is actually ‘availability bias’ (when things are at the forefront of your mind) 
which has signicantly distorted your estimate of probability.
Common cognitive biases in medicine
Figure 1.7 illustrates the common cognitive biases prevalent in medical 
practice. Biases often work together; for example, in overcondence bias 
(the tendency to believe we know more than we actually do), too much 
faith is placed in opinion instead of gathered evidence. This bias can be 
augmented by the availability bias and nally by commission bias (the 
tendency towards action rather than inaction) – sometimes with disas-
trous results.
The mark of a well-calibrated thinker is the ability to recognise what 
mode of thinking is being employed and to anticipate and recognise situ-
ations in which cognitive biases and errors are more likely to occur.
Thinking about thinking
Research has highlighted the importance of being aware of and being 
able to think about one’s own thinking (also known as metacognition). 
Several studies have demonstrated that engaging in reection during 
diagnostic decision-making improves performance (Prakash et al, see 
‘Further information’). This can be as simple as asking, ‘What is the 
evidence for this diagnosis? What else could it be?’ Reection is most 
effective when the case is more complex (relative to the clinician).
Some people have a natural tendency to look for evidence, weigh 
things up, be aware of context, not take things at face value, and think 
about their own thinking. Others can learn to do so. Psychologists con-
sider this ‘reective mind’ a subset of analytical type 2 thinking. The ten-
dency to engage in reection during decision-making is independent of 
knowledge and cognitive ability, and accounts for the greatest variation 
in individual performance on many reasoning tasks.
With increasing knowledge and experience, intuitive type 1 think-
ing is used more; it is fast and highly accurate and commonly used 
by experts. Novices cannot do this because they have not yet built 
a database of patterns in their long-term memory, known as illness 
scripts. Reection interrupts type 1 processing, even briey, to sim-
ulate alternatives. So as you can see, good decision-making relies 
on knowledge and experience, but also the ability to ‘stop and think’ 
when needed. However, this requires cognitive effort (type 2 thinking), 
which may be impaired by things like fatigue, interruptions and cog-
nitive overload.
Human factors
‘Human factors’ is the science of the limitations of human performance, 
and how technology, the work environment and team communication can 
adapt for this to reduce diagnostic and other types of error. Analysis of 
serious adverse events in clinical practice shows that human factors and 
poor team communication play a signicant role when things go wrong.
Research shows that many errors are beyond an individual’s con-
scious control and are precipitated by many factors. The discipline of 
human factors seeks to understand interactions between:
 people and tasks or technology
 people and their work environment
 people in a team.
1.6  Type 1 and type 2 thinking
Type 1
Type 2
Intuitive, heuristic (pattern 
recognition)
Analytical, systematic
Automatic, subconscious
Deliberate, conscious
Fast, effortless
Slow, effortful
Low/variable reliability
High/consistent reliability
Vulnerable to error
Less prone to error
Highly affected by context
Less affected by context
High emotional involvement
Low emotional involvement
Low scientic rigour
High scientic rigour
Experience
Context
Ambient conditions
Education
Training
Logical competence
Clinical
presentation
Recognised
Not
recognised
Type 2
processes
Type 1
processes
Cognitive biases more likely
Irrational
override
Rational
override
Working
diagnosis
Fig. 1.6 The interplay between type 1 and type 2 thinking in the diagnostic process. Adapted from Croskerry P. A universal model of diagnostic reasoning. Acad Med 
2009; 84:1022–1028.

[[p29]]
8    CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING
An understanding of these interactions makes it easier for health-care 
professionals, who are committed to ‘rst, do no harm’, to work in the safest 
way possible. For example, performance is adversely affected by factors 
such as poorly designed processes and equipment, fatigue and poor com-
munication. So simple, clear processes, good design of equipment and 
shift patterns, and clear team communication all help to minimise errors.
The areas of the brain required for type 2 processing are most affected 
by things like fatigue and cognitive overload, and the brain reverts to 
type1 processing to conserve cognitive energy. Figure 1.8 illustrates 
some of the internal and external factors that affect human judgement 
and decision-making. An awareness of the factors that impact on 
 decision-making can allow clinicians to take steps to mitigate these.
Anchoring
The common human tendency
to rely too heavily on the first piece
of information offered (the
‘anchor’) when making decisions
Diagnostic momentum
Once a diagnostic label has been
attached to a patient (by the patient
or other health-care professionals),
it can gather momentum with each
review, leading others to exclude
other possibilities in their thinking
Premature closure
The tendency to close the decision-
making process prematurely and
accept a diagnosis before it, and
other possibilities, have been fully
explored
Ascertainment bias
We sometimes see what we
expect to see (‘self-fulfilling
prophecy’). For example, a
frequent self-harmer attends the
emergency department with
drowsiness; everyone assumes he
has taken another overdose and
misses a brain injury
Psych-out error
Psychiatric patients who present
with medical problems are under-
assessed, under-examined and
under-investigated because
problems are presumed to be due
to, or exacerbated by, their
psychiatric condition
Framing effect
How a case is presented – for
example, in handover – can
generate bias in the listener. This
can be mitigated by always having
‘healthy scepticism’ about other
people’s diagnoses
Availability bias
Things may be at the forefront of
your mind because you have seen
several cases recently or have
been studying that condition in
particular. For example, when one
of the authors worked in an
epilepsy clinic, all blackouts were
possible seizures
Hindsight bias
Knowing the outcome may
profoundly influence the perception
of past events and decision-making,
preventing a realistic appraisal of
what actually occurred – a major
problem in learning from
diagnostic error
Search satisficing
We may stop searching because we
have found something that fits or is
convenient, instead of
systematically looking for the best
alternative, which involves more
effort
Base rate neglect
The tendency to ignore the
prevalence of a disease, which
then distorts Bayesian reasoning.
In some cases, clinicians do this
deliberately in order to rule out an
unlikely but worst-case scenario
Omission bias
The tendency towards inaction,
rooted in the principle of ‘first, do
no harm.’ Events that occur through
natural progression of disease are
more acceptable than those that
may be attributed directly to the
action of the health-care team
Triage-cueing
Triage ensures patients are sent to
the right department. However, this
leads to ‘geography is destiny’. For
example, a diabetic ketoacidosis
patient with abdominal pain and
vomiting is sent to surgery. The
wrong location (surgical ward)
stops people thinking about
medical causes of abdominal pain
and vomiting
Commission bias
The tendency towards action
rather than inaction, on the
assumption that good can come
only from doing something
(rather than ‘watching and
waiting’)
Overconfidence bias
The tendency to believe we know
more than we actually do, placing
too much faith in opinion instead of
gathered evidence
Unpacking principle
Failure to ‘unpack’ all the available
information may mean things are
missed. For example, if a thorough
history is not obtained from either
the patient or carers (a common
problem in geriatric medicine),
diagnostic possibilities may be
discounted
Confirmation bias
The tendency to look for
confirming evidence to support a
theory rather than looking for
disconfirming evidence to refute
it, even if the latter is clearly
present. Confirmation bias is
common when a patient has been
seen first by another doctor
Posterior probability
Our estimate of the likelihood of
disease may be unduly influenced
by what has gone on before for a
particular patient. For example, a
patient who has been extensively
investigated for headaches
presents with a severe headache,
and serious causes are discounted
Visceral bias
The influence of either negative or
positive feelings towards patients,
which can affect our decision-
making
Fig. 1.7 Common cognitive biases in medicine. Adapted from Croskerry P. Achieving quality in clinical decision-making: cognitive strategies and detection of bias. Acad 
Emerg Med 2002; 9:1184–1204.

[[p30]]
1
Reducing errors in clinical decision-making    9
Several studies demonstrate that we focus our attention to lter out 
distractions. This is advantageous in many situations (for example, when 
performing a procedure), but in focusing on what we are trying to see we 
may not notice the unexpected. In a team context, what is obvious to 
one person may be completely missed by someone else. Safe and effec-
tive team communication therefore requires us never to assume, and to 
verbalise things, even though they may seem ‘obvious’.
Shared decision-making
Shared decision-making refers to the fact that clinical reasoning does 
not necessarily take place solely within a clinician’s head. Good deci-
sion-making is often shared with patients, relatives and carers, within 
teams, and by using guidelines, clinical prediction rules and other 
decision aids. Integral to all of this is the ability to engage in optimal 
decision-making behaviours: involving the patient and/or carers in the 
diagnostic and management process, listening to others, following evi-
dence-based guidelines, asking for help when needed, and using clear 
communication, especially when handing over care.
Patient-centred evidence-based medicine
‘Patient-centred evidence-based medicine’ refers to the application of 
best available research evidence while taking individual patient factors 
into account; these include both clinical and non-clinical factors (e.g. 
the patient’s social circumstances, values and wishes). For example, a 
95-year-old man with dementia and a recent gastrointestinal bleed is 
admitted with an inferior myocardial infarction. He is clinically well. Should 
he be treated with dual antiplatelet therapy and low-molecular-weight 
heparin as recommended in clinical guidelines?
As this chapter has described, clinicians frequently deal with uncer-
tainty/probability. Clinicians need to be able to explain risks and benets 
of treatment in an accurate and understandable way. Providing the rel-
evant statistics is seldom sufcient to guide decision-making because a 
patient’s perception of risk may be inuenced by irrational factors as well 
as individual values.
Research evidence provides statistics but these can be confusing. 
Terms such as ‘common’ and ‘rare’ are nebulous. Whenever possible, 
clinicians should quote numerical information using consistent denomi-
nators (e.g. ‘90 out of 100 patients who have this operation feel much 
better, 1 will die during the operation and 2 will suffer a stroke’). Visual 
aids can be used to present complex statistical information (Fig. 1.9).
How uncertainty is conveyed to patients is important. Many studies 
demonstrate a correlation between effective clinician–patient communi-
cation and improved health outcomes. If patients feel they have been 
listened to and understand the problem and proposed treatment plan, 
they are more likely to follow the plan and less likely to re-attend.
Effective team communication
In increasingly complex health-care systems, patients are looked after by 
a wide variety of professionals, each of whom has access to important 
information required to make clinical decisions. Strict hierarchies are haz-
ardous to patient safety if certain members of the team do not feel able 
to speak up.
The SBAR system of communication has been recommended by the 
UK’s Patient Safety First campaign. It is a structured way to communicate 
about a patient with another health-care professional (e.g. during handover 
or when making a referral) and increases the amount of relevant informa-
tion being communicated in a shorter time. It is illustrated in Box 1.7
Using clinical prediction rules and other  
decision aids
A clinical prediction rule is a statistical model of the diagnostic process. 
When clinical prediction rules are matched against the opinion of experts, 
the model usually outperforms the experts, because it is applied con-
sistently in each case. However, it is important that clinical prediction 
rules are used correctly – that is, applied to the patient population that 
was used to create the rule. Clinical prediction rules force a scientic 
assessment of the patient’s symptoms, signs and other data to develop 
a numerical probability of a disease or an outcome. They help clinicians 
to estimate probability more accurately.
A good example of a clinical prediction rule to estimate pre-test prob-
ability is the Wells score in suspected deep vein thrombosis (see Box 
9.18). Other commonly used clinical prediction rules predict outcomes 
and therefore guide the management plan. These include the GRACE 
score in acute coronary syndromes (see Fig. 16.61) and the CURB-65 
score in community-acquired pneumonia (see Fig. 17.32).
Reducing errors in clinical decision-making
Deliberate practice
Studies of expertise reveal that extensive experience is necessary to 
achieve high levels of performance, but extensive experience does not 
by itself lead to expert levels of achievement. Something else is required, 
encapsulated in the term ‘deliberate practice’. This involves effortful
practice, coaching and feedback, and the ability of an individual to plan, 
assess, reect and adjust so their performance improves.
Cognitive debiasing strategies
Knowledge and experience alone, however, do not eliminate errors. 
There are some simple and established techniques that can be used to 
avoid cognitive biases and errors in clinical decision-making.
History and physical examination
Taking a history and performing a physical examination may seem 
obvious, but these are sometimes carried out inadequately. This is 
the ‘unpacking principle’: failure to unpack all the available information 
means things can be missed and lead to error.
Error
Type 1 thinking/
conservation of
cognitive effort
Cognitive and
affective biases
Internal factors
Knowledge
Training
Beliefs and values
Emotions
Sleep/fatigue
Stress
Physical illness
Personality type
External factors
Interruptions
Cognitive overload
Time pressure
Ambient conditions
Insufficient data
Team factors
Patient factors
Poor feedback
Fig. 1.8 Factors that affect our judgement and decision-making. (Type 1 thinking = fast, intuitive, subconscious, low effort)

[[p31]]
10    CLINICAL DECISION-MAKING
Problem representation/list and differential 
diagnosis
Once all the available data from history, physical examination and (some-
times) initial test results are available, these need to be synthesised into 
a problem representation or problem list. The process of generating a 
problem list ensures nothing is missed. The process of generating a 
differential diagnosis works against anchoring on a particular diagnosis 
too early, thereby avoiding search satiscing and premature closure (see 
Fig. 1.6).
Mnemonics and checklists
These are used frequently in medicine in order to reduce reliance on 
fallible human memory. ABCDE (airway, breathing, circulation, disability, 
exposure/examination) is probably the most successful checklist in med-
icine, used during the assessment and treatment of critically ill patients 
(ABCDE is sometimes prexed with ‘C’ for ‘control of any obvious prob-
lem’; see p. 191). Checklists ensure that important issues have been 
considered and completed, especially under conditions of complexity, 
stress or fatigue.
Red ags and ROWS (‘rule out worst-case scenario’)
These are strategies that force doctors to consider serious diseases that 
can present with common symptoms. Red ags in back pain are listed 
in Box 26.19. Considering and investigating for possible pulmonary 
embolism in patients who present with pleuritic chest pain and breath-
lessness is a common example of ruling out a worst-case scenario, as 
pulmonary embolism can be fatal if missed. Red ags and ROWS help 
to avoid cognitive biases such as the ‘framing effect’ and ‘premature 
closure’.
Newer strategies to avoid cognitive biases and errors in decision-mak-
ing are emerging. These involve explicit training in clinical reasoning and 
human factors. In theory, if doctors are aware of the science of human 
thinking and decision-making, then they are more able to think about 
their thinking, understand situations in which their decision-making may 
be affected, and take steps to mitigate this.
Clinical decision-making: putting it all 
together
The following is a practical example that brings together many of the 
concepts outlined in this chapter:
A 25-year-old woman presents with right-sided pleuritic chest pain 
and breathlessness. She reports that she had an upper respiratory tract 
infection a week ago and was almost back to normal when the symp-
toms started. The patient has no past medical history and no family his-
tory, and her only medication is the combined oral contraceptive pill. 
On examination, her vital signs are normal (respiratory rate 19 breaths/
min, oxygen saturations 98% on air, blood pressure 115/60 mmHg, heart 
rate 90 beats/min, temperature 37.5°C) and the physical examination is 
also normal. You have been asked to assess her for the possibility of a 
pulmonary embolism.
(More information on pulmonary embolism can be found in Chapter 17.)
Evidence-based history and examination
Information from the history and physical examination is vital in deciding 
whether this could be a pulmonary embolism. Pleurisy and breathless-
ness are common presenting features of this disease but are also com-
mon presenting features in other diseases. There is nothing in the history 
to suggest an alternative diagnosis (e.g. high fever, productive cough, 
recent chest trauma). The patient’s vital signs are normal, as is the phys-
ical examination. However, very few individual ndings help to distinguish 
patients with pulmonary embolism from those without it. The presence of 
wheeze and a high fever modestly decrease the probability of pulmonary 
embolism. The presence of hypoxaemia is unhelpful (likelihood ratio not 
signicant).
Deciding pre-test probability
The prevalence of pulmonary embolism (PE) in 25-year-old women is 
low. We anchor on this prevalence and then adjust for individual patient 
factors. This patient has no major risk factors for pulmonary embolism. 
To assist our estimate of pre-test probability, we could use a clinical 
1.7  The SBAR system of communicating
SBAR
Example (a telephone call to the 
Intensive Care team)
Situation
I am [name] calling from [place] about 
a patient with a NEWS* of 10.
Background
[Patient’s name], 30-year-old woman, 
no past medical history, was admitted 
last night with community-acquired 
pneumonia. Since then her oxygen 
requirements have been steadily 
increasing.
Assessment
Her vital signs are: blood pressure 
115/60 mmHg, heart rate 120 beats/
min, temperature 38°C, respiratory 
rate 32 breaths/min, oxygen 
saturations 89% on 15 L via reservoir 
bag mask.
An arterial blood gas shows H+
50 nmol/L (pH 7.3), PaCO2 4.0 kPa 
(30 mmHg), PaO2 7 kPa (52.5 mmHg), 
standard bicarbonate 14 mmol/L.
Chest X-ray shows extensive right 
lower zone consolidation.
Recommendation
Please can you come and see her as 
soon as possible? I think she needs 
admission to Intensive Care.
*NEWS = National Early Warning Score; a patient with normal vital signs scores 0. See Royal 
College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2: Standardising the assessment of 
acute-illness severity in the NHS. Updated report of a working party. London: RCP; December 2017.
Feel better
No difference
Stroke
Dead
Fig. 1.9 Visual portrayal of benets and risks. The image refers to an operation 
that is expected to relieve symptoms in 90% of patients, but cause stroke in 2% and 
death in 1%. From Edwards A, Elwyn G, Mulley A. Explaining risks: turning numerical 
data into meaningful pictures. BMJ 2002; 324:827–830, reproduced with permission 
from the BMJ Publishing Group.

[[p32]]
Further information    11
1
prediction rule: in this case, the modied Wells score for pulmonary 
embolism, which would give a score of 3 (low probability – answering 
yes only to the criterion ‘PE is the number one diagnosis, an alternative 
is less likely’).
Interpreting test results
Imagine the patient went on to have a normal chest X-ray and blood 
results, apart from a raised D-dimer of 900 (normal <500 ng/mL). A nor-
mal chest X-ray is a common nding in pulmonary embolism. Several 
studies have shown that the D-dimer assay has at least 95% sensitivity 
in acute pulmonary embolism but it has a low specicity. A very sensitive 
test will detect most disease but generate abnormal ndings in healthy 
people. On the other hand, a negative result virtually, but not completely, 
excludes the disease. It is important at this point to realise that a raised 
D-dimer result does not mean this patient has a pulmonary embolism; 
it just means that we have not been able to exclude it. Since pulmonary 
embolism is a potentially fatal condition we need to rule out the worst-
case scenario (ROWS), and the next step is therefore to arrange further 
imaging. What kind of imaging depends on individual patient character-
istics and what is available.
Treatment threshold
The treatment threshold combines factors such as the risks of the test, 
and the risks versus benets of treatment. A CT pulmonary angiogram 
(CTPA) could be requested for this patient, although in some circum-
stances ventilation–perfusion single-photon emission computed tomog-
raphy (V/Q SPECT, p. 547) may be a more suitable alternative. However, 
what if the scan cannot be performed until the next day? Because pul-
monary embolism is potentially fatal and the risks of treatment in this 
case are low, the patient should be started on treatment while awaiting 
the scan.
Post-test probability
The patient’s scan result is subsequently reported as ‘no pulmonary 
embolism’. Combined with the low pre-test probability, this scan result 
reliably excludes pulmonary embolism.
Cognitive biases
Imagine during this case that the patient had been handed over to you 
as ‘nothing wrong – probably a pulled muscle’. Cognitive biases (sub-
conscious tendencies to respond in a certain way) would come into play, 
such as the ‘framing effect’, ‘conrmation bias’ and ‘search satiscing’. 
The normal clinical examination might conrm the diagnosis of mus-
culoskeletal pain in your mind, despite the examination being entirely 
consistent with pulmonary embolism and despite the lack of history and 
examination ndings (e.g. chest wall tenderness) to support the diagno-
sis of musculoskeletal chest pain.
Human factors
Imagine that, after you have seen the patient, a colleague hands you 
some blood forms and asks you what tests you would like to request 
on ‘this lady’. You request blood tests including a D-dimer on the wrong 
patient. Luckily, this error is intercepted.
Shared decision-making
The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism can be difcult. Clinical prediction 
rules (e.g. modied Wells score), guidelines (e.g. from the UK’s National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, or NICE) and decision aids (e.g. 
simplied pulmonary embolism severity index, or PESI) are frequently 
used in combination with the doctor’s opinion, derived from information 
gathered in the history and physical examination.
The patient is treated according to evidence-based guidelines that 
apply to her particular situation. Tests alone do not make a diagnosis 
and at the end of this process the patient is told that the combination 
of history, examination and test results mean she is extremely unlikely 
to have a pulmonary embolism. Viral pleurisy is offered as an alternative 
diagnosis and she is reassured that her symptoms are expected to settle 
over the coming days with analgesia. She is advised to re-present to 
hospital if her symptoms get worse.
Answers to problems
Harvard problem (p. 5)
Almost half of doctors surveyed said 95%, but they neglected to take 
prevalence into account. If 1000 people are tested, there will be 51 pos-
itive results: 50 false positives and 1 true positive (assuming 100% sen-
sitivity). The chance that a person found to have a positive result actually 
has the disease is therefore only 1/51 or ~2%.
Bat and ball problem (p. 6)
This puzzle is from the book Thinking, Fast and Slow, by Nobel laureate 
Daniel Kahneman (see ‘Further information’). He writes, ‘A number came 
to your mind. The number, of course, is 10p. The distinctive mark of this 
easy puzzle is that it evokes an answer that is intuitive, appealing – and 
wrong. Do the math, and you will see.’ The correct answer is 5p.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Bordage G. Elaborated knowledge: a key to successful diagnostic thinking. Acad 
Med 1994;69:883–885.
Casscells W, Schoenberger A, Graboys TB. Interpretation by physicians of clinical 
laboratory results. N Engl J Med 1978;299:999–1001.
Cooper N, Frain J, eds. ABC of clinical reasoning. Oxford: Wiley–Blackwell; 2016.
Croskerry P. A universal model of diagnostic reasoning. Acad Med  
2009;84:1022–1028.
Kahneman D. Thinking, fast and slow. London: Penguin; 2012.
McGee S. Evidence-based physical diagnosis, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018.
Prakash S, Sladek RM, Schuwirth L. Interventions to improve diagnostic decision 
making: a systematic review and meta-analysis on reective strategies. Med 
Teacher 2019;41:517–524.
Sox H, Higgins MC, Owens DK. Medical decision making, 2nd edn. Chichester: 
Wiley–Blackwell; 2013.
Websites
creme.org.uk UK Clinical Reasoning in Medical Education Group.
improvediagnosis.org Society to Improve Diagnosis in Medicine (USA).
chfg.org UK Clinical Human Factors Group.
clinical-reasoning.org Clinical reasoning resources.
vassarstats.net/index.html Suite of calculators for statistical computation 
(Calculator 2 is a calculator for predictive values and likelihood ratios) .

[[p33]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p34]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 1.1. Which of the following best describes what is meant by the term 
‘shared decision-making’?
 A. Allowing the patient to make decisions about his or her care
 B. Asking for help when needed
 C. Making decisions with the wider clinical team
 D. Patient-centred evidence-based medicine
 E. Sharing decision-making with the patient, relatives, clinical 
team, guidelines and decision aids
Answer: E.
Shared decision-making refers to the fact that clinical reasoning does 
not necessarily take place solely within a clinician’s head. Good deci-
sion-making is often shared with patients, relatives and carers, within 
teams, and by using guidelines, clinical prediction rules and other 
decision aids. Integral to all of this is the ability to engage in optimal 
decision-making behaviours: involving the patient and/or carers in the 
diagnostic and management process, listening to others, following evi-
dence-based guidelines, asking for help when needed, and using clear 
communication, especially when handing over care.
 1.2. Which of the following best describes what is meant by the term 
‘metacognitive knowledge’?
 A. An awareness of and an ability to think about one’s own 
thinking
 B. An understanding of how things t together
 C. An understanding of how to do something, what techniques to 
use
 D. The tendency to engage in deliberate practice
 E. The tendency to look for evidence, weigh things up and be 
aware of context
Answer: A.
Metacognition literally means ‘thinking about thinking’, ‘knowing 
about knowing’, and being ‘aware of one’s awareness’. Metacognitive 
knowledge is about being aware of one’s own cognitive processes 
and is a key ingredient for successful learning and the development 
of expertise.
 1.3. When using a clinical prediction rule for a specic condition, which 
of the following is true?
 A. The tool can be applied to any patient with the condition
 B. The tool can determine the clinical probability that a patient has 
a disease
 C. The tool is not necessarily based on evidence
 D. The tool uses the receiver operating characteristic curve to 
statistically model the diagnostic process
 E. Use of the tool removes the need for clinical decision-making 
on the part of the clinician
Answer: B.
A clinical prediction rule is a statistical model of the diagnostic pro-
cess. When clinical prediction rules are matched against the opinion of 
experts, the model usually outperforms the experts, because it is applied 
consistently in each case. However, it is important that clinical prediction 
rules are used correctly – that is, applied to the patient population that 
was used to create the rule. Clinical prediction rules force a scientic 
assessment of the patient’s symptoms, signs and other data to develop 
a numerical probability of a disease or an outcome. They help clinicians 
to estimate probability more accurately. A good example of a clinical 
prediction rule to estimate pre-test probability is the Wells score in sus-
pected deep vein thrombosis.
 1.4. Regarding normal values, which of the following statements is 
true?
 A. A normal result means that disease is not present
 B. A normal result specic to a particular disease is not found in a 
person with the disease
 C. Normal values do not vary signicantly within the same person
 D. Normal values follow a Poisson distribution
 E. One in 20 healthy people will have values that lie outside the 
reference range
Answer: E.
Most tests provide quantitative results on a continuous numerical 
scale. In order to classify quantitative results as normal or abnormal, it is 
necessary to dene a cut-off point. Many quantitative measurements in 
populations have a Gaussian or ‘normal’ distribution. By convention, the 
normal (reference) range is dened as those values that encompass 95% 
of the population, or 2 standard deviations above and below the mean. 
This means that 2.5% of the normal population will have values above, 
and 2.5% will have values below the normal range. In some diseases 
there is no overlap between results from the abnormal and normal pop-
ulation. However, in many diseases there is overlap. So a healthy person 
can have an ‘abnormal’ result, and a person with disease can have a 
‘normal’ result. Normal values also vary from day to day in the same per-
son in the absence of a real change because of biological variation and 
laboratory variation. The extent to which a blood test is allowed to vary 
before it has truly changed is called the ‘critical difference’.
 1.5. An 80-year-old man presented with a fall on a background of a 
2-week history of his legs ‘giving way’ and a history of increasing 
low back pain. In this scenario, which of the following strategies to 
reduce errors in clinical reasoning would be most appropriate?
 A. An assessment of his mobility
 B. An X-ray of the lumbar spine
 C. Generating a problem representation
 D. Use of a clinical prediction rule
 E. Using red ags and ‘ROWS’ (rule out worst-case scenario)
Answer: E.
Various strategies can be used to reduce errors in clinical reasoning 
including: taking a proper history and performing a thorough physical 
examination, generating a problem representation, and using mnemon-
ics and checklists. Using red ags and ROWS (rule out worst-case 
scenario) forces clinicians to think about serious diseases that can 
present with common symptoms. In this example, it forces clinicians 
to consider the possibility of cord compression. Red ags and ROWS 
helps to avoid cognitive biases such as the ‘framing effect’ and ‘pre-
mature closure’.

[[p35]]
Clinical therapeutics and 
good prescribing
Principles of clinical pharmacology 13
Pharmacodynamics 13
Pharmacokinetics 16
Inter-individual variation in drug responses 19
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 19
Adverse drug reactions 19
Drug interactions 23
Medication errors 24
Drug regulation and management 25
Drug development and marketing 25
Managing the use of medicines 27
Prescribing in practice 28
Decision-making in prescribing 28
Prescribing in special circumstances 31
Writing prescriptions 32
Monitoring drug therapy 35
2
SRJ Maxwell

[[p36]]
14    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
Prescribing medicines is the major tool used by doctors to restore or 
preserve the health of patients. Medicines contain drugs (the specic 
chemical substances with pharmacological effects), either alone or in 
combination with additional drugs, in a formulation mixed with other 
ingredients. The benecial effects of medicines must be weighed against 
their cost and potential adverse drug reactions and interactions. The lat-
ter two factors are sometimes caused by injudicious prescribing deci-
sions and by prescribing errors. The modern prescriber must meet the 
challenges posed by the increasing number of drugs and formulations 
available, of indications for prescribing them and the greater complexity 
of treatment regimens followed by individual patients (‘polypharmacy’, a 
particular challenge in the ageing population). The purpose of this chap-
ter is to elaborate on the principles and practice that underpin good pre-
scribing (Box 2.1).
at a particular subtype of receptor to exhibit some effect at other 
subtypes. For example, β-adrenoceptors can be subtyped on the 
basis of their responsiveness to the endogenous agonist noradren-
aline (norepinephrine): the concentration of noradrenaline required 
to cause bronchodilatation (via β2-adrenoceptors) is 10 times higher 
than that required to cause tachycardia (via β1-adrenoceptors). 
‘Cardioselective’ β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) have 
anti-anginal effects on the heart (β1), but may still cause broncho-
spasm in the lung (β2) and are contraindicated for asthmatic patients.
 Agonists bind to a receptor to produce a conformational change 
that is coupled to a biological response. As agonist concentration 
increases, so does the proportion of receptors occupied, and hence 
the biological effect. Partial agonists activate the receptor, but can-
not produce a maximal signalling effect equivalent to that of a full 
agonist even when all available receptors are occupied.
 Antagonists bind to a receptor, but do not produce the confor-
mational change that initiates an intracellular signal. A competitive 
antagonist competes with endogenous agonist ligands to occupy 
receptor-binding sites, with the resulting antagonism depending 
on the relative afnities and concentrations of the antagonist drug 
and endogenous agonist. Non-competitive antagonists inhibit the 
effect of an agonist by mechanisms other than direct competition 
for receptor binding with the agonist (e.g. by affecting post-receptor 
signalling).
Dose–response relationships 
Plotting the logarithm of drug dose against drug response typically pro-
duces a sigmoidal dose–response curve (Fig. 2.2). Progressive increases 
in drug dose (which, for most drugs, is proportional to the plasma drug 
concentration) produce increasing response, but only within a relatively 
narrow range of dose; further increases in dose beyond this range pro-
duce little extra effect. The following characteristics of the drug response 
are useful in comparing different drugs:
 Efcacy describes the extent to which a drug can produce a tar-
get-specic response when all available receptors or binding sites 
are occupied (i.e. Emax on the dose–response curve). A full agonist 
can produce the maximum response of which the receptor is capa-
ble, while a partial agonist at the same receptor will have lower 
efcacy. Therapeutic efcacy describes the effect of the drug on a 
desired biological endpoint and can be used to compare drugs that 
act via different pharmacological mechanisms (e.g. loop diuretics 
2.1 Steps in good prescribing
 Make a diagnosis
 Consider factors that might inuence the patient’s response to therapy (age, 
concomitant drug therapy, renal and liver function etc.)
 Establish the therapeutic goal*
 Choose the therapeutic approach*
 Choose the drug and its formulation (the ‘medicine’)
 Choose the dose, route and frequency
 Choose the duration of therapy
 Write an unambiguous prescription (or ‘medication order’)
 Inform the patient about the treatment and its likely effects
 Monitor treatment effects, both benecial and harmful
 Review/alter the prescription
*These steps in particular take the patient’s views into consideration to establish a therapeutic 
partnership that aims to achieve ‘concordance’ based on shared decision-making
Dosage
regimen
Plasma
concentration
Concentration at
the site of action
Pharmacological
effects
Pharmacokinetics
‘what the body does
to a drug’
Monitoring
Measure plasma drug
concentration
‘what a drug does
to the body’
Monitoring
Measure clinical
effects
Time
Concentration
Pharmacodynamics
Concentration
Effect
Fig. 2.1 Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.
Principles of clinical pharmacology 
Prescribers need to understand what the drug does to the body (phar-
macodynamics) and what the body does to the drug (pharmacokinetics) 
(Fig. 2.1). Although this chapter is focused on the most common drugs, 
which are synthetic small molecules, the same principles apply to the 
increasingly numerous ‘biologic’ therapies (sometimes abbreviated to 
‘biologics’) now in use, which include peptides, proteins, enzymes and 
monoclonal antibodies.
Pharmacodynamics 
Drug targets and mechanisms of action 
Modern drugs are usually discovered by screening compounds for activ-
ity either to stimulate or to block the function of a specic molecular tar-
get, which is predicted to have a benecial effect in a particular disease 
(Box 2.2). Other drugs have useful but less selective chemical properties, 
such as chelators (e.g. for treatment of iron or copper overload), osmotic 
agents (used as diuretics in cerebral oedema) or general anaesthetics 
(that alter the biophysical properties of lipid membranes). The following 
characteristics of the interaction of drugs with receptors illustrate some 
of the important determinants of the effects of drugs:
 Afnity describes the propensity for a drug to bind to a receptor 
and is related to the ‘molecular t’ and the strength of the chemi-
cal bond. Some drug–receptor interactions are irreversible, either 
because the afnity is so strong or because the drug modies the 
structure of its molecular target.
 Selectivity describes the propensity for a drug to bind to one target 
rather than another. Selectivity is a relative term, not to be con-
fused with absolute specicity. It is common for drugs targeted 

[[p37]]
Principles of clinical pharmacology     15
2
2.2 Examples of target molecules for drugs
Drug target
Description
Examples
Receptors
Channel-linked receptors
Ligand binding controls a linked ion channel, known as ‘ligand-
gated’ (in contrast to ‘voltage-gated’ channels that respond to 
changes in membrane potential)
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
GABA receptor
Sulphonylurea receptor
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)
Ligand binding affects one of a family of ‘G-proteins’ that mediate 
signal transduction either by activating intracellular enzymes 
(such as adenylate or guanylate cyclase, producing cyclic AMP or 
GMP, respectively) or by controlling ion channels
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
β-adrenoceptors
Dopamine receptors
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) receptors
Opioid receptors
Kinase-linked receptors
Ligand binding activates an intracellular protein kinase that 
triggers a cascade of phosphorylation reactions
Insulin receptor
Cytokine receptors
Transcription factor receptors
Intracellular and also known as ‘nuclear receptors’; ligand binding 
promotes or inhibits gene transcription and hence synthesis of 
new proteins
Steroid receptors
Thyroid hormone receptors
Vitamin D receptors
Retinoid receptors
PPARγ and α receptors
Other targets
Voltage-gated ion channels
Mediate electrical signalling in excitable tissues (muscle and 
nervous system)
Na+ channels
Ca2+ channels
Enzymes
Catalyse biochemical reactions. Drugs interfere with binding of 
substrate to the active site or of co-factors
Cyclo-oxygenase
ACE
Xanthine oxidase
Transporter proteins
Carry ions or molecules across cell membranes
5-HT re-uptake transporter
Na+/K+ ATPase
Cytokines and other signalling molecules
Small proteins that are important in cell signalling (autocrine, 
paracrine and endocrine), especially affecting the immune 
response
Tumour necrosis factors
Interleukins
Cell surface antigens
Block the recognition of cell surface molecules that modulate 
cellular responses
Cluster of differentiation molecules (e.g. CD20, 
CD80)
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; AMP = adenosine monophosphate; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase; GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid; GMP = guanosine monophosphate; PPAR = 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor)
Hypersusceptibility
Side-effects
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Therapeutic index
100/0.1 = 1000
Drug dose (mg)
 Response (% of maximum)
Toxic effects
Adverse
effect
ED50 =100 mg
Beneficial
effect
ED50 =0.1 mg
Emax
ED50
ED50
Fig. 2.2 Dose–response curve. The green curve represents the benecial effect of the drug. The maximum response on the curve is the E max and the dose (or concentration) 
producing half this value (Emax/2) is the ED50 (or EC50). The red curve illustrates the dose–response relationship for the most important adverse effect of this drug. This occurs at 
much higher doses; the ratio between the ED50 for the adverse effect and that for the benecial effect is the ‘therapeutic index’, which indicates how much margin there is for 
prescribers when choosing a dose that will provide benecial effects without also causing this adverse effect. Adverse effects that occur at doses above the therapeutic range 
are normally called ‘toxic effects’, while those occurring within the therapeutic range are ‘side-effects’ and those below it are ‘hyper-susceptibility effects’.

[[p38]]
16    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
induce a greater diuresis than thiazide diuretics and so have greater 
therapeutic efcacy).
 Potency describes the amount of drug required for a given 
response. More potent drugs produce biological effects at lower 
doses, so they have a lower ED50. A less potent drug can still have 
an equivalent or greater efcacy if it is given in higher doses.
The dose–response relationship for a specic drug varies between 
patients because of variations in the many determinants of pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In clinical practice, the prescriber is 
unable to construct a dose–response curve for each individual patient. 
Therefore, most drugs are licensed for use within a recommended range 
of doses that is expected to reach close to the top of the dose–response 
curve for most patients. However, it is sometimes possible to achieve the 
desired therapeutic efcacy at doses towards the lower end of, or even 
below, the recommended range.
Therapeutic index 
The adverse effects of drugs are often dose-related in a similar way to the 
benecial effects, although the dose–response curve for these adverse 
effects is normally shifted to the right (see Fig. 2.2). The ratio of the 
ED50 for therapeutic efcacy and for a major adverse effect is known as 
the ‘therapeutic index’. In reality, drugs have multiple potential adverse 
effects, but the concept of therapeutic index is usually based on adverse 
effects that might require dose reduction or discontinuation. For most 
drugs, the therapeutic index is greater than 100, but there are some 
notable exceptions with therapeutic indices of less than 10 (e.g. digoxin, 
warfarin, insulin, phenytoin, opioids). The doses of such drugs have to 
be titrated carefully for individual patients to maximise benets, but avoid 
adverse effects.
Desensitisation and withdrawal effects 
Desensitisation refers to the common situation in which the biological 
response to a drug diminishes when it is given continuously or repeat-
edly. It may be possible to restore the response by increasing the dose 
of the drug but, in some cases, the tissues may become completely 
refractory to its effect.
 Tachyphylaxis describes desensitisation that occurs very rap-
idly, sometimes with the initial dose. This rapid loss of response 
implies depletion of chemicals that may be necessary for the 
pharmacological actions of the drug (e.g. a stored neurotransmitter 
released from a nerve terminal) or receptor phosphorylation.
 Tolerance describes a more gradual loss of response to a drug that 
occurs over days or weeks. This slower change implies changes in 
receptor numbers or the development of counter-regulatory physio-
logical changes that offset the actions of the drug (e.g. accumulation 
of salt and water in response to vasodilator therapy).
 Drug resistance is a term normally reserved for describing the loss 
of effectiveness of an antimicrobial (p. 113) or cancer chemotherapy 
drug.
 In addition to these pharmacodynamic causes of desensitisation, 
reduced response may be the consequence of lower plasma and 
tissue drug concentrations as a result of altered pharmacokinetics
(see below).
When drugs induce chemical, hormonal and physiological changes 
that offset their actions, discontinuation may allow these changes to 
cause ‘rebound’ withdrawal effects (Box 2.3).
Pharmacokinetics 
Understanding ‘what the body does to the drug’ (Fig. 2.3) is extremely 
important for prescribers because this forms the basis on which the opti-
mal route of administration and dose regimen are chosen and explains 
the majority of inter-individual variation in the response to drug therapy.
Drug absorption and routes of administration 
Absorption is the process by which drug molecules gain access to the 
blood stream. The rate and extent of drug absorption depend on the 
route of administration (see Fig. 2.3).
Enteral administration 
These routes involve administration via the gastrointestinal tract:
 Oral. This is the most common route of administration because it 
is simple, convenient and readily used by patients to self-admin-
ister their medicines. Absorption after an oral dose is a complex 
process that depends on the drug being swallowed, surviving 
exposure to gastric acid, avoiding unacceptable food binding, being 
absorbed across the small bowel mucosa into the portal venous 
system, and surviving metabolism by gut wall or liver enzymes 
2.3 Examples of drugs associated with withdrawal effects
Drug
Symptoms
Signs
Treatment
Alcohol
Anxiety, panic, paranoid delusions, 
visual and auditory hallucinations
Agitation, restlessness, delirium, 
tremor, tachycardia, ataxia, 
disorientation, seizures
Treat immediate withdrawal syndrome with 
benzodiazepines
Barbiturates, benzodiazepines
Similar to alcohol
Similar to alcohol
Transfer to long-acting benzodiazepine then 
gradually reduce dosage
Glucocorticoids
Weakness, fatigue, decreased 
appetite, weight loss, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain
Hypotension, hypoglycaemia
Prolonged therapy suppresses the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and 
causes adrenal insufciency requiring 
glucocorticoid replacement. Withdrawal 
should be gradual after prolonged therapy 
(p. 684)
Opioids
Rhinorrhoea, sneezing, yawning, 
lacrimation, abdominal and leg 
cramping, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea
Dilated pupils
Transfer addicts to long-acting agonist 
methadone
Selective serotonin re-uptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
Dizziness, sweating, nausea, 
insomnia, tremor, delirium, 
nightmares
Tremor
Reduce SSRIs slowly to avoid withdrawal 
effects

[[p39]]
Principles of clinical pharmacology     17
2
on some degree of manual dexterity and timing (see Fig. 17.23). 
Patients who nd these difcult may use a ‘spacer’ device to 
improve drug delivery. A special mode of inhaled delivery is via a 
nebulised solution created by using pressurised oxygen or air to 
break up solutions and suspensions into small aerosol droplets that 
can be directly inhaled from the mouthpiece of the device.
Drug distribution 
Distribution is the process by which drug molecules transfer between 
the circulating blood, interstitial space and intracellular uid. This is 
inuenced by the drug’s molecular size and lipid solubility, the extent to 
which it binds to proteins in plasma, its susceptibility to drug transporters 
expressed on cell surfaces and its binding to its molecular target and 
to other cellular proteins (which can be irreversible). Most drugs diffuse 
passively across capillary walls down a concentration gradient into the 
interstitial uid until the concentration of free drug molecules in the inter-
stitial uid is equal to that in the plasma. As drug molecules in the blood 
are removed by metabolism or excretion, the plasma concentration falls 
and drug molecules diffuse back from the tissue compartment into the 
blood until eventually all are eliminated. Note that this reverse movement 
of drug away from the tissues will be prevented if further drug doses are 
administered and absorbed into the plasma.
Volume of distribution 
The apparent volume of distribution (Vd) is the volume into which a drug 
appears to have distributed following intravenous injection. It is calcu-
lated from the equation
Vd = D.C0
where D is the amount of drug given and C0 is the initial plasma concen-
tration (Fig. 2.4A). Drugs that are highly bound to plasma proteins may 
have a Vd below 10 L (e.g. warfarin, aspirin), while those that diffuse into 
the interstitial uid but do not enter cells because they have low lipid sol-
ubility may have a Vd between 10 and 30 L (e.g. gentamicin, amoxicillin). 
It is an ‘apparent’ volume because those drugs that are lipid-soluble and 
highly tissue-bound may have a Vd of greater than 100 L (e.g. digoxin, 
amitriptyline). Drugs with a larger Vd have longer half-lives (see below), 
take longer to reach steady state on repeated administration and are 
eliminated more slowly from the body following discontinuation.
Drug elimination 
Drug metabolism 
Metabolism is the process by which drugs are chemically altered from 
a lipid-soluble form suitable for absorption and distribution to a more 
water-soluble form that is necessary for excretion. Some drugs, known 
as ‘prodrugs’, are inactive in the form in which they are administered, but 
are converted to an active metabolite in vivo.
(‘rst-pass metabolism’). As a consequence, absorption is frequently 
incomplete following oral administration. The term ‘bioavailability’ 
describes the proportion of the dose that reaches the systemic 
circulation intact.
 Buccal and sublingual (SL). These routes have the advantage of 
enabling rapid absorption into the systemic circulation without 
the uncertainties associated with oral administration (e.g. organic 
nitrates for angina pectoris, triptans for migraine, opioid analgesics).
 Rectal (PR). The rectal mucosa is occasionally used as a site of 
drug administration when the oral route is compromised because of 
nausea and vomiting or unconsciousness (e.g. diazepam in status 
epilepticus).
Parenteral administration 
These routes avoid absorption via the gastrointestinal tract and rst-pass 
metabolism in the liver:
 Intravenous (IV). The IV route enables all of a dose to enter the sys-
temic circulation reliably, without any concerns about absorption 
or rst-pass metabolism (i.e. the dose is 100% bioavailable), and 
rapidly achieve a high plasma concentration. It is ideal for very ill 
patients when a rapid, certain effect is critical to outcome (e.g. ben-
zylpenicillin for meningococcal meningitis).
 Intramuscular (IM). IM administration is easier to achieve than the 
IV route (e.g. adrenaline (epinephrine) for acute anaphylaxis), but 
absorption is less predictable and depends on muscle blood ow.
 Subcutaneous (SC). The SC route is ideal for drugs that have to 
be administered parenterally because of low oral bioavailability, are 
absorbed well from subcutaneous fat and can ideally be injected by 
patients themselves (e.g. insulin, heparin).
 Transdermal. A transdermal patch can enable a drug to be 
absorbed through the skin and into the circulation (e.g. oestrogens, 
nicotine, nitrates).
 Nasal. The nasal mucosa provides another potential route for 
absorption of some drugs with systemic action (e.g. sumatriptan, 
calcitonin, naloxone, testosterone, desmopressin).
Other routes of administration 
 Topical application of a drug involves direct administration to the site 
of action (e.g. skin, eye, ear). This has the advantage of achieving 
sufcient concentration at this site while minimising systemic expo-
sure and the risk of adverse effects elsewhere.
 Inhaled (INH) administration allows drugs to be delivered directly 
to a target in the respiratory tree, usually the small airways (e.g. 
salbutamol, beclometasone). However, a signicant proportion of 
the inhaled dose may be absorbed from the lung or is swallowed 
and can reach the systemic circulation. The most common mode 
of delivery is the metered-dose inhaler, but its success depends 
I
t
e
r
s
t
t
i
a
l
f
l
u
i
d
Intracellular
fluid
Kidney
Liver
Parenteral
Mouth
Stomach
Small
intestine
Large
intestine
Rectum
Buccal
Excretion
in urine
Excretion
in faeces
Portal
venous system
Intestinal wall enzymes
          Liver enzymes
Metabolism
Circulating
plasma
Rectal
Oral
Fig. 2.3 Pharmacokinetics summary. Most drugs are taken orally, 
are absorbed from the intestinal lumen and enter the portal venous 
system to be conveyed to the liver, where they may be subject to 
rst-pass metabolism and/or excretion in bile. Active drugs then enter 
the systemic circulation, from which they may diffuse (or sometimes 
be actively transported) in and out of the interstitial and intracellular 
uid compartments. Drug that remains in circulating plasma is subject 
to liver metabolism and renal excretion. Drugs excreted in bile may 
be reabsorbed, creating an enterohepatic circulation. First-pass 
metabolism in the liver is avoided if drugs are administered via the 
buccal or rectal mucosa, or parenterally (e.g. by intravenous injection).

[[p40]]
18    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
Phase I metabolism involves oxidation, reduction or hydrolysis to make 
drug molecules suitable for phase II reactions or for excretion. Oxidation 
is by far the most common form of phase I reaction and chiey involves 
members of the cytochrome P450 family of membrane-bound enzymes 
in the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes.
Phase II metabolism involves combining phase I metabolites with an 
endogenous substrate to form an inactive conjugate that is much more 
water-soluble. Reactions include glucuronidation, sulphation, acetyla-
tion, methylation and conjugation with glutathione. This is necessary to 
enable renal excretion, because lipid-soluble metabolites will simply dif-
fuse back into the body after glomerular ltration (p. 617).
Drug excretion 
Excretion is the process by which drugs and their metabolites are 
removed from the body.
Renal excretion is the usual route of elimination for drugs or their 
metabolites that are of low molecular weight and sufciently water-soluble 
to avoid reabsorption from the renal tubule. Drugs bound to plasma pro-
teins are not ltered by the glomeruli. The pH of the urine is more acidic 
than that of plasma, so that weakly acidic drugs (e.g. salicylates) become 
un-ionised and tend to be reabsorbed. Alkalination of the urine can has-
ten excretion (e.g. after a salicylate overdose; p. 225). For some drugs, 
active secretion into the proximal tubule lumen, rather than glomerular 
ltration, is the predominant mechanism of excretion (e.g. methotrexate, 
penicillins).
Faecal excretion is the predominant route of elimination for drugs 
with high molecular weight, including those that are excreted in the bile 
after conjugation with glucuronide in the liver and any drugs that are not 
absorbed after enteral administration. Molecules of drug or metabolite 
that are excreted in the bile enter the small intestine where they may, if 
they are sufciently lipid-soluble, be reabsorbed through the gut wall and 
return to the liver via the portal vein (see Fig. 2.3). This recycling between 
the liver, bile, gut and portal vein is known as ‘enterohepatic circulation’ 
and can signicantly prolong the residence of drugs in the body (e.g. 
digoxin, morphine, levothyroxine).
Elimination kinetics 
The net removal of drug from the circulation results from a combination of 
drug metabolism and excretion and is usually described as ‘clearance’, 
i.e. the volume of plasma that is completely cleared of drug per unit time.
For most drugs, elimination is a high-capacity process that does not 
become saturated, even at high dosage. The rate of elimination is, there-
fore, directly proportional to the drug concentration because of the ‘law 
of mass action’, whereby higher drug concentrations will drive faster met-
abolic reactions and support higher renal ltration rates. This results in 
‘rst-order’ kinetics, when a constant fraction of the drug remaining in the 
circulation is eliminated in a given time and the decline in concentration 
over time is exponential (see Fig. 2.4A). This elimination can be described 
by the drug’s half-life (t1/2), i.e. the time taken for the plasma drug concen-
tration to halve, which remains constant throughout the period of drug 
elimination. The signicance of this phenomenon for prescribers is that 
the effect of increasing doses on plasma concentration is predictable – a 
doubled dose leads to a doubled concentration at all time points.
For a few drugs in common use (e.g. phenytoin, alcohol), elimination 
capacity is exceeded (saturated) within the usual dose range. This is 
called ‘zero-order’ kinetics. Its signicance for prescribers is that, if the 
rate of administration exceeds the maximum rate of elimination, the drug 
will accumulate progressively, leading to serious toxicity.
Repeated dose regimens 
The goal of therapy is usually to maintain drug concentrations within the 
therapeutic range (see Fig. 2.2) over several days (e.g. antibiotics) or 
even for months or years (e.g. antihypertensives, lipid-lowering drugs, 
thyroid hormone replacement therapy). This goal is rarely achieved with 
single doses, so prescribers have to plan a regimen of repeated doses. 
This involves choosing the size of each individual dose and the frequency 
of dose administration.
As illustrated in Figure 2.4B, the time taken to reach drug concentra-
tions within the therapeutic range depends on the half-life of the drug. 
Typically, with doses administered regularly, it takes approximately 5 
half-lives to reach a ‘steady state’ in which the rate of drug elimination 
is equal to the rate of drug administration. This applies when starting 
new drugs and when adjusting doses of current drugs. With appropri-
ate dose selection, steady-state drug concentrations will be maintained 
within the therapeutic range. This is important for prescribers because it 
means that the effects of a new prescription, or dose titration, for a drug 
with a long half-life (e.g. digoxin – 36 hours) may not be known for a few 
days. In contrast, drugs with a very short half-life (e.g. dobutamine – 2 
minutes) have to be given continuously by infusion, but reach a new 
steady state within minutes.
Time (hours)
A constant fraction of drug
is cleared in unit time
t1/2= 8 hours
C0
Plasma drug concentration
6
12
18
24
A
Loading
dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Dose
Subtherapeutic
Dose interval = 24 hours
Time (days)
Plasma drug concentration
1
2
3
4
5
6
Therapeutic range
Adverse effects
t1/2= 30 hours
B
Fig. 2.4 Drug concentrations in plasma following single and multiple drug 
dosing.
the time period required for the plasma drug concentration to halve (half-life, t1/2) remains 
concentration rises if each dose is administered before the previous dose has been 
entirely cleared. In this example, the drug’s half-life is 30 hours, so that with daily dosing 
the peak, average and trough concentrations steadily increase as drug accumulates 
in the body (black line). Steady state is reached after approximately 5 half-lives, when 
the rate of elimination (the product of concentration and clearance) is equal to the rate 
of drug absorption (the product of rate of administration and bioavailability). The long 
half-life in this example means that it takes 6 days for steady state to be achieved and, 
for most of the rst 3 days of treatment, plasma drug concentrations are below the 
therapeutic range. This problem can be overcome if a larger loading dose (red line) is 
used to achieve steady-state drug concentrations more rapidly.

[[p41]]
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy     19
2
For drugs with a long half-life, if it is unacceptable to wait for 5 half-
lives until concentrations within the therapeutic range are achieved, then 
an initial ‘loading dose’ can be given that is much larger than the main-
tenance dose and equivalent to the amount of drug required in the body 
at steady state. This achieves a peak plasma concentration close to the 
plateau concentration, which can then be maintained by successive 
maintenance doses.
‘Steady state’ actually involves uctuations in drug concentrations, 
with peaks just after administration followed by troughs just prior to the 
next administration. The manufacturers of medicines recommend dosing 
regimens that predict that, for most patients, these oscillations result in 
troughs within the therapeutic range and peaks that are not high enough 
to cause adverse effects. The optimal dose interval is a compromise 
between convenience for the patient and a constant level of drug expo-
sure. More frequent administration (e.g. 25 mg 4 times daily) achieves a 
smoother plasma concentration prole than 100 mg once daily, but is 
much more difcult for patients to sustain. A solution to this need for 
compromise in dosing frequency for drugs with half-lives of less than 
24 hours is the use of ‘modied-release’ (m/r) formulations. These allow 
drugs to be absorbed more slowly from the gastrointestinal tract and 
reduce the oscillation in plasma drug concentration prole, which is espe-
cially important for drugs with a low therapeutic index (e.g. levodopa).
Inter-individual variation in drug responses 
Prescribers have numerous sources of guidance about how to use drugs 
appropriately (e.g. dose, route, frequency, duration) for many conditions. 
However, this advice is based on average dose–response data derived 
from observations in many individuals. When applying this information 
to an individual patient, prescribers must take account of inter-individ-
ual variability in response. Some of this variability is predictable and 
good prescribers are able to anticipate it and adjust their prescriptions 
accordingly to maximise the chances of benet and minimise harm. Inter-
individual variation in responses also mandates that effects of treatment 
should be monitored (p. 35).
Some inter-individual variation in drug response is accounted for by 
differences in pharmacodynamics. For example, the benecial natriuresis 
produced by the loop diuretic furosemide is often signicantly reduced 
at a given dose in patients with renal impairment, while delirium caused 
by opioid analgesics is more likely in the elderly. However, it is differences 
in pharmacokinetics that more commonly account for different drug 
responses. Examples of factors inuencing the absorption, metabolism 
and excretion of drugs are shown in Box 2.4.
It is hoped that a signicant proportion of the inter-individual varia-
tion in drug responses can be explained by studying genetic differences 
in single genes (‘pharmacogenetics’; Box 2.5) or the effects of multiple 
gene variants (‘pharmacogenomics’). The aim is to identify those patients 
most likely to benet from specic treatments and those most suscepti-
ble to adverse effects. In this way, it may be possible to select drugs and 
dose regimens for individual patients to maximise the benet-to-hazard 
ratio (‘personalised medicine’).
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy 
The decision to prescribe a drug always involves a judgement of the 
balance between therapeutic benets and risk of an adverse outcome. 
Both prescribers and patients tend to be more focused on the former, 
but a truly informed decision requires consideration of both.
Adverse drug reactions 
Some important denitions for the adverse effects of drugs are:
 Adverse event. A harmful event that occurs while a patient is taking 
a drug, irrespective of whether the drug is suspected of being the 
cause.
 Adverse drug reaction (ADR). An unwanted or harmful reaction that 
is experienced following the administration of a drug or combination 
of drugs under normal conditions of use and is suspected to be 
related to the drug. An ADR will usually require the drug to be dis-
continued or the dose reduced.
 Side-effect. Any effect caused by a drug other than the intended 
therapeutic effect, whether benecial, neutral or harmful. The term 
‘side-effect’ is often used interchangeably with ‘ADR’, although the 
former usually implies an ADR that occurs during exposure to nor-
mal therapeutic drug concentrations (e.g. vasodilator-induced ankle 
oedema).
 Hypersensitivity reaction. An ADR that occurs as a result of an 
immunological reaction and often after exposure to subtherapeutic 
drug concentrations. These include: (1) acute anaphylaxis (p. 183) –  
the result of an interaction between drug antigens and immuno-
globulin E (IgE) on mast cells and basophils, resulting in a release 
of vasoactive biomolecules (e.g. penicillin, suxamethonium); this is 
also known as a type I hypersensitivity reaction. (2) ‘Anaphylactoid’ 
2.4 Patient-specic factors that inuence pharmacokinetics
Age
 Drug metabolism is low in the fetus and newborn, may be enhanced in young 
children, and becomes less effective with age
 Drug excretion falls with the age-related decline in renal function
Sex
 Women have a greater proportion of body fat than men, increasing the volume of 
distribution and half-life of lipid-soluble drugs
Body weight
 Obesity increases volume of distribution and half-life of lipid-soluble drugs
 Patients with higher lean body mass have larger body compartments into which 
drugs are distributed and may require higher doses
Liver function
 Metabolism of most drugs depends on several cytochrome P450 enzymes that are 
impaired in patients with advanced liver disease
 Hypoalbuminaemia inuences the distribution of drugs that are highly protein-
bound
Kidney function
 Renal disease and the decline in renal function with ageing may lead to drug 
accumulation
Gastrointestinal function
 Small intestinal absorption of oral drugs may be delayed by reduced gastric 
motility
 Absorptive capacity of the intestinal mucosa may be reduced in disease (e.g. 
Crohn’s or coeliac disease) or after surgical resection
Food
 Food in the stomach delays gastric emptying and reduces the rate (but not usually 
the extent) of drug absorption
 Some food constituents bind to certain drugs and prevent their absorption
Smoking
 Tar in tobacco smoke stimulates the oxidation of certain drugs
Alcohol
 Regular alcohol consumption stimulates liver enzyme synthesis, while binge 
drinking may temporarily inhibit drug metabolism
Drugs
 Drug–drug interactions cause marked variation in pharmacokinetics  
(see Box 2.12)

[[p42]]
20    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
reactions – these present in a similar manner to acute anaphylaxis, 
but are a consequence of non-IgE-mediated degranulation of mast 
cells and basophils or direct complement activation (e.g. aspirin, 
non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs, opiates). (3) Types II–IV 
hypersensitivity reactions – these occur via other mechanisms, such 
as antibody-dependent (IgM or IgG), immune complex-mediated 
or cell-mediated pathways (p. 78); examples of such reactions are 
listed in Box 2.6.
 Drug toxicity. Adverse effects of a drug that occur because the dose 
or plasma concentration has risen above the therapeutic range, 
either unintentionally or intentionally (drug overdose; see Fig. 2.2 and 
p. 224).
 Drug misuse. The misuse of recreational or therapeutic drugs that 
may lead to addiction or dependence, serious physiological injury 
(such as liver damage), psychological harm (abnormal behaviour 
patterns, hallucinations, memory loss) or death (p. 1240).
Prevalence of ADRs 
ADRs are a common cause of illness, accounting in the UK for approx-
imately 3% of consultations in primary care, 7% of emergency admis-
sions to hospital and affecting around 15% of hospital inpatients. Many 
‘disease’ presentations are eventually attributed to ADRs, emphasising 
the importance of always taking a careful drug history (Box 2.7). Factors 
2.5 Examples of pharmacogenetic variations that inuence drug response
Genetic variant
Drug affected
Clinical outcome
Pharmacokinetic
Aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 deciency
Ethanol
Elevated blood acetaldehyde causes facial ushing and increased 
heart rate in ~50% of Japanese, Chinese and other Asian 
populations
Acetylation
Isoniazid, hydralazine, procainamide
Increased responses in slow acetylators, up to 50% of some 
populations
Oxidation (CYP2D6)
Nortriptyline
Codeine
Increased risk of toxicity in poor metabolisers
Reduced responses with slower conversion of codeine to more 
active morphine in poor metabolisers, 10% of European populations
Increased risk of toxicity in ultra-fast metabolisers, 3% of 
Europeans but 25% of North Africans
Oxidation (CYP2C9)
Warfarin
Polymorphisms known to inuence dosages
Oxidation (CYP2C19)
Clopidogrel 
Proguanil
Reduced enzymatic activation results in reduced antiplatelet effect 
Reduced efcacy with slower conversion to active cycloguanil in 
poor metabolisers
Sulphoxidation
Penicillamine
Increased risk of toxicity in poor metabolisers
Pseudocholinesterase deciency
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine)
Decreased drug inactivation leads to prolonged paralysis and 
sometimes persistent apnoea requiring mechanical ventilation until 
the drug can be eliminated by alternate pathways; occurs in 1 in 
1500 people
Pharmacodynamic
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deciency
Oxidant drugs, including 
antimalarials (e.g. chloroquine, 
primaquine)
Risk of haemolysis in G6PD deciency
Acute intermittent porphyria
Enzyme-inducing drugs
Increased risk of an acute attack
SLC01B1 polymorphism
Statins
Increased risk of rhabdomyolysis
HLA-B*5701 polymorphism
Abacavir
Increased risk of skin hypersensitivity reaction
HLA-B*5801 polymorphism
Allopurinol
Increased risk of rashes in Han Chinese
HLA-B*1502 polymorphism
Carbamazepine
Increased risk of serious dermatological reactions  
(e.g. Stevens–Johnson syndrome)
Hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) 
polymorphism
Sulphonylureas
Increased sensitivity to the blood glucose-lowering effects
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-
positive breast cancer cells
Trastuzumab
Increased sensitivity to the inhibitory effects on growth and division 
of the target cancer cells
accounting for the rising prevalence of ADRs are the increasing age of 
patients, polypharmacy (higher risk of drug interactions), increasing avail-
ability of over-the-counter medicines, increasing use of herbal or tradi-
tional medicines and the increase in medicines available via the Internet 
that can be purchased without a prescription from a health-care profes-
sional. Risk factors for ADRs are shown in Box 2.8.
ADRs are important because they reduce quality of life for patients, 
reduce adherence to and therefore efcacy of benecial treatments, 
cause diagnostic confusion, undermine the condence of patients in 
their health-care professional(s) and consume health-care resources.
Retrospective analysis of ADRs has shown that more than half could have 
been avoided if the prescriber had taken more care in anticipating the poten-
tial hazards of drug therapy. For example, non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drug (NSAID) use accounts for many thousands of emergency admissions, 
gastrointestinal bleeding episodes and a signicant number of deaths. In 
many cases, the patients are at increased risk due to their age, interacting 
drugs (e.g. aspirin, warfarin) or a past history of peptic ulcer disease. Drugs 
that commonly cause ADRs are listed in Box 2.9.
Prescribers and their patients ideally want to know the frequency with 
which ADRs occur for a specic drug. Although this may be well char-
acterised for more common ADRs observed in clinical trials, it is less 
clear for rarely reported ADRs when the total numbers of reactions and 
patients exposed are not known. The words used to describe frequency 

[[p43]]
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy     21
2
who experience type B reactions are generally ‘hyper-susceptible’ 
because of unpredictable immunological or genetic factors (e.g. 
anaphylaxis caused by penicillin, peripheral neuropathy caused by 
isoniazid in poor acetylators).
This simple classication has shortcomings, and a more detailed clas-
sication based on dose (see Fig. 2.2), timing and susceptibility (DoTS) is 
now used by those analysing ADRs in greater depth (Box 2.10). The AB 
classication can be extended as a reminder of some other types of ADR:
 Type C (‘chronic/continuous’) ADRs. These occur only after pro-
longed continuous exposure to a drug. Examples include osteopo-
rosis caused by glucocorticoids, retinopathy caused by (hydroxy)
chloroquine and tardive dyskinesia caused by phenothiazines.
 Type D (‘delayed’) ADRs. These are delayed until long after drug 
exposure, making diagnosis difcult. Examples include malignancies 
that may emerge after immunosuppressive treatment post-trans-
plantation (e.g. azathioprine, tacrolimus) and vaginal cancer occur-
ring many years after exposure to diethylstilboestrol.
 Type E (‘end-of-treatment’) ADRs. These occur after abrupt drug 
withdrawal (see Box 2.3).
2.6 Examples of drug-mediated types I-IV hypersensitivity 
reactions1
Type I (mediated by IgE antibodies and mast cell degranulation)
Acute anaphylaxis
 Penicillins
 Chemotherapy
 Monoclonal antibodies
 Neuromuscular blocking drugs
Type II (mediated by IgM and IgG antibodies)
Haemolytic anaemia (latency less than 7 days)
 Methyldopa
 Penicillins
 Cephalosporins
 NSAIDs
 Quinidine/quinine
Neutropenia/agranulocytosis (latency days to weeks)
 Antiarrhythmics
 Antibiotics
 NSAIDs
 Antimalarials
 Antithyroid drugs
 Clozapine
 Ticlopidine
Thrombocytopenia (latency 1–2 weeks)
 Carbamazepine
 Heparin
 Penicillins
 Cephalosporins
 NSAIDs
 Quinidine/quinine
 Thiazide diuretics
Type III (mediated by immune complex deposition)
Glomerulonephritis, serum sickness, vasculitis
 Penicillins
 Cephalosporins
 Sulphonamides
Type IV (mediated by T cells)
Skin eruptions, including maculopapular rash, lichenoid or pemphigoid-like 
reaction, drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), Stevens–
Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)2
 Carbamazepine
 Abacavir
 Trimethoprim
 Dapsone
Drug-induced lupus
 Allopurinol
 Thiazide diuretics
 Hydralazine
2.7 How to take a drug history
Information from the patient (or carer)
Use language that patients will understand (e.g. ‘medicines’ rather than ‘drugs’, 
which may be mistaken for drugs of abuse) while gathering the following information:
 Current prescribed drugs, including formulations (e.g. modied-release tablets), 
doses, routes of administration, frequency and timing, duration of treatment
 Other medications that are often forgotten (e.g. contraceptives, over-the-counter 
drugs, herbal remedies, vitamins)
 Drugs that have been taken in the recent past and reasons for stopping them
 Previous drug hypersensitivity reactions, their nature and time course (e.g. rash, 
anaphylaxis)
 Previous ADRs, their nature and time course (e.g. ankle oedema with amlodipine)
 Adherence to therapy (e.g. ‘Are you taking your medication regularly?’)
Information from GP medical records and/or pharmacist
 Up-to-date list of medications
 Previous ADRs
 Last order dates for each medication
Inspection of medicines
 Drugs and their containers (e.g. blister packs, bottles, vials) should be inspected 
for name, dosage and the number of dosage forms taken since dispensed
(ADR = adverse drug reaction)
can be misinterpreted by patients, but widely accepted meanings 
include: very common (10% or more), common (1%–10%), uncommon 
(0.1%–1%), rare (0.01%–0.1%) and very rare (0.01% or less).
Classication of ADRs 
ADRs have traditionally been classied into two major groups:
 Type A (‘augmented’) ADRs. These are predictable from the known 
pharmacodynamic effects of the drug and are dose-dependent, 
common (detected early in drug development) and usually mild. 
Examples include constipation caused by opioids, hypotension 
caused by antihypertensives and dehydration caused by diuretics.
 Type B (‘bizarre’) ADRs. These are not predictable, are not obvi-
ously dose-dependent in the therapeutic range, are rare (remaining 
undiscovered until the drug is marketed) and often severe. Patients 
2.8 Risk factors for adverse drug reactions
Patient factors
 Advanced age (e.g. low physiological reserve)
 Gender (e.g. ACE inhibitor-induced cough in women)
 Polypharmacy (e.g. drug interactions)
 Genetic predisposition (see Box 2.5)
 Hypersensitivity/allergy (e.g. β-lactam antibiotics)
 Diseases altering pharmacokinetics (e.g. hepatic or renal impairment) or 
pharmacodynamic responses (e.g. bladder instability)
 Adherence problems (e.g. cognitive impairment)
Drug factors
 Steep dose–response curve (e.g. insulin)
 Low therapeutic index (e.g. digoxin, cytotoxic drugs)
Prescriber factors
 Inadequate understanding of the principles of clinical pharmacology
 Inadequate knowledge of the patient
 Inadequate knowledge of the prescribed drug
 Inadequate instructions and warnings provided to patients
 Inadequate monitoring arrangements planned
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme)
2See also Boxes 27.34 and 27.35.
1Type I is often known as ‘immediate’ hypersensitivity while types II–IV are known as ‘delayed’ 
hypersensitivity.

[[p44]]
22    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
A teratogen is a drug with the potential to affect the development of 
the fetus in the rst 10 weeks of intrauterine life (e.g. phenytoin, warfa-
rin). The thalidomide disaster in the early 1960s highlighted the risk of 
teratogenicity and led to mandatory testing of all new drugs. Congenital 
defects in a live infant or aborted fetus should provoke suspicion of an 
ADR and a careful exploration of maternal drug exposures (including 
self-medication and herbal remedies).
Detecting ADRs – pharmacovigilance 
Type A ADRs become apparent early in the development of a new 
drug. By the time a new drug is licensed and launched on to a possi-
ble worldwide market, however, a relatively small number of patients 
(just several hundred) may have been exposed to it, meaning that 
rarer but potentially serious type B ADRs may remain undiscovered. 
Pharmacovigilance is the process of detecting (‘signal generation’) 
and evaluating ADRs in order to help prescribers and patients to be 
better informed about the risks of drug therapy. Drug regulatory agen-
cies may respond to this information by placing restrictions on the 
licensed indications, reducing the recommended dose range, adding 
special warnings and precautions for prescribers in the product litera-
ture, writing to all health-care professionals or withdrawing the product 
from the market.
Voluntary reporting systems allow health-care professionals and 
patients to report suspected ADRs to the regulatory authorities. A 
good example is the ‘Yellow Card’ scheme that was set up in the UK 
in response to the thalidomide tragedy. Reports are analysed to assess 
the likelihood that they represent a true ADR (Box 2.11). Although vol-
untary reporting is a continuously operating and effective early-warning 
system for previously unrecognised rare ADRs, its weaknesses include 
low reporting rates (only 3% of all ADRs and 10% of serious ADRs are 
ever reported), an inability to quantify risk (because the ratio of ADRs 
to prescriptions is unknown) and the inuence of prescriber awareness 
on likelihood of reporting (reporting rates rise rapidly following publicity 
about potential ADRs).
More systematic approaches to collecting information on ADRs 
include ‘prescription event monitoring’, in which a sample of prescribers 
of a particular drug are issued with questionnaires concerning the clini-
cal outcome for their patients and the collection of population statistics. 
Many health-care systems routinely collect patient-identiable data on 
prescriptions (a surrogate marker of exposure to a drug), health-care 
events (e.g. hospitalisation, operations, new clinical diagnoses) and other 
2.9 Drugs that are common causes of adverse drug reactions
Drug or drug class
Common adverse drug reactions
ACE inhibitors
(e.g. lisinopril)
Renal impairment
Hyperkalaemia
Antibiotics
(e.g. amoxicillin)
Nausea
Diarrhoea
Anticoagulants
(e.g. warfarin, heparin)
Bleeding
Antipsychotics
(e.g. haloperidol)
Falls
Sedation
Delirium
Aspirin
Gastrotoxicity (dyspepsia, 
gastrointestinal bleeding)
Benzodiazepines
(e.g. diazepam)
Drowsiness
Falls
β-blockers
(e.g. atenolol)
Cold peripheries
Bradycardia
Calcium channel blockers
(e.g. amlodipine)
Ankle oedema
Digoxin
Nausea and anorexia
Bradycardia
Diuretics
(e.g. furosemide, 
bendroumethiazide)
Dehydration
Electrolyte disturbance (hypokalaemia, 
hyponatraemia)
Hypotension
Renal impairment
Insulin
Hypoglycaemia
NSAIDs
(e.g. ibuprofen)
Gastrotoxicity (dyspepsia, 
gastrointestinal bleeding)
Renal impairment
Opioid analgesics
(e.g. morphine)
Nausea and vomiting
Delirium
Constipation
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug)
2.10 DoTS classication of adverse drug reactions
Category
Example
Dose
Below therapeutic dose
In the therapeutic dose range
At high doses
Anaphylaxis with penicillin
Nausea with morphine
Hepatotoxicity with paracetamol
Timing
With the rst dose
Early stages of treatment
On stopping treatment
Signicantly delayed
Anaphylaxis with penicillin
Hyponatraemia with diuretics
Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome
Clear-cell cancer with 
diethylstilboestrol
Susceptibility
See patient factors in Box 2.8
2.11 TREND analysis of suspected adverse drug reactions
Factor
Key question
Comment
Temporal relationship
What is the time 
interval between the 
start of drug therapy 
and the reaction?
Most ADRs occur soon 
after starting treatment 
and within hours in the 
case of anaphylactic 
reactions
Re-challenge
What happens when 
the patient is re-
challenged with the 
drug?
Re-challenge is rarely 
possible because of the 
need to avoid exposing 
patients to unnecessary 
risk
Exclusion
Have concomitant 
drugs and other non-
drug causes been 
excluded?
ADR is a diagnosis of 
exclusion following 
clinical assessment and 
relevant investigations for 
non-drug causes
Novelty
Has the reaction been 
reported before?
The suspected ADR may 
already be recognised 
and mentioned in the 
SPC approved by the 
regulatory authorities
De-challenge
Does the reaction 
improve when the 
drug is withdrawn or 
the dose is reduced?
Most, but not all, 
ADRs improve on drug 
withdrawal, although 
recovery may be slow
(ADR = adverse drug reaction; SPC = summary of product characteristics)

[[p45]]
Adverse outcomes of drug therapy     23
2
clinical data (e.g. haematology, biochemistry). If these records can be 
linked, with appropriate safeguards for condentiality and data protec-
tion, they may provide a much more powerful mechanism for assessing 
both the harms and benets of drugs.
All prescribers will inevitably see patients experiencing ADRs caused 
by prescriptions written by themselves or their colleagues. It is important 
that these are recognised early. In addition to the features in Box 2.11, 
features that should raise suspicion of an ADR and the need to respond 
(by drug withdrawal, dosage reduction or reporting to the regulatory 
authorities) include:
 concern expressed by a patient that a drug has harmed them
 abnormal clinical measurements (e.g. blood pressure, temperature, 
pulse, blood glucose and weight) or laboratory results (e.g. abnor-
mal liver or renal function, low haemoglobin or white cell count) while 
on drug therapy
 new therapy started that could be in response to an ADR (e.g. ome-
prazole, allopurinol, naloxone)
 the presence of risk factors for ADRs (see Box 2.8).
Drug interactions 
A drug interaction has occurred when the administration of one 
drug increases or decreases the benecial or adverse responses to 
another drug. Although the number of potential interacting drug com-
binations is very large, only a small number are common in clinical 
practice. Important drug interactions are most likely to occur when 
the affected drug has a low therapeutic index, steep dose–response 
curve, high rst-pass or saturable metabolism, or a single mechanism 
of elimination.
Mechanisms of drug interactions 
Pharmacodynamic interactions occur when two drugs produce additive, 
synergistic or antagonistic effects at the same drug target (e.g. receptor, 
enzyme) or physiological system (e.g. electrolyte excretion, heart rate). 
These are the most common interactions in clinical practice and some 
important examples are given in Box 2.12.
2.12 Common drug interactions
Mechanism
Object drug
Precipitant drug
Result
Pharmaceutical*
Chemical reaction
Sodium bicarbonate
Calcium gluconate
Precipitation of insoluble calcium carbonate
Pharmacokinetic
Reduced absorption
Tetracyclines
Calcium, aluminium and 
magnesium salts
Reduced tetracycline absorption
Reduced protein binding
Phenytoin
Aspirin
Increased unbound and reduced total phenytoin plasma 
concentration
Reduced metabolism:
 CYP3A4
Amiodarone
Grapefruit juice
Cardiac arrhythmias because of prolonged QT  
interval (p. 418)
Warfarin
Clarithromycin
Enhanced anticoagulation
 CYP2C19
Phenytoin
Miconazole
Phenytoin toxicity
 CYP2D6
Haloperidol
Fluoxetine
Haloperidol toxicity
 Xanthine oxidase
Azathioprine
Allopurinol
Azathioprine toxicity
 Monoamine oxidase
Catecholamines
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Hypertensive crisis due to monoamine toxicity
Increased metabolism (enzyme 
induction)
Ciclosporin
St John’s wort
Loss of immunosuppression
Reduced renal elimination
Lithium
Diuretics
Lithium toxicity
Methotrexate
NSAIDs
Methotrexate toxicity
Pharmacodynamic
Direct antagonism at same receptor
Opioids
Naloxone
Reversal of opioid effects used therapeutically
Salbutamol
Atenolol
Inhibits bronchodilator effect
Direct potentiation in same organ 
system
Benzodiazepines
Alcohol
Increased sedation
ACE inhibitors
NSAIDs
Increased risk of renal impairment
Indirect potentiation by actions in 
different organ systems
Digoxin
Diuretics
Digoxin toxicity enhanced because of hypokalaemia
Warfarin
Aspirin, NSAIDs
Increased risk of bleeding because of gastrotoxicity and 
antiplatelet effects
Diuretics
ACE inhibitors
Blood pressure reduction (may be therapeutically 
advantageous) because of the increased activity of the 
renin–angiotensin system in response to diuresis
*Pharmaceutical interactions are related to the formulation of the drugs and occur before drug absorption.
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug)

[[p46]]
24    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
Pharmacokinetic interactions occur when the administration of a sec-
ond drug alters the concentration of the rst at its site of action. There are 
numerous potential mechanisms:
 Absorption interactions. Drugs that either delay (e.g. anticholinergic 
drugs) or enhance (e.g. prokinetic drugs) gastric emptying inuence 
the rate of rise in plasma concentration of other drugs, but not the 
total amount of drug absorbed. Drugs that bind to form insoluble 
complexes or chelates (e.g. aluminium-containing antacids binding 
with ciprooxacin) can reduce drug absorption.
 Distribution interactions. Co-administration of drugs that compete 
for protein binding in plasma (e.g. phenytoin and diazepam) can 
increase the unbound drug concentration, but the effect is usually 
short-lived due to increased elimination and hence restoration of the 
pre-interaction equilibrium.
 Metabolism interactions. Many drugs rely on metabolism by different 
isoenzymes of cytochrome P450 (CYP) in the liver. CYP enzyme 
inducers (e.g. phenytoin, rifampicin) generally reduce plasma con-
centrations of other drugs, although they may enhance activation 
of pro drugs. CYP enzyme inhibitors (e.g. clarithromycin, cimetidine, 
grapefruit juice) have the opposite effect. Enzyme induction effects 
usually take a few days to manifest because of the need to synthesise 
new CYP enzyme, in contrast to the rapid effects of enzyme inhibition.
 Excretion interactions. These primarily affect renal excretion. For 
example, drug-induced reduction in glomerular ltration rate (e.g. 
diuretic-induced dehydration, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, NSAIDs) can reduce the clearance and increase the 
plasma concentration of many drugs, including some with a low 
therapeutic index (e.g. digoxin, lithium, aminoglycoside antibiotics). 
Less commonly, interactions may be due to competition for a com-
mon tubular organic anion transporter (e.g. methotrexate excretion 
may be inhibited by competition with NSAIDs).
Avoiding drug interactions 
Drug interactions are increasing as patients are prescribed more medi-
cines (polypharmacy). Prescribers can avoid the adverse consequences 
of drug–drug interactions by taking a careful drug history (see Box 2.7) 
before prescribing additional drugs, only prescribing for clear indications 
and taking special care when prescribing drugs with a narrow therapeu-
tic index (e.g. warfarin). When prescribing an interacting drug is una-
voidable, good prescribers will seek further information and anticipate 
the potential risk. This will allow them to provide special warnings for 
the patient and arrange for monitoring, either of the clinical effects (e.g. 
coagulation tests for warfarin) or of plasma concentration (e.g. digoxin).
Medication errors 
A medication error is any preventable event that may lead to inappropri-
ate medication use or patient harm while the medication is in the control 
of the health-care professional or patient. Errors may occur in prescrib-
ing, dispensing, preparing solutions, administration or monitoring. Many 
ADRs are considered in retrospect to have been ‘avoidable’ with more 
care or forethought; in other words, an adverse event considered by one 
prescriber to be an unfortunate ADR might be considered by another to 
be a prescribing error.
Medication errors are very common. Several thousand medication 
orders are dispensed and administered each day in a medium-sized 
hospital. Recent UK studies suggest that 7%–9% of hospital prescrip-
tions contain an error, and most are written by junior doctors. Common 
prescribing errors in hospitals include omission of medicines (especially 
failure to prescribe regular medicines at the point of admission or dis-
charge, i.e. ‘medicines reconciliation’), dosing errors, unintentional pre-
scribing and poor use of documentation (Box 2.13).
Most prescription errors result from a combination of failures by the 
individual prescriber and the health-service systems in which they work 
(Box 2.14). Health-care organisations increasingly encourage reporting 
of errors within a ‘no-blame culture’ so that they can be subject to ‘root 
cause analysis’ using human error theory (Fig. 2.5). Prevention is tar-
geted at the factors in Box 2.14 and can be supported by prescribers 
communicating and cross-checking with colleagues (e.g. when calculat-
ing doses adjusted for body weight, or planning appropriate monitoring 
after drug administration). Prescription errors may also be reduced by 
clinical pharmacist support (e.g. to check the patient’s previous medica-
tions and current prescriptions) and electronic prescribing (which avoids 
errors due to illegibility or serious dosing mistakes and may be combined 
with a clinical decision support system to take account of patient char-
acteristics and drug history, and provide warnings of potential contrain-
dications and drug interactions).
Responding when an error is discovered 
All prescribers will make errors. When they do, their rst duty is to pro-
tect the patient’s safety. This will involve a clinical review and the taking 
of any steps that will reduce harm (e.g. remedial treatment, monitoring, 
recording the event in the notes, informing colleagues). Patients should 
be informed if they have been exposed to potential harm. For errors that 
do not reach the patient, it is the prescriber’s duty to report them, so that 
others can learn from the experience and take the opportunity to reect 
on how a similar incident might be avoided in the future.
2.13 Hospital prescribing errors
Error type
Approximate 
% of total
Omission on admission
30
Underdose
11
Overdose
8
Strength/dose missing
7
Omission on discharge
6
Administration times incorrect/missing
6
Duplication
6
Product or formulation not specied
4
Incorrect formulation
4
No maximum dose
4
Unintentional prescribing
3
No signature
2
Clinical contraindication
1
Incorrect route
1
No indication
1
Intravenous instructions incorrect/missing
1
Drug not prescribed but indicated
1
Drug continued for longer than needed
1
Route of administration missing
1
Start date incorrect/missing
1
Risk of drug interaction
< 0.5
Controlled drug requirements incorrect/missing
< 0.5
Daily dose divided incorrectly
< 0.5
Signicant allergy
< 0.5
Drug continued in spite of adverse effects
< 0.5
Premature discontinuation
< 0.5
Failure to respond to out-of-range drug level
< 0.5

[[p47]]
Drug regulation and management     25
2
2.14 Causes of prescribing errors
Systems factors
 Working hours of prescribers (and others)
 Patient throughput
 Professional support and supervision by colleagues
 Availability of information (medical records)
 Design of prescription forms
 Distractions
 Availability of decision support
 Checking routines (e.g. clinical pharmacy)
 Reporting and reviewing of incidents
Prescriber factors
Knowledge
 Clinical pharmacology principles
 Drugs in common use
 Therapeutic problems commonly encountered
 Knowledge of workplace systems
Skills
 Taking a good drug history
 Obtaining information to support prescribing
 Communicating with patients
 Numeracy and calculations
 Prescription writing
Attitudes
 Coping with risk and uncertainty
 Monitoring of prescribing
 Checking routines
Planned
action
Prescribing
Intended
action
Correct
action
Intended
outcome
Unintended
action
Lapse
Slip
Wrong plan selected
(Causes include
poor training and
lack of experience)
Correct plan known
but not executed
(Causes include
workload, time
pressures, distractions)
Prescription not
as intended
Prescriber unaware
Prescription incomplete
or forgotten
Prescriber may remember
Violation
Mistake
Prescription as intended
but written based on
the wrong principles or
lack of knowledge
Prescriber unaware
Deliberate deviations
from standard practice
Prescriber aware
Fig. 2.5 Human error theory. Unintended errors may occur because the prescriber 
fails to complete the prescription correctly (a slip; e.g. writes the dose in ‘mg’ not 
‘micrograms’) or forgets part of the action that is important for success (a lapse; e.g. 
forgets to co-prescribe folic acid with methotrexate); prevention requires the system 
to provide appropriate checking routines. Intended errors occur when the prescriber 
acts incorrectly due to lack of knowledge (a mistake; e.g. prescribes atenolol for a 
patient with known severe asthma because of ignorance about the contraindication); 
prevention must focus on training the prescriber.
Drug regulation and management 
Given the powerful benecial and potentially adverse effects of drugs, the 
production and use of medicines are strictly regulated (e.g. by the Food 
and Drug Administration in the United States, Medicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulatory Agency in the UK, and Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation in India). Regulators are responsible for licensing 
medicines, monitoring their safety (pharmacovigilance), approving clinical 
trials, and inspecting and maintaining standards of drug development 
and manufacture.
In addition, because of the high costs of drugs and their adverse effects, 
health-care services must prioritise their use in light of the evidence of their 
benet and harm, a process referred to as ‘medicines management’.
Drug development and marketing 
Naturally occurring products have been used to treat illnesses for 
thousands of years and some remain in common use today. Examples 
include morphine from the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), dig-
italis from the foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), curare from the bark of 
a variety of species of South American trees, and quinine from the 
bark of the Cinchona species. Although plants and animals remain a 
source of discovery, the majority of new drugs come from drug dis-
covery programmes that aim to identify small-molecule compounds 
with specic interactions with a molecular target that will induce a 
predicted biological effect.
The usual pathway for development of these small molecules includes: 
identifying a plausible molecular target by investigating pathways in dis-
ease; screening a large library of compounds for those that interact with 
the molecular target in vitro; conducting extensive medicinal chemistry to 
optimise the properties of lead compounds; testing efcacy and toxicity 
of these compounds in vitro and in animals; and undertaking a clinical 
development programme (Box 2.15). This process typically takes longer 
than 10 years and may cost up to US$2 billion. Manufacturers have a 
dened period of exclusive marketing of the drug while it remains pro-
tected by an original patent, typically 10–15 years, during which time 
they must recoup the costs of developing the drug. Meanwhile, com-
petitor companies will often produce similar ‘me too’ drugs of the same 
class. Once the drug’s patent has expired, ‘generic’ manufacturers may 
step in to produce cheaper formulations of the drug. Paradoxically, if a 
generic drug is produced by only one manufacturer, the price may actu-
ally rise, sometimes substantially.
2.15 Clinical development of new drugs
Phase I
 Healthy volunteers (20–80)
 These involve initial single-dose, ‘rst-into-man’ studies, followed by 
repeated-dose studies. They aim to establish the basic pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic properties, and short-term safety
 Duration: 6–12 months
Phase II
 Patients (100–200)
 These investigate clinical effectiveness (‘proof of concept’), safety and dose–
response relationship, often with a surrogate clinical endpoint, in the target 
patient group to determine the optimal dosing regimen for larger conrmatory 
studies
 Duration: 1–2 years
Phase III
 Patients (100 s–1000 s)
 These are large, expensive clinical trials that conrm safety and efcacy in 
the target patient population, using relevant clinical endpoints. They may be 
placebo-controlled studies or comparisons with other active compounds
 Duration: 1–2 years
Phase IV
 Patients (100 s–1000 s)
 These are undertaken after the medicine has been marketed for its rst 
indication to evaluate new indications, new doses or formulations, long-term 
safety or cost-effectiveness

[[p48]]
26    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
New therapeutic agents 
The traditional approach of targeting membrane-bound receptors and 
enzymes with small molecules (see Box 2.2) is now giving way to drug 
development that focuses on new targets, such as complex second-
messenger systems, cytokines, nucleic acids and cellular networks 
(Box 2.16). These require the development of novel therapeutic agents, 
which are typically large molecules (e.g. human recombinant antibod-
ies) manufactured by biological processes (‘biologics’) (Fig. 2.6). These 
present new challenges for ‘translational medicine’, the discipline of con-
verting scientic discoveries into a useful medicine with a well-dened 
benet–risk prole, and also for health-care providers and prescribers.
Manufacturers 
There are multiple challenges at every stage of the development and 
quality assurance of high-quality biological products. These include 
the initial molecular cloning process, development of clone expres-
sion by stable cell lines, purication and characterisation procedures, 
performing post-translation modications, ensuring chemical stability, 
deploying novel sensitive bio-analytical methods and meeting strin-
gent regulatory expectations. There are also new hurdles to overcome 
in the clinical development phase, including denition of the clinical 
indication with linked inclusion and exclusion criteria, study design 
and appropriate comparator product, selecting the appropriate ther-
apeutic dose based on interpretation of pharmacokinetic/pharma-
codynamic (PK/PD) data, and addressing specic safety concerns 
(notably immunogenicity) that arise after exposure to large biological 
molecules.
Health services 
Biological drugs are often much more expensive than conventional 
synthetic molecules because of the complex manufacturing process 
outlined above, but also because they often have much narrower indi-
cations for use based on specic molecular proling of the recipients. 
This means that the development costs have to be recouped from a rel-
atively smaller patient group. After the patent for the originator product 
expires, other manufacturers may develop similar products (‘biosimi-
lars’) that have the same pharmacological actions, but are not com-
pletely identical because of inevitable differences that arise during a 
complex manufacturing process (e.g. glycosylation). For that reason, 
‘biosimilars’ are not considered to be ‘generic’ medications, although 
they are usually considerably cheaper than the originator product. 
Nevertheless, the use of expensive biological agents is subject to par-
ticular scrutiny with regard to cost-effectiveness and health services 
may put additional requirements in place prior to access (e.g. failure of 
conventional treatments).
Prescribers 
For prescribers there are some important considerations when assessing 
the balance of benecial and adverse effects of biologics, for example, the 
use of recombinant antibodies for autoimmune inammatory conditions. 
Drugs such as iniximab or adalimumab carry a signicantly increased 
risk of infection when compared to classical disease-modifying anti-rheu-
matic drugs (cDMARDs) and this risk is increased by age, co-morbidities 
and concomitant use of other immunosuppressant drugs (e.g. gluco-
corticoids). Patients should be protected with appropriate vaccinations 
(e.g. inuenza, pneumococcus) and treatment is contra-indicated in the 
presence of active infection (e.g. hepatitis B, tuberculosis). The increased 
immunogenicity of large biological molecules has two important conse-
quences. First, there is an increased chance of immediate and delayed 
hypersensitivity reactions (see Box 2.6). Second, the development of anti-
drug antibodies can precipitate loss of effect. A recent Cochrane review 
of exposure to nine commonly used biologics for up to 5 years concluded 
that there was a 5% absolute increase in all adverse effects combined, a 
1% absolute increase in risk of serious infection, but little or no increased 
risk of cancer or other serious outcomes.
Licensing new medicines 
New drugs are given a ‘market authorisation’, based on the evidence of 
quality, safety and efcacy presented by the manufacturer. The regulator 
not only will approve the drug, but also will take great care to ensure 
that the accompanying information reects the evidence that has been 
presented. The summary of product characteristics (SPC), or ‘label’, 
provides detailed information about indications, dosage, adverse effects, 
warnings and monitoring requirements. If approved, drugs can be made 
available with different levels of restriction:
 Controlled drug (CD). These drugs are subject to strict legal controls 
on supply and possession, usually due to their abuse potential (e.g. 
opioid analgesics).
 Prescription-only medicine (PoM). These are available only from a 
pharmacist and can be supplied only if prescribed by an appropriate 
practitioner.
 Pharmacy (P). These are available only from a pharmacist, but can 
be supplied without a prescription.
 General sales list (GSL). These medicines may be bought ‘over the 
counter’ (OTC) from any shop and without a prescription.
Although the regulators take great care to agree the exact indica-
tions for prescribing a medicine, based on the evidence provided by the 
manufacturer, there are some circumstances in which prescribers may 
2.16 Novel therapeutic alternatives to conventional small-molecule drugs
Approaches
Therapeutic indications
Challenges
Monoclonal antibodies
Targeting of receptors or other molecules with 
relatively specic antibodies
Cancer
Chronic inammatory diseases (e.g. rheumatoid 
arthritis, inammatory bowel disease)
Selectivity of action
Complex manufacturing process
Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
Inhibition of gene expression
Macular degeneration
Delivery to target
Gene therapy
Delivery of modied genes that supplement or alter 
host DNA
Cystic brosis
Cancer
Cardiovascular disease
Delivery to target
Adverse effects of delivery vector (e.g. virus)
Stem cell therapy
Stem cells differentiate and replace damaged host 
cells
Parkinson’s disease
Spinal cord injury
Ischaemic heart disease
Delivery to target
Immunological compatibility
Long-term effects unknown

[[p49]]
Drug regulation and management     27
2
Monoclonal antibodies
e.g. infliximab, adalimumab
150000 Da
Small-molecule drugs
e.g. allopurinol
136 Da
Other proteins
e.g. interferons, enzymes,
cytokines
10000 – 500000 Da
A
B
Polypeptides
e.g. insulin, glucagon
5000 – 50000 Da
α
β
7
20
7
19
s
s
s
s
s
s
Blood products
e.g. red blood cells, white cells,
platelets
1000000000000 Da
C
D
Gene therapies
e.g. alipogene tiparvovec
1000000 Da
Antisense oligonucleotides
e.g. nusinersin, inotersin
10000 Da
mRNA
E
F
Cell therapy
e.g. CAR-T cells, embryonic
stem cells
1000000000000 Da
Vaccines
e.g. Haemophilus, polio
50000000 Da
G
H
Fig. 2.6 The mechanism of action and molecular weight of various types of biologic therapies.
 Cell therapies include injection of cells that replace damaged cells (e.g. embryonic stem cells) or manipulated immune cells that are targeted 
 Vaccines are used to stimulate the immune system to respond to and remember specic antigens associated with viral or bacterial 
infections. (CAR-T cells = chimeric antigen recipient T cells; Da = Daltons; mRNA = messenger ribonucleic acid; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)
direct its use outside the terms stated in the SPC (‘off-label’ prescribing). 
Common situations where this might occur include prescribing outside 
the approved age group (e.g. prescribing for children) or using an alter-
native formulation (e.g. administering a medicine provided in a solid form 
as an oral solution). Other important examples might include prescribing 
for an indication for which there are no approved medicines or where all 
of the approved medicines have caused unacceptable adverse effects. 
Occasionally, medicines may be prescribed when there is no marketing 
authorisation in the country of use. Examples include when a medicine 
licensed in another country is imported for use for an individual patient 
(‘unlicensed import’) or when a patient requires a specic preparation of 
a medicine to be manufactured (‘unlicensed special’). When prescribing 
is ‘off-label’ or ‘unlicensed’, there is an increased requirement for pre-
scribers to be able to justify their actions and to inform and agree the 
decision with the patient.
Drug marketing 
The marketing activities of the pharmaceutical industry are well resourced 
and are important in the process of recouping the massive costs of drug 
development. In some countries, such as the United States, it is possible 
to promote a new drug by direct-to-consumer advertising, although this 
is illegal in the UK and countries of the European Union. A major focus 
is on promotion to prescribers via educational events, sponsorship of 
meetings, advertisements in journals, involvement with opinion leaders 
and direct contact by company representatives. Such largesse has the 
potential to cause signicant conicts of interest and might tempt pre-
scribers to favour one drug over another, even in the face of evidence on 
effectiveness or cost-effectiveness.
Managing the use of medicines 
Many medicines meet the three key regulatory requirements of quality, 
safety and efcacy. Although prescribers are legally entitled to prescribe 
any of them, it is desirable to limit the choice so that treatments for spe-
cic diseases can be focused on the most effective and cost-effective 
options, prescribers (and patients) gain familiarity with a smaller number 
of medicines, and pharmacies can concentrate stocks on them.
The process of ensuring optimal use of available medicines is known 
as ‘medicines management’ or ‘quality use of medicines’. It involves 
careful evaluation of the evidence of benet and harm from using the 
medicine, an assessment of cost-effectiveness and support for pro-
cesses to implement the resulting recommendations. These activities 
usually involve both national (e.g. National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) in the UK) and local organisations (e.g. drug and ther-
apeutics committees).

[[p50]]
28    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
Evaluating evidence 
Drugs are often evaluated in high-quality randomised controlled trials, 
the results of which can be considered in systematic reviews (Fig. 2.7). 
Ideally, data are available not only for comparison with placebo, but also 
for ‘head-to-head’ comparison with alternative therapies. Trials are con-
ducted in selected patient populations and so may not be representative 
of every clinical scenario; therefore, extrapolation to individual patients 
is not always straightforward. Other subtle bias may be introduced 
because of the sources of funding (e.g. pharmaceutical industry) and 
the interests of the investigators in being involved in research that has a 
‘positive’ impact. These biases may be manifest in the way the trials are 
conducted or in how they are interpreted or reported. A common exam-
ple of the latter is the difference between relative and absolute risk of clin-
ical events reported in prevention trials. If a clinical event is encountered 
in the placebo arm at a rate of 1 in 50 patients (2%), but only 1 in 100 
patients (1%) in the active treatment arm, then the impact of treatment 
can be described as either a 50% relative risk reduction or 1% absolute 
risk reduction. Although the former sounds more impressive, it is the 
latter that is of more importance to the individual patient. It means that 
the number of patients that needed to be treated (NNT) for 1 to benet 
(compared to placebo) was 100. This illustrates how large clinical trials of 
new medicines can produce highly statistically signicant and impressive 
relative risk reductions and still predict a very modest clinical impact.
Evaluating cost-effectiveness 
New drugs often represent an incremental improvement over the current 
standard of care, but are usually more expensive. Health-care budgets are 
limited in every country and so it is impossible to fund all new medicines. 
This means that very difcult nancial decisions have to be taken with 
due regard to the principles of ethical justice. The main approach taken is 
cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA), where a comparison is made between 
the relative costs and outcomes of different courses of action. CEA is usu-
ally expressed as a ratio where the denominator is a gain in health and the 
numerator is the cost associated with the health gain. A major challenge is 
to compare the value of interventions for different clinical outcomes. One 
method is to calculate the quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) gained if the 
new drug is used rather than standard treatment. This analysis involves 
estimating the ‘utility’ of various health states between 1 (perfect health) 
and 0 (dead). If the additional costs and any savings are known, then it is 
possible to derive the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) in terms 
of cost/QALY. These principles are exemplied in Box 2.17. There are, 
however, inherent weaknesses in this kind of analysis: it usually depends 
on modelling future outcomes well beyond the duration of the clinical trial 
data; it assumes that QALYs gained at all ages are of equivalent value; 
and the appropriate standard care against which the new drug should be 
compared is often uncertain.
These pharmacoeconomic assessments are challenging and 
resource-intensive, and are undertaken at national level in most coun-
tries, e.g. in the UK by NICE.
Implementing recommendations 
Many recommendations about drug therapy are included in clinical guide-
lines written by an expert group after systematic review of the evidence. 
Guidelines provide recommendations rather than obligations for prescribers 
and are helpful in promoting more consistent and higher-quality prescrib-
ing. They are often written without concern for cost-effectiveness, however, 
and may be limited by the quality of available evidence. Guidelines cannot 
anti cipate the extent of the variation between individual patients who may, 
for example, have unexpected contraindications to recommended drugs 
or choose different priorities for treatment. When deviating from respected 
national guidance, prescribers should be able to justify their practice.
Additional recommendations for prescribing are often implemented 
locally or imposed by bodies responsible for paying for health care. Most 
health-care units have a drug and therapeutics committee (or equivalent) 
comprised of medical staff, pharmacists and nurses, as well as manag-
ers (because of the implications of the committee’s work for governance 
and resources). This group typically develops local prescribing policy and 
guidelines, maintains a local drug formulary and evaluates requests to 
use new drugs. The local formulary contains a more limited list than any 
national formulary (e.g. British National Formulary) because the latter lists 
all licensed medicines that can be prescribed legally, while the former 
contains only those that the health-care organisation has approved for 
local use. The local committee may also be involved, with local special-
ists, in providing explicit protocols for management of clinical scenarios.
Prescribing in practice 
Decision-making in prescribing 
Prescribing should be based on a rational approach to a series of chal-
lenges (see Box 2.1).
Odds ratio
Favours treatment
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
Favours placebo
Fig. 2.7 Systematic review of the evidence from randomised controlled 
clinical trials. This forest plot shows the effect of warfarin compared with placebo 
on the likelihood of stroke in patients with atrial brillation in ve randomised 
controlled trials that passed the quality criteria required for inclusion in a meta-
analysis. For each trial, the purple box is proportionate to the number of participants. 
The tick marks show the mean odds ratio and the black lines indicate its 95% 
condence intervals. Note that not all the trials showed statistically signicant effects 
(i.e. the condence intervals cross 1.0). However, the meta-analysis, represented 
by the black diamond, conrms a highly signicant statistical benet. The overall 
odds ratio is approximately 0.4, indicating a mean 60% risk reduction with warfarin 
treatment in patients with the characteristics of the participants in these trials.
2.17 Cost-effectiveness analysis
A clinical trial lasting 2 years compares two interventions for the treatment of colon 
cancer:
 Treatment A: standard treatment, cost £1000/year, oral therapy
 Treatment B: new treatment, cost £6000/year, monthly intravenous infusions, 
often followed by a week of nausea.
The new treatment (B) signicantly increases the average time to progression 
(18 months versus 12 months) and reduces overall mortality (40% versus 
60%). The health economist models the survival curves from the trial in order to 
undertake a cost–utility analysis and concludes that:
 Intervention A: allows an average patient to live for 2 extra years at a utility  
0.7 = 1.4 QALYs (cost £2000)
 Intervention B: allows an average patient to live for 3 extra years at a utility  
0.6 = 1.8 QALYs (cost £18 000).
The health economists conclude that treatment B provides an extra 0.4 QALYs 
at an extra cost of £16 000, meaning that the ICER = £40 000/QALY. They 
recommend that the new treatment should not be funded on the basis that their 
threshold for cost acceptability is £30 000/QALY.
(ICER = incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; QALY = quality-adjusted life year)

[[p51]]
Prescribing in practice     29
2
Making a diagnosis 
Ideally, prescribing should be based on a conrmed diagnosis but, in 
reality, many prescriptions are based on the balance of probability, taking 
into account the differential diagnosis (e.g. proton pump inhibitors for 
post-prandial retrosternal discomfort).
Establishing the therapeutic goal 
The goals of treatment are usually clear, particularly when relieving symp-
toms (e.g. pain, nausea, constipation). Sometimes the goal is less obvi-
ous to the patient, especially when aiming to prevent future events (e.g. 
ACE inhibitors to prevent hospitalisation and extend life in chronic heart 
failure). Prescribers should be clear about the therapeutic goal against 
which they will judge success or failure of treatment. It is also important 
to establish that the value placed on this goal by the prescriber is shared 
by the patient (concordance).
Choosing the therapeutic approach 
For many clinical problems, drug therapy is not absolutely mandated. 
Having taken the potential benets and harms into account, prescribers 
must consider whether drug therapy is in the patient’s interest and is 
preferred to no treatment or one of a range of alternatives (e.g. physio-
therapy, psychotherapy, surgery). Assessing the balance of benet and 
harm is often complicated and depends on various features associated 
with the patient, disease and drug (Box 2.18).
Choosing a drug 
For most common clinical indications (e.g. type 2 diabetes, depression), 
more than one drug is available, often from more than one drug class. 
Although prescribers often have guidance about which represents the 
rational choice for the average patient, they still need to consider whether 
this is the optimal choice for the individual patient. Certain factors may 
inuence the choice of drug:
Absorption 
Patients may nd some formulations easier to swallow than others or 
may be vomiting and require a drug available for parenteral administration.
Distribution 
Distribution of a drug to a particular tissue sometimes dictates choice 
(e.g. tetracyclines and rifampicin are concentrated in the bile, and linco-
mycin and clindamycin in bones).
Metabolism 
Drugs that are extensively metabolised should be avoided in severe liver 
disease (e.g. opioid analgesics).
Excretion 
Drugs that depend on renal excretion for elimination (e.g. digoxin, amino-
glycoside antibiotics) should be avoided in patients with impaired renal 
function if suitable alternatives exist.
Efcacy 
Prescribers normally choose drugs with the greatest efcacy in achieving 
the goals of therapy (e.g. proton pump inhibitors rather than H2-receptor 
antagonists). It may be appropriate, however, to compromise on efcacy 
if other drugs are more convenient, safer to use or less expensive.
Avoiding adverse effects 
Prescribers should be wary of choosing drugs that are more likely to 
cause adverse effects (e.g. cephalosporins rather than alternatives 
for patients allergic to penicillin) or worsen coexisting conditions (e.g. 
β-blockers as treatment for angina in patients with asthma).
Features of the disease 
This is most obvious when choosing antibiotic therapy, which should be 
based on the known or suspected sensitivity of the infective organism.
Severity of disease 
The choice of drug should be appropriate to disease severity (e.g. par-
acetamol for mild pain, morphine for severe pain).
Coexisting disease 
This may be either an indication or a contraindication to therapy. 
Hypertensive patients might be prescribed a β-blocker if they also have 
left ventricular impairment, but not if they have asthma.
Avoiding adverse drug interactions 
Prescribers should avoid giving combinations of drugs that might inter-
act, either directly or indirectly (see Box 2.12).
Patient adherence to therapy 
Prescribers should choose drugs with a simple dosing schedule or eas-
ier administration (e.g. the ACE inhibitor lisinopril once daily rather than 
captopril 3 times daily for hypertension).
Cost 
Prescribers should choose the cheaper drug (e.g. a generic or biosimilar) if 
two drugs are of equal efcacy and safety. Even if cost is not a concern for 
the individual patient, it is important to remember that unnecessary expendi-
ture will ultimately limit choices for other prescribers and patients. Sometimes 
a more costly drug may be appropriate (e.g. if it yields improved adherence).
Genetic factors 
There are already a small number of examples where genotype inu-
ences the choice of drug therapy (see Box 2.5).
Choosing a dosage regimen 
Prescribers have to choose a dose, route and frequency of administra-
tion (dosage regimen) to achieve a steady-state drug concentration that 
provides sufcient exposure of the target tissue without producing toxic 
effects. Manufacturers draw up dosage recommendations based on 
average observations in many patients, but the optimal regimen that will 
maximise the benet to harm ratio for an individual patient is never cer-
tain. Rational prescribing involves treating each prescription as an exper-
iment and gathering sufcient information to amend it if necessary. There 
are some general principles that should be followed, as described below.
Dose titration 
Prescribers should generally start with a low dose and titrate this slowly 
upwards as necessary. This cautious approach is particularly important if the 
patient is likely to be more sensitive to adverse pharmacodynamic effects 
(e.g. delirium or postural hypotension in the elderly), if there may be altered 
pharmacokinetic handling (e.g. renal or hepatic impairment) and when using 
drugs with a low therapeutic index (e.g. benzodiazepines, lithium, digoxin). 
However, there are some exceptions. Some drugs must achieve therapeu-
tic concentration quickly because of the clinical circumstance (e.g. antibiot-
ics, glucocorticoids, carbimazole). When early effect is important, but there 
may be a delay in achieving steady state because of a drug’s long half-life 
(e.g. digoxin, warfarin, amiodarone), an initial loading dose is given prior to 
establishing the appropriate maintenance dose (see Fig. 2.4).
2.18 Factors to consider when balancing benets and harms 
of drug therapy
 Seriousness of the disease or symptom
 Efcacy of the drug
 Seriousness of potential adverse effects
 Likelihood of adverse effects
 Efcacy of alternative drugs or non-drug therapies
 Safety of alternative drugs or non-drug therapies

[[p52]]
30    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
If adverse effects occur, the dose should be reduced or an alternative 
drug prescribed; in some cases, a lower dose may sufce if it can be 
combined with another synergistic drug (e.g. the immunosuppressant 
azathioprine reduces glucocorticoid requirements in patients with inam-
matory disease). It is important to remember that the shape of the dose–
response curve (see Fig. 2.2) means that higher doses may produce 
little added therapeutic effect and might increase the chances of toxicity.
Route 
There are many reasons for choosing a particular route of administration 
(Box 2.19).
Frequency 
Frequency of doses is usually dictated by a manufacturer’s recommen-
dation. Less frequent doses are more convenient for patients, but result 
in greater uctuation between peaks and troughs in drug concentration 
(see Fig. 2.4). This is relevant if the peaks are associated with adverse 
effects (e.g. dizziness with antihypertensives) or the troughs are associ-
ated with troublesome loss of effect (e.g. anti-Parkinsonian drugs). These 
problems can be tackled either by splitting the dose or by employing a 
modied-release formulation, if available.
Timing 
For many drugs the time of administration is unimportant. There are 
occasionally pharmacokinetic or therapeutic reasons, however, for giving 
drugs at particular times (Box 2.20).
Formulation 
For some drugs there is a choice of formulation, some for use by different 
routes. Some are easier to ingest, particularly by children (e.g. elixirs). The 
formulation is important when writing repeat prescriptions for drugs with 
a low therapeutic index that come in different formulations (e.g. lithium, 
phenytoin, theophylline). Even if the prescribed dose remains constant, 
an alternative formulation may differ in its absorption and bioavailabil-
ity, and hence plasma drug concentration. These are examples of the 
small number of drugs that should be prescribed by specic brand name 
rather than ‘generic’ international non-proprietary name (INN).
Duration 
Some drugs require a single dose (e.g. thrombolysis post-myocardial 
infarction), while for others the duration of the course of treatment is cer-
tain at the outset (e.g. antibiotics). For most, the duration will be largely 
at the prescriber’s discretion and will depend on response and disease 
progression (e.g. analgesics, antidepressants). For many, the treatment 
will be long-term (e.g. insulin, antihypertensives, levothyroxine).
Involving the patient 
Patients should, whenever possible, be engaged in making choices 
about drug therapy. Their beliefs and expectations affect the goals of 
therapy and help in judging the acceptable benet/harm balance when 
selecting treatments. Very often, patients may wish to defer to the pro-
fessional expertise of the prescriber. Nevertheless, they play key roles in 
adherence to therapy and in monitoring treatment, not least by providing 
early warning of adverse events. It is important for them to be provided 
with the necessary information to understand the choice that has been 
made, what to expect from the treatment, and any measurements that 
must be undertaken (Box 2.21).
A major drive to include patients has been the recognition that up to 
half of the drug doses for chronic preventative therapy are not taken. 
This is often termed ‘non-compliance’, but is more appropriately called 
‘non-adherence’, to reect a less paternalistic view of the doctor–patient 
relationship; it may or may not be intentional. Non-adherence to the dose 
regimen reduces the likelihood of benets to the patient and can be costly 
in terms of wasted medicines and unnecessary health-care episodes. An 
important reason may be lack of concordance with the prescriber about 
the goals of treatment. A more open and shared decision-making process 
might resolve any misunderstandings at the outset and foster improved 
adherence, as well as improved satisfaction with health-care services and 
condence in prescribers. Considerable efforts are now made to help 
patients to access the reliable information they require to engage more 
fully with clinicians. Patient-focused websites and leaets provided by 
national services, local health-care providers and charities are increasingly 
supplementing the Patient Information Leaet (PIL) approved by the regu-
latory authorities and supplied with all medicines. Fully engaging patients 
in shared decision-making is sometimes constrained by various factors, 
such as limited consultation time, language barriers and challenges in 
communicating complex numerical data.
Writing the prescription 
The culmination of the planning described above is writing an accurate 
and legible prescription so that the drug will be dispensed and adminis-
tered as planned (see ‘Writing prescriptions’ below).
Monitoring treatment effects 
Rational prescribing involves monitoring for the benecial and adverse 
effects of treatment so that the balance remains in favour of a positive 
outcome (see ‘Monitoring drug therapy’ below).
Stopping drug therapy 
It is also important to review long-term treatment at regular intervals 
to assess whether continued treatment is required. Elderly patients 
are keen to reduce their medication burden and are often prepared to 
compromise on the original goals of long-term preventative therapy to 
achieve this.
2.19 Factors inuencing the route of drug administration
Reason
Example
Only one route possible
Dobutamine (IV)
Gliclazide (oral)
Patient adherence
Phenothiazines and thioxanthenes (2 
weekly IM depot injections rather than 
daily tablets, in schizophrenia)
Poor absorption
Furosemide (IV rather than oral, in 
severe heart failure)
Rapid action
Haloperidol (IM rather than oral, in 
acute behavioural disturbance)
Vomiting
Phenothiazines (PR or buccal rather 
than oral, in nausea)
Avoidance of rst-pass 
metabolism
Glyceryl trinitrate (SL, in angina 
pectoris)
Certainty of effect
Amoxicillin (IV rather than oral, in acute 
chest infection)
Direct access to the site of 
action (avoiding unnecessary 
systemic exposure)
Bronchodilators (INH rather than oral, 
in asthma)
Local application of drugs to skin, 
eyes etc.
Ease of access
Diazepam (PR, if IV access is difcult 
in status epilepticus)
Adrenaline (epinephrine) (IM, if IV 
access is difcult in acute anaphylaxis)
Comfort
Morphine (SC rather than IV in terminal 
care)
(IM = intramuscular; INH = by inhalation; IV = intravenous; PR = per rectum; SC = 
subcutaneous; SL = sublingual)

[[p53]]
Prescribing in practice     31
2
Prescribing in special circumstances 
Prescribing for patients with renal disease 
Patients with renal impairment are identied by a low estimated glomer-
ular ltration rate (eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2), based on their serum cre-
atinine, age, sex and ethnic group (see Box 18.1). This group includes 
a large proportion of elderly patients. If a drug (or its active metabolites) 
is eliminated predominantly by the kidneys, it will tend to accumulate 
and so the maintenance dose must be reduced. For some drugs, renal 
impairment makes patients more sensitive to their adverse pharmacody-
namic effects. Examples of drugs that require extra caution in patients 
with renal disease are listed in Box 2.22.
Prescribing for patients with hepatic disease 
The liver has a large capacity for drug metabolism and hepatic insuf-
ciency has to be advanced before drug dosages need to be modi-
ed. Patients who may have impaired metabolism include those with 
jaundice, ascites, hypoalbuminaemia, malnutrition or encephalopathy. 
Hepatic drug clearance may also be reduced in acute hepatitis, in 
hepatic congestion due to cardiac failure and in the presence of intra-
hepatic arteriovenous shunting (e.g. in hepatic cirrhosis). There are no 
good tests of hepatic drug-metabolising capacity or of biliary excre-
tion, so dosage should be guided by the therapeutic response and 
careful monitoring for adverse effects. The presence of liver disease 
also increases the susceptibility to adverse pharmacological effects of 
drugs. Some drugs that require extra caution in patients with hepatic 
disease are listed in Box 2.22.
Prescribing for older patients 
The issues around prescribing in old age are discussed in Box 2.23.
Prescribing for women who are pregnant or 
breastfeeding 
Prescribing in pregnancy should be avoided if possible to minimise the 
risk of adverse effects in the fetus. Drug therapy in pregnancy may, 
however, be required either for a pre-existing problem (e.g. epilepsy, 
asthma, hypothyroidism) or for problems that arise during pregnancy 
(e.g. morning sickness, anaemia, prevention of neural tube defects, 
gestational diabetes, hypertension). About 35% of women take drug 
2.20 Factors inuencing the timing of drug therapy
Drug
Recommended timing
Reasons
Diuretics (e.g. furosemide)
Once in the morning
Night-time diuresis undesirable
Statins (e.g. simvastatin)
Once at night
HMG CoA reductase activity is greater at night
Antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline)
Once at night
Allows adverse effects to occur during sleep
Salbutamol
Before exercise
Reduces symptoms in exercise-induced asthma
Glyceryl trinitrate
When required
Relief of acute symptoms only
Paracetamol
Regular nitrate therapy (e.g. isosorbide 
mononitrate)
Eccentric dosing regimen (e.g. twice daily at 8 a.m. 
and 2 p.m.)
Reduces development of nitrate tolerance by 
allowing drug-free period each night
Aspirin
With food
Minimises gastrotoxic effects
Alendronate
Once in the morning before breakfast, sitting upright
Minimises risk of oesophageal irritation
Tetracyclines
2 hours before or after food or antacids
Divalent and trivalent cations chelate tetracyclines, 
preventing absorption
Hypnotics (e.g. temazepam)
Once at night
Maximises therapeutic effect and minimises daytime 
sedation
Antihypertensive drugs (e.g. amlodipine)
Once in the morning
Blood pressure is higher during the daytime
(HMG CoA = 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A)
2.21 What patients need to know about their medicines*
Knowledge
Comment
The reason for taking the medicine
Reinforces the goals of therapy
How the medicine works
How to take the medicine
May be important for the effectiveness (e.g. inhaled salbutamol in asthma) and safety (e.g. alendronate for 
osteoporosis) of treatment
What benets to expect
May help to support adherence or prompt review because of treatment failure
What adverse effects might occur
Discuss common and mild effects that may be transient and might not require discontinuation
Mention rare but serious effects that might inuence the patient’s consent
Precautions that improve safety
Explain symptoms to report that might allow serious adverse effects to be averted, monitoring that will be required and 
potentially important drug–drug interactions
When to return for review
This will be important to enable monitoring
*Many medicines are provided with patient information leaets, which the patient should be encouraged to read.

[[p54]]
32    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
therapy at least once during pregnancy and 6% take drug therapy 
during the rst trimester (excluding iron, folic acid and vitamins). The 
most commonly used drugs are simple analgesics, antibacterial drugs 
and antacids. Some considerations when prescribing in pregnancy are 
listed in Box 2.24.
Drugs that are excreted in breast milk may cause adverse effects in the 
baby. Prescribers should always consult the SPC for each drug or a relia-
ble formulary when treating a pregnant woman or breastfeeding mother.
Writing prescriptions 
A prescription is a means by which a prescriber communicates the 
intended plan of treatment to the pharmacist who dispenses a med-
icine and to a nurse or patient who administers it. It should be pre-
cise, accurate, clear and legible. The two main kinds of prescription 
are those written, dispensed and administered in hospital and those 
written in primary care (in the UK by a GP), dispensed at a community 
pharmacy and self-administered by the patient. The information sup-
plied must include:
 the date
 the identication details of the patient
 the name of the drug
 the formulation
 the dose
 the frequency of administration
 the route and method of administration
 the amount to be supplied (primary care only)
 instructions for labelling (primary care only)
 the prescriber’s signature.
Prescribing in hospital 
Although primary care prescribing is increasingly electronic, many hos-
pital prescriptions continue to be based around the prescription and 
administration record (the ‘drug chart’) (Fig. 2.8). A variety of charts are 
in use and prescribers must familiarise themselves with the local version. 
Most contain the following sections:
 Basic patient information: will usually include name, age, date of 
birth, hospital number and address. These details are often ‘lled 
in’ using a sticky addressograph label, but this increases the risk of 
serious error.
 Previous adverse reactions/allergies: communicates important 
patient safety information based on a careful drug history and/or the 
medical record.
 Other medicines charts: notes any other hospital prescription doc-
uments that contain current prescriptions being received by the 
patient (e.g. anticoagulants, insulin, oxygen, uids).
 Once-only medications: for prescribing medicines to be used 
infrequently, such as single-dose prophylactic antibiotics and other 
pre-operative medications.
2.22 Some drugs that require extra caution in patients with 
renal or hepatic disease
Kidney disease
Liver disease
Pharmacodynamic effects enhanced
ACE inhibitors and ARBs (renal 
impairment, hyperkalaemia)
Metformin (lactic acidosis)
Spironolactone (hyperkalaemia)
NSAIDs (impaired renal function)
Sulphonylureas (hypoglycaemia)
Insulin (hypoglycaemia)
Warfarin (increased anticoagulation 
because of reduced clotting factor 
synthesis)
Metformin (lactic acidosis)
Chloramphenicol (bone marrow 
suppression)
NSAIDs (gastrointestinal bleeding, 
uid retention)
Sulphonylureas (hypoglycaemia)
Benzodiazepines (coma)
Pharmacokinetic handling altered (reduced clearance)
Aminoglycosides (e.g. gentamicin)
Vancomycin
Other antibiotics (e.g. ciprooxacin)
Digoxin
Lithium
Atenolol
Allopurinol
Cephalosporins
Methotrexate
Opioids (e.g. morphine)
Phenytoin
Rifampicin
Propranolol
Warfarin
Diazepam
Lidocaine
Opioids (e.g. morphine)
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker; NSAID = non-
steroidal anti-inammatory drug)
2.23 Prescribing in old age
 Reduced drug elimination: partly due to impaired renal function.
 Increased sensitivity to drug effects: notably in the brain (leading to sedation 
or delirium) and as a result of comorbidities.
 More drug interactions: largely as a result of polypharmacy.
 Lower starting doses and slower dose titration: often required, with careful 
monitoring of drug effects.
 Drug adherence: may be poor because of cognitive impairment, difculty 
swallowing (dry mouth) and complex polypharmacy regimens. Supplying 
medicines in pill organisers (e.g. dosette boxes or calendar blister packs), 
providing automatic reminders, and regularly reviewing and simplifying the drug 
regimen can help.
 Some drugs that require extra caution, and their mechanisms
Digoxin: increased sensitivity of Na+/K+ pump; hypokalaemia due to 
diuretics; renal impairment favours accumulation→increased risk of toxicity.
Antihypertensive drugs: reduced baroreceptor function→increased risk of 
postural hypotension.
Antidepressants, hypnotics, sedatives, tranquillisers: increased sensitivity of 
the brain; reduced metabolism→increased risk of toxicity.
Warfarin: increased tendency to falls and injury and to bleeding from intra- 
and extracranial sites; increased sensitivity to inhibition of clotting factor 
synthesis→increased risk of bleeding.
Amitriptyline, diltiazem, lidocaine, metoprolol, morphine, propranolol, 
theophylline: metabolism reduced→increased risk of toxicity.
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs: poor renal function→increased risk 
of renal impairment; susceptibility to gastrotoxicity→increased risk of upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding.
2.24 Prescribing in pregnancy
 Teratogenesis: a potential risk, especially when drugs are taken between 2 
and 8 weeks of gestation (4–10 weeks from last menstrual period). Common 
teratogens include retinoids (e.g. isotretinoin), cytotoxic drugs, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors, antiepileptics (e.g. sodium valproate) and warfarin. If 
there is inadvertent exposure, then the timing of conception should be established, 
counselling given and investigations undertaken for fetal abnormalities.
 Adverse fetal effects in late gestation: e.g. tetracyclines may stain growing 
teeth and bones; sulphonamides displace fetal bilirubin from plasma proteins, 
potentially causing kernicterus; opioids given during delivery may be associated 
with respiratory depression in the neonate.
 Altered maternal pharmacokinetics: extracellular uid volume and Vd
increase. Plasma albumin falls but other binding globulins (e.g. for thyroid and 
steroid hormones) increase. Glomerular ltration increases by approximately 
70%, enhancing renal clearance. Placental metabolism contributes to increased 
clearance, e.g. of levothyroxine and glucocorticoids. The overall effect is a fall in 
plasma concentration of many drugs.
 In practice
Avoid any drugs unless the risk:benet analysis is in favour of treating 
(usually the mother).
Use drugs for which there is some record of safety in humans.
Use the lowest dose for the shortest time possible.
Choose the least harmful drug if alternatives are available.

[[p55]]
Prescribing in practice     33
2
 Regular medications: for prescribing medicines to be taken for a 
number of days or continuously, such as a course of antibiotics or 
antihypertensive drugs.
 ‘As required’ medications: for prescribing for symptomatic relief, 
usually to be administered at the discretion of the nursing staff (e.g. 
antiemetics, analgesics).
Prescribers should be aware of the risks of prescription error (Box 2.25 
and see Box 2.14), ensure they have considered the rational basis for their 
prescribing decision and then follow the guidance illustrated in Figure 2.8 in 
order to write the prescription. It is a basic principle that a prescription will 
be followed by a judgement as to its success or failure and any appropriate 
changes made (e.g. altered dosage, discontinuation or substitution).
Hospital discharge (‘to take out’) medicines 
Most patients will be prescribed a short course of their medicines 
at discharge. This prescription is particularly important because it 
usually informs future therapy at the point of transfer of prescribing 
responsibility to primary care. Great care is required to ensure that this 
list is accurate. It is particularly important to ensure that any hospital 
medicines that should be stopped are not included and that those 
intended to be administered for a short duration only are clearly iden-
tied. It is also important for any signicant ADRs experienced in hos-
pital to be recorded and any specic monitoring or review identied.
Prescribing in primary care 
Most of the considerations above are equally applicable to primary care 
(GP) prescriptions. In many health-care systems, community prescrib-
ing is electronic, making issues of legibility irrelevant and often providing 
basic decision support to limit the range of doses that can be written and 
highlight potential drug interactions. Important additional issues more rel-
evant to GP prescribing are:
OTHER MEDICINES CHARTS
CODES FOR NON-ADMINISTRATION OF PRESCRIBED MEDICINE
PREVIOUS ADVERSE REACTIONS
(This must be completed before prescribing on this chart)
Hospital number:
(Attach printed label here)
D.O.B.:
Weight:
Date
Date
Time
Medicine (approved name)
Dose
Route
Time
given
Given
by
Prescriber – sign and print
If a dose is not administered as prescribed, intial and enter a code in the column with a circle drawn round the code according to the
reason as shown below. Inform the responsible doctor of the appropriate timescale.
1. Patient refuses
2. Patient not present
3. Medicines not available – CHECK ORDERED
4. Asleep/drowsy
5. Administration route not available – CHECK FOR ALTERNATIVE
6. Vomiting/nausea
7. Time varied on doctor’s instructions
8. Once-only/as-required medicine given
9. Dose withheld on doctor’s instructions
10. Possible adverse reaction/side-effect
Type of chart
Medicine
Description of reaction
Completed by
Date
Height:
If rewritten, date:
DISCHARGE PRESCRIPTION
PRESCRIPTION AND ADMINISTRATION RECORD
Standard Chart
ONCE-ONLY MEDICINES
Date completed:–
Completed by:–
A
B
Fig. 2.8 Example of a hospital prescription and administration record (‘drug chart’).
Front page. The correct identication of the patient is critical to reducing the risk 
of an administration error. This page also clearly identies other prescriptions charts in use and previous adverse reactions to drugs to minimise the risk of repeated exposure. 
Note also the codes employed by the nursing staff to indicate reasons why drugs may not have been administered. The patient’s name and date of birth should be written on 
‘Once-only medicines’
This area is used for prescribing medicines that are unlikely to be repeated on a regular basis. Note that the prescriber has written the names of all drugs legibly in block 
capitals. The generic international non-proprietary name (INN) should be used in preference to the brand name (e.g. write ‘SIMVASTATIN’, not ‘ZOCOR’). The only exceptions are 
when variation occurs in the properties of alternative branded formulations (e.g. modied-release preparations of drugs such as lithium, theophylline, phenytoin and nifedipine) 
or when the drug is a combination product with no generic name (e.g. Kliovance®). The only acceptable abbreviations for drug dose units are ‘g’ and ‘mg’. ‘Units’ (e.g. of 
insulin or heparin) and ‘micrograms’ must always be written in full, never as ‘U’ or ‘µg’ (nor ‘mcg’, nor ‘ug’). For liquid preparations write the dose in mg; ‘mL’ can be written 
only for a combination product (e.g. Gaviscon liquid) or if the strength is not expressed in weight (e.g. adrenaline (epinephrine) 1 in 1000). Use numbers/gures (e.g. 1 or 
‘one’) to denote use of a sachet/enema but avoid prescribing numbers of tablets without specifying their strength. Always include the dose of inhaled drugs in addition to 
stating numbers of ‘puffs’, as strengths can vary. Widely accepted abbreviations for route of administration are: intravenous – ‘IV’; intramuscular – ‘IM’; subcutaneous – ‘SC’; 
sublingual – ‘SL’; per rectum – ‘PR’; per vaginam – ‘PV’; nasogastric – ‘NG’; inhaled – ‘INH’; and topical – ‘TOP’. ‘ORAL’ is preferred to per oram – ‘PO’. Care should be taken 
in specifying ‘RIGHT’ or ‘LEFT’ for eye and ear drops. The prescriber should sign and print their name clearly so that they can be identied by colleagues. The prescription 
should be dated and have an administration time. The nurse who administered the prescription has signed to conrm that the dose has been administered. 
(Continues overleaf)

[[p56]]
34    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
REGULAR MEDICINES
AS-REQUIRED THERAPY
Drug (approved name)
Dose
Date
Time
6
8
12
14
18
22
6
8
12
14
18
22
6
8
12
14
18
22
Prescriber–sign and print
Notes
Start date
Pharmacy
Route
Drug (approved name)
Dose
Prescriber–sign and print
Notes
Start date
Pharmacy
Route
Drug (approved name)
Dose and frequency
Prescriber–sign and print
Start date
Route
Date
Time
Dose
Initials
Date
Time
Dose
Initials
Drug (approved name)
Dose and frequency
Route
Date
Time
Dose
Initials
Date
Time
Dose
Initials
Drug (approved name)
Dose
Prescriber–sign and print
Notes
Start date
Pharmacy
Route
C
D
Fig. 2.8, cont’d 
‘Regular medicines’. This area is used for prescribing medicines that are going to be given regularly. In addition to the name, dose and route, a 
frequency of administration is required for each medicine. Widely accepted Latin abbreviations for dose frequency are: once daily – ‘OD’; twice daily – ‘BD’; 3 times daily – 
‘TDS’; 4 times daily – ‘QDS’; as required – ‘PRN’; in the morning – ‘OM’ (omni mane); at night – ‘ON’ (omni nocte); and immediately – ‘stat’. The hospital chart usually 
requires specic times to be identied for regular medicines that coincide with nursing drug rounds and these can be circled. If treatment is for a known time period, cross 
off subsequent days when the medicine is not required. The ‘notes’ box can be used to communicate additional important information (e.g. whether a medicine should be 
taken with food, type of inhaler device used, and anything else that the drug dispenser should know). State here the times for peak/trough plasma levels for drugs requiring 
therapeutic monitoring. Prescriptions should be discontinued by drawing a vertical line at the point of discontinuation, horizontal lines through the remaining days on the chart, 
and diagonal lines through the drug details and administration boxes. This action should be signed and dated and a supplementary note written to explain it (e.g. describing any 
adverse effect). In this example, amlodipine has been discontinued because of ankle oedema. There is room for the ward pharmacist to sign to indicate that the prescription 
has been reviewed and that a supply of the medicine is available. The administration boxes allow the nurse to sign to conrm that the dose has been given. Note that these 
boxes also allow for recording of reasons for non-administration (in this example ‘2’ indicates that the patient was not present on the ward at the time) and the prevention of 
‘As-required medicines’. These prescriptions leave the administration of the drug to the discretion of the nursing staff. The 
prescription must describe clearly the indication, frequency, minimal time interval between doses, and maximum dose in any 24-hour period (in this case, the maximum daily 
dose of paracetamol is 4 g).
 Formulation. The prescription needs to carry information about 
the formulation for the dispensing pharmacist (e.g. tablets or oral 
suspension).
 Amount to be supplied. A pharmacist will organise this in hospital. 
Elsewhere it must be specied either as the precise number of tab-
lets or as the duration of treatment. Creams and ointments should 
be specied in grams and lotions in mL.
 Controlled drugs. Prescriptions for ‘controlled’ drugs (e.g. opioid 
analgesics, with potential for drug abuse) are subject to additional 
legal requirements. In the UK, they must contain the address of the 
patient and prescriber (not necessary on most hospital forms), the 
form and the strength of the preparation, and the total quantity of 
the preparation/number of dose units in both words and gures.
 ‘Repeat prescriptions’. A large proportion of GP prescribing involves 
‘repeat prescriptions’ for chronic medication. These are often gen-
erated automatically, although the prescriber remains responsible 
for regular review and for ensuring that the benet-to-harm ratio 
remains favourable.

[[p57]]
Prescribing in practice     35
2
Monitoring drug therapy 
Prescribers should measure the effects of the drug, both benecial and 
harmful, to inform decisions about dose titration (up or down), discontinu-
ation or substitution of treatment. Monitoring can be achieved subjectively 
by asking the patient about symptoms or, more objectively, by measuring 
a clinical effect, which may be possible to assess by clinical examination 
(e.g. eczematous rash), physiological measurement (e.g. blood pressure, 
pulse oximetry), imaging (e.g. chest X-ray, CT scan) or laboratory tests (e.g. 
haem oglobin, INR (International Normalised Ratio)). Alternatively, if the phar-
macodynamic effects of the drug are difcult to assess, the plasma drug 
concentration may be measured, if this is closely related to the effect of 
the drug (see Fig. 2.2). Rational prescribing ultimately rests on continuous 
monitoring of the balance between the risks and benets of drug therapy. 
Common examples are ACE inhibitors (negative impact on renal function 
versus blood pressure-lowering), cancer chemotherapy (bone marrow 
suppression versus radiological tumour regression) and disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs (liver toxicity versus anti-inammatory effect). Advances 
in therapeutics have also led to increasing complexity of ongoing monitoring 
requirements. The recognition that hospital specialist clinics cannot take on 
the responsibility for monitoring of all chronic disease therapy has led to the 
development of ‘shared care protocols’ that aim to share monitoring activ-
ities between specialists and primary care physicians with the aim of max-
imising efcient use of health-care resources and convenience for patients.
Clinical and surrogate endpoints 
Ideally, clinical endpoints are measured directly and the drug dosage titrated 
to achieve the therapeutic goal and avoid toxicity (e.g. control of ventricular 
rate in a patient with atrial brillation, monitoring anticoagulation using INR). 
Sometimes this is impractical because the clinical endpoint is a future event 
(e.g. prevention of myocardial infarction by statins or resolution of a chest 
infection with antibiotics); in these circumstances, it may be possible to 
select a ‘surrogate’ endpoint that will predict success or failure. This may be 
an intermediate step in the pathophysiological process (e.g. serum choles-
terol as a surrogate for risk of myocardial infarction) or a measurement that 
follows the pathophysiology, even if it is not a key factor in its progression 
(e.g. serum C-reactive protein as a surrogate for resolution of inammation 
in chest infection, TSH as a surrogate for adequate replacement of levo-
thyroxine). Such surrogates are sometimes termed ‘biomarkers’.
Plasma drug concentration 
The following criteria must be met to justify routine monitoring by plasma 
drug concentration:
 Clinical endpoints and other pharmacodynamic (surrogate) effects 
are difcult to monitor.
 The relationship between plasma concentration and clinical effects is 
predictable.
 The therapeutic index is low. For drugs with a high therapeutic 
index, any variability in plasma concentrations is likely to be irrele-
vant clinically.
Some examples of drugs that full these criteria are listed in Box 2.26.
Measurement of plasma concentration may be useful in planning 
adjustments of drug dose and frequency of administration; to explain 
an inadequate therapeutic response (by identifying subtherapeutic con-
centration or incomplete adherence); to establish whether a suspected 
ADR is likely to be caused by the drug; and to assess and avoid potential 
drug interactions.
Timing of samples in relation to doses 
The concentration of drug rises and falls during the dosage interval 
(see Fig. 2.4B). Measurements made during the initial absorption and 
2.25 High-risk prescribing moments
 Trying to amend an active prescription (e.g. altering the dose/timing) – always 
avoid and start again
 Writing up drugs in the immediate presence of more than one prescription chart 
or set of notes – avoid
 Allowing one’s attention to be diverted in the middle of completing a 
prescription – avoid
 Prescribing ‘high-risk’ drugs (e.g. anticoagulants, opioids, insulin, sedatives) –  
ask for help if necessary
 Prescribing parenteral drugs – take care
 Rushing prescribing (e.g. in the midst of a busy ward round) – avoid
 Prescribing unfamiliar drugs – consult the formulary and ask for help if 
necessary
 Transcribing multiple prescriptions from an expired chart to a new one – take 
care to review the rationale for each medicine
 Writing prescriptions based on information from another source such as a 
referral letter (the list may contain errors and some of the medicines may be the 
cause of the patient’s illness) – review the justication for each as if it is a new 
prescription
 Writing up ‘to take out’ drugs (because these will become the patient’s regular 
medication for the immediate future) – take care and seek advice if necessary
 Calculating drug doses – ask a colleague to perform an independent calculation 
or use approved electronic dose calculators
 Prescribing sound-alike or look-alike drugs (e.g. chlorphenamine and 
chlorpromazine) – take care
2.26 Drugs commonly monitored by plasma drug concentration
Drug
Half-life (hrs)*
Comment
Digoxin
36
Steady state takes several days to achieve. Samples should be taken 6 hrs post dose. Measurement is useful to conrm 
the clinical impression of toxicity or non-adherence but clinical effectiveness is better assessed by ventricular heart rate. 
Risk of toxicity increases progressively at concentrations > 1.5 µg/L, and is likely at concentrations > 3.0 µg/L (toxicity is 
more likely in the presence of hypokalaemia)
Gentamicin
2
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be < 1 mg/L) to ensure that accumulation (and the risk of nephrotoxicity 
and ototoxicity) is avoided; see Fig. 6.18
Lithium
24
Steady state takes several days to achieve. Samples should be taken 12 hrs post dose. Target range 0.4–1 mmol/L
Phenytoin
24
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be 10–20 mg/L) to ensure that accumulation is avoided. Good 
correlation between concentration and toxicity. Concentration may be misleading in the presence of hypoalbuminaemia
Theophylline (oral)
6
Steady state takes 2–3 days to achieve. Samples should be taken 6 hrs post dose. Target concentration is 10–20 mg/L 
but its relationship with bronchodilator effect and adverse effects is variable
Vancomycin
6
Measure pre-dose trough concentration (should be 10–15 mg/L) to ensure clinical efcacy and that accumulation and 
the risk of nephrotoxicity are avoided
*Half-lives vary considerably with different formulations and between patients.

[[p58]]
36    CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS AND GOOD PRESCRIBING 
distribution phases are unpredictable because of the rapidly changing 
concentration, so samples are usually taken at the end of the dosage 
interval (a ‘trough’ or ‘pre-dose’ concentration). This measurement is 
normally made in steady state, which usually takes 5 half-lives to achieve 
after the drug is introduced or the dose changed (unless a loading dose 
has been given).
Interpreting the result 
A target range is provided for many drugs, based on average thresh-
olds for therapeutic benet and toxicity. Inter-individual variability means 
that these can be used only as a guide. For instance, in a patient who 
describes symptoms that could be consistent with toxicity, but has a 
drug concentration in the top half of the target range, toxic effects should 
still be suspected. Another important consideration is that some drugs 
are heavily protein-bound (e.g. phenytoin), but only the unbound drug is 
pharmacologically active. Patients with hypoalbuminaemia may, there-
fore, have a therapeutic or even toxic concentration of unbound drug, 
despite a low ‘total’ concentration.
````Further information 
Websites 
bnf.org The British National Formulary (BNF) is a key reference resource for UK 
NHS prescribers, with a list of licensed drugs, chapters on prescribing in renal 
failure, liver disease, pregnancy and during breastfeeding, and appendices on 
drug interactions
cochrane.org The Cochrane Collaboration is a leading international body that 
provides evidence-based reviews (around 7000 so far)
evidence.nhs.uk NHS Evidence provides a wide range of health information 
relevant to delivering quality patient care
icp.org.nz The Interactive Clinical Pharmacology site is designed to increase 
understanding of principles in clinical pharmacology
medicines.org.uk/emc/ The electronic medicines compendium (emc) contains 
up-to-date, easily accessible information about medicines licensed by the 
UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the 
European Medicines Agency (EMA)
nice.org.uk The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence makes 
recommendations to the UK NHS on new and existing medicines, treatments 
and procedures
who.int/health-topics/medicines The World Health Organization Essential 
Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policies

[[p59]]
Multiple Choice Questions 
 2.1. Which of the following drugs for type 2 diabetes acts on a 
transporter protein?
A. Gliclazide
B. Dapagliozin
C. Metformin hydrochloride
D. Pioglitazone
 E. Sitagliptin
Answer: B.
Dapagliozin is a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor that is 
indicated for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Dapagliozin 
improves glycaemic control by inhibiting glucose re-absorption in the 
proximal tubule of the nephron leading to excretion of excess glucose in 
the urine (glycosuria).
 2.2. Which of the following is a prodrug that depends on hepatic 
metabolism for conversion to its active form?
A. Amlodipine
B. Clopidogrel
C. Metoprolol
D. Simvastatin
 E. Tramadol
Answer: B.
Clopidogrel binds specically and irreversibly to the platelet P2RY12 
purinergic receptor to inhibit ADP-mediated platelet activation and 
aggregation. Clopidogrel is a prodrug that is absorbed in the intestine 
and activated in the liver. The conversion of clopidogrel to its active 
metabolite involves two sequential oxidation reactions that involve vari-
ous cytochrome P450 isoforms (CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 
and CYP3A4/5).
 2.3. A 52-year-old man who is being treated with azathioprine 150 mg 
orally daily to maintain remission from Crohn’s disease presents 
to hospital with severe pancytopenia. Which of his other current 
medicines (listed below) is most likely to have interacted with 
azathioprine to cause this adverse drug reaction?
A. Allopurinol 200 mg orally daily
B. Atorvastain 20 mg orally daily
C. Indapamide 2.5 mg orally daily
D. Metronidazole 400 mg orally three times daily
 E. Omeprazole 20 mg orally daily
Answer: A.
Allopurinol inhibits the enzyme xanthine oxidase (XO), which is one 
of the three enzymes responsible for inactivating 6-mercaptopurine, its 
active purine metabolite. Normally, XO is needed to convert the purine 
base hypoxanthine to xanthine and then xanthine to uric acid. Allopurinol 
is a structural analogue of hypoxanthine and binds to XO, thereby inhib-
iting its effect on purine metabolism.
 2.4. Which of the following regular medicines is most likely to require a 
dose reduction in a patient who develops chronic renal impairment 
(chronic kidney disease stage 3)?
A. Bendroumethiazide 2.5 mg orally daily
B. Digoxin 125 micrograms orally daily
C. Fluoxetine 20 mg orally daily
D. Simvastatin 20 mg orally nightly
 E. Verapamil hydrochloride m/r 120 mg orally daily
Answer: B.
Digoxin is mainly eliminated by renal excretion and there is a risk 
of toxicity if the dosage is not reduced as renal function deteriorates. 
Bendroumethiazide becomes less effective as renal function deterior-
ates but does not require a dose reduction (unless there is evidence 
that dehydration is a contributory factor). Simvastatin should be used 
with caution if the eGFR falls below 30 mL/min/1.73 m2. Verapamil is 
eliminated by hepatic metabolism. Fluoxetine does not require dose 
adjustment.
 2.5. Which of the following aspects of a new drug is not considered 
by drug regulators but considered by heath-care providers (e.g. a 
hospital drug and therapeutics committee)?
A. Manufacturing standards
B. Safety prole
C. Efcacy in treating the clinical indication
D. Cost-effectiveness
 E. Patient information
Answer: D.
The role of national drug regulatory authorities is to ensure that any 
new medicine meets minimum acceptable standards of quality, safety 
and efcacy prior to being granted a market authorisation. It is not the 
role of the regulator to assess cost-effectiveness which is devolved to 
national or local health technology assessments that may compare the 
new drug with other available treatment options.

[[p60]]
Clinical genetics
3
K Tatton-Brown
The fundamental principles of genomics 38
The packaging of genes: DNA, chromatin and chromosomes 38
From DNA to protein 38
Non-coding RNA 40
Cell division, differentiation and migration 40
Cell death, apoptosis and senescence 41
Genomics, health and disease 41
Classes of genetic variant 41
Consequences of genomic variation 42
Normal genomic variation 45
Constitutional genetic disease 45
Somatic genetic disease 49
Interrogating the genome: the changing landscape of genomic technologies 50
Looking at chromosomes 50
Looking at genes 50
Genomics and clinical practice 52
Genomics and health care 52
Genomics in infectious disease 55
Treatment of genetic disease 56
Ethics in a genomic age 56

[[p61]]
38    CLINICAL GENETICS
We have entered a genomic era. Powerful new technologies are driving 
forward transformational change in health care. Genetic sequencing has 
evolved from the targeted sequencing of a single gene to the parallel 
sequencing of multiple genes. In addition to improving the chances of 
identifying a genetic cause of rare diseases, these technologies are 
increasingly directing therapies and, in the future, are likely to be used in 
the diagnosis and prevention of common diseases such as diabetes. In 
this chapter we explore the fundamentals of genomics, the basic prin-
ciples underlying these new genomic technologies and how the data 
generated can be applied safely for patient benet. We will review the use 
of genomic technology across a breadth of medical specialties, including 
obstetrics, paediatrics, oncology and infectious disease, and consider 
how health care is being transformed by these new genomic technolo-
gies. Finally, we will consider the ethical impact that these technologies 
are likely to have, both for the individual and for their wider family.
The fundamental principles of genomics
The packaging of genes: DNA, chromatin and 
chromosomes
Genes are functional units encoded in double-stranded deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA), packaged as chromosomes and located in the nucleus of the 
cell: a membrane-bound compartment found in all cells except erythro-
cytes and platelets (Fig. 3.1). DNA consists of a linear sequence of just four 
bases: adenine (A,) cytosine (C), thymine (T) and guanine (G.) It forms a 
‘double helix’, a twisted ladder-like structure formed from two comple-
mentary strands of DNA joined by hydrogen bonds between bases on 
the opposite strand that can form only between a C and a G base and an 
A and a T base. It is this feature of DNA that enables faithful DNA replica-
tion and is the basis for many of the technologies designed to interrogate 
the genome: when the DNA double helix ‘unzips’, one strand can act as 
a template for the creation of an identical strand.
A single copy of the human genome comprises approximately 
3.1 billion base pairs of DNA, wound around proteins called histones. 
The unit consisting of 147 base pairs wrapped around four different 
histone proteins is called the nucleosome. Sequences of nucleosomes 
(resembling a string of beads) are wound and packaged to form chroma-
tin: tightly wound, densely packed chromatin is called heterochromatin 
and open, less tightly wound chromatin is called euchromatin.
The chromatin is nally packaged into the chromosomes. Humans 
are diploid organisms: the nucleus contains two copies of the genome, 
visible microscopically as 23 chromosome pairs (known as the karyo-
type). Chromosomes 1 through to 22 are known as the autosomes and 
consist of identical chromosome pairs. The 23rd ‘pair’ of chromosomes 
are the two sex chromosomes: females have two X chromosomes and 
males an X and Y chromosome. A normal female karyotype is therefore 
written as 46,XX and a normal male is 46,XY.
From DNA to protein
Genes are functional elements on the chromosome that are capable 
of transmitting information from the DNA template via the production 
of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) to the production of proteins. 
The human genome contains over 20 000 genes, although many of 
these are inactive or silenced in different cell types, reecting the varia-
ble gene expression responsible for cell-specic characteristics. The 
central dogma is the pathway describing the basic steps of protein 
production: transcription, splicing, translation and protein modication 
(Fig. 3.2). Although this is now recognised as an over-simplication (con-
trary to this linear relationship, a single gene will often encode many different 
proteins), it remains a useful starting point to explore protein production.
Transcription: DNA to messenger RNA
Transcription describes the production of ribonucleic acid (RNA) from the 
DNA template. For transcription to commence, an enzyme called RNA 
polymerase binds to a segment of DNA at the start of the gene: the pro-
moter. Once bound, RNA polymerase moves along one strand of DNA, 
producing an RNA molecule complementary to the DNA template. In 
protein-coding genes this is known as messenger RNA (mRNA). A DNA 
sequence close to the end of the gene, called the polyadenylation signal, 
acts as a signal for termination of the RNA transcript (Fig. 3.3).
DNA helix
Histones
Chromatin
Chromosome
Normal female karyotype
Nucleosome
A T G A C G G A T
T A C T G C C T A
Fig. 3.1 The packaging of DNA, genes and chromosomes. From bottom to top: 
the double helix and the complementary DNA bases; chromatin; and a normal female 
chromosome pattern – the karyotype.
DNA
5’CGATTC3’
3’GCTAAG5’
5’CGAUUC3’
N_ArgPhe_C
RNA
Protein
Transcription
Translation
Fig. 3.2 The central dogma of protein production. Double-stranded DNA as a 
template for single-stranded RNA, which codes for the production of a peptide chain 
of amino acids. Each of these chains has an orientation. For DNA and RNA, this is 5
to 3 . For peptides, this is N-terminus to C-terminus.

[[p62]]
The fundamental principles of genomics    39
3
RNA differs from DNA in three main ways:
 RNA is single-stranded.
 The sugar residue within the nucleotide is ribose, rather than 
deoxyribose.
 It contains uracil (U) in place of thymine (T).
The activity of RNA polymerase is regulated by transcription fac-
tors. These proteins bind to specic DNA sequences at the promoter 
or to enhancer elements that may be many thousands of base pairs 
away from the promoter; a loop in the chromosomal DNA brings 
the enhancer close to the promoter, enabling the bound proteins to 
interact. The human genome encodes more than 1200 different tran-
scription factors. Mutations (now more frequently referred to as gene 
variants) within transcription factors, promoters and enhancers can 
cause disease. For example, the blood disorder alpha-thalassaemia is 
usually caused by gene deletions (see Box 3.4). However, it can also 
result from a variant in an enhancer located more than 100 000 base 
pairs (bp) from the α-globin gene promoter, leading to greatly reduced 
transcription.
Gene activity, or expression, is inuenced by a number of complex 
interacting factors, including the accessibility of the gene promoter to 
transcription factors. DNA can be modied by the addition of a methyl 
group to cytosine molecules (methylation). If DNA methylation occurs 
in promoter regions, transcription is silenced, as methyl cytosines are 
usually not available for transcription factor binding. A second mecha-
nism determining promoter accessibility is the structural conguration 
of chromatin. In open chromatin, called euchromatin, gene promoters 
are accessible to RNA polymerase and transcription factors; therefore it 
is transcriptionally active. This contrasts with heterochromatin, which is 
densely packed and transcriptionally silent. The chromatin conguration 
is determined by modications (such as methylation or acetylation) of 
specic amino acid residues of histone protein tails.
Modications of DNA and histone protein tails are termed epigenetic 
(‘epi-’ meaning ‘above’ the genome), as they do not alter the primary 
sequence of the DNA code but have biological signicance in chromo-
somal function. Abnormal epigenetic changes are increasingly recognised 
as important events in the progression of cancer, allowing expression of 
normally silenced genes that result in cancer cell de-differentiation and 
proliferation. They also afford therapeutic targets. For instance, the his-
tone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat has been successfully used to treat 
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, due to the re-expression of genes that had 
previously been silenced in the tumour. These genes encode transcrip-
tion factors that promote T-cell differentiation as opposed to proliferation, 
thereby causing tumour regression.
RNA splicing, editing and degradation
Transcription produces an RNA molecule that is a copy of the whole 
gene, termed the primary or nascent transcript. This nascent transcript 
then undergoes splicing, whereby regions not required to make pro-
tein (the intronic regions) are removed while those segments that are 
necessary for protein production (the exonic regions) are retained and 
rejoined.
Splicing is a highly regulated process that is carried out by a multimeric 
protein complex called the spliceosome. Following splicing, the mRNA 
molecule is exported from the nucleus and used as a template for pro-
tein synthesis. Many genes produce more than one form of mRNA (and 
thus protein) by a process termed alternative splicing, in which different 
combinations of exons are joined together. Different proteins from the 
same gene can have entirely distinct functions. For example, in thyroid C 
cells the calcitonin gene produces mRNA encoding the osteoclast inhib-
itor calcitonin, but in neurons the same gene produces an mRNA with 
a different complement of exons via alternative splicing that encodes a 
neurotransmitter, calcitonin-gene-related peptide.
Protein product
N-term
C-term
cap
Messenger RNA
(mRNA)
Messenger RNA
(mRNA)
AAAAA
tRNAs
Ribosome
Nuclear
membrane
Primary RNA
transcript
Spliceosome
RNA export
to cytoplasm
cap
cap
AAAAA
PolyA tail
3'UTR
5'UTR
Nuclear pore
AAAAA
Splicing
Transcription
3'
5'
3'
Sense strand
Enhancer
Transcription
factors
RNA
polymerase II
Exon 1
Intron 2
Intron 1
Exon 2
Exon 3
Exon 1
Exon 2
Exon 3
Promoter
Nucleolus
Nuclear
membrane
Gene A
Gene B
Gene C
Active
gene
RNA
Nucleus
Translation
Fig. 3.3 RNA synthesis and its translation into protein. Gene transcription 
involves binding of RNA polymerase II to the promoter of genes being 
transcribed with other proteins (transcription factors) that regulate the 
transcription rate. The primary RNA transcript is a copy of the whole gene 
and includes both introns and exons, but the introns are removed within the 
nucleus by splicing and the exons are joined to form the messenger RNA 
(mRNA). Prior to export from the nucleus, a methylated guanosine nucleotide 
is added to the 5  end of the RNA (‘cap’) and a string of adenine nucleotides 
is added to the 3  (‘polyA tail’). This protects the RNA from degradation and 
facilitates transport into the cytoplasm. In the cytoplasm, the mRNA binds to 
ribosomes and forms a template for protein production. (tRNA = transfer RNA; 
UTR = untranslated region)

[[p63]]
40    CLINICAL GENETICS
Translation and protein production
Following splicing, the segment of mRNA containing the code that 
directs synthesis of a protein product is called the open reading frame 
(ORF). The inclusion of a particular amino acid in the protein is specied 
by a codon composed of three contiguous bases. There are 64 different 
codons with some redundancy in the system: 61 codons encode one 
of the 20 amino acids, and the remaining three codons – UAA, UAG 
and UGA (known as stop codons) – cause termination of the growing 
polypeptide chain. ORFs in humans most commonly start with the amino 
acid methionine. All mRNA molecules have domains before and after the 
ORF called the 5  untranslated region (UTR) and 3 UTR, respectively. 
The start of the 5 UTR contains a cap structure that protects mRNA 
from enzymatic degradation, and other elements within the 5 UTR are 
required for efcient translation. The 3 UTR also contains elements that 
regulate efciency of translation and mRNA stability, including a stretch 
of adenine bases known as a polyA tail (see Fig. 3.3).
The mRNAs then leave the nucleus via nuclear pores and associate 
with ribosomes, the sites of protein production (see Fig. 3.3). Each ribo-
some consists of two subunits (40S and 60S), which comprise non-cod-
ing rRNA molecules (see Fig. 3.9) complexed with proteins. During 
translation, a different RNA molecule known as transfer RNA (tRNA) 
binds to the ribosome. The tRNAs deliver amino acids to the ribosome 
so that the newly synthesised protein can be assembled in a stepwise 
fashion. Individual tRNA molecules bind a specic amino acid and ‘read’ 
the mRNA ORF via an ‘anticodon’ of three nucleotides that is comple-
mentary to the codon in mRNA (see Fig. 3.3). A proportion of ribosomes 
is bound to the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a complex 
tubular structure that surrounds the nucleus.
Proteins synthesised on these ribosomes are translocated into the 
lumen of the ER, where they undergo folding and processing. From here, 
the protein may be transferred to the Golgi apparatus, where it under-
goes post-translational modications, such as glycosylation (covalent 
attachment of sugar moieties), to form the mature protein that can be 
exported into the cytoplasm or packaged into vesicles for secretion. The 
clinical importance of post-translational modication of proteins is shown 
by the severe developmental, neurological, haemostatic and soft tissue 
abnormalities that are associated with the many different congenital dis-
orders of glycosylation. Post-translational modications can also be dis-
rupted by the synthesis of proteins with abnormal amino acid sequences. 
For example, the most common CFTR gene variant that causes cystic 
brosis (ΔF508) results in an abnormal protein that cannot be exported 
from the ER and Golgi (see Box 3.4).
Non-coding RNA
Approximately 4500 genes in humans encode non-coding RNAs 
(ncRNA) rather than proteins. There are various categories of ncRNA, 
including transfer RNA (tRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), ribozymes and 
microRNA (miRNA). The miRNAs, which number over 1000, have a role 
in post-translational gene expression: they bind to mRNAs, typically 
in the 3 UTR, promoting target mRNA degradation and gene silenc-
ing. Together, miRNAs affect over half of all human genes and have 
important roles in normal development, cancer and common degen-
erative disorders. This is the subject of considerable research interest 
at present.
Cell division, differentiation and migration
In normal tissues, molecules such as hormones, growth factors and 
cytokines provide the signal to activate the cell cycle: a controlled pro-
gramme of biochemical events that culminates in cell division. In all 
cells of the body, except the gametes (the sperm and egg cells, also 
known as the germ line), mitosis completes cell division, resulting in 
two diploid daughter cells. In contrast, the sperm and eggs cells com-
plete cell division with meiosis, resulting in four haploid daughter cells 
(Fig. 3.4).
The stages of cell division in the non-germ-line, somatic cells are 
shown below:
 Cells not committed to mitosis are said to be in G0
 Cells committed to mitosis must go through the preparatory phase 
of interphase consisting of G1, S and G2
 G1 (rst gap): synthesis of the cellular components necessary to 
complete cell division
 S (synthesis): DNA replication producing identical copies of each 
chromosome called the sister chromatids
Egg
Sperm
Father
Mother
Meiotic cell divisions
1st
polar bodies
2nd
polar body
DNA replication
Sister chromatids
Homologous pairing
Swapping of
genetic material
between homologues:
Recombination
Individual chromosome
pair (homologues)
Non-disjunction of
chromosomes is a common
error in human meiosis,
resulting in trisomy of
individual chromosomes
or uniparental disomy
(both chromosomes from
single parent)
Fig. 3.4 Meiosis and gametogenesis: the main chromosomal stages of 
meiosis in both males and females. A single homologous pair of chromosomes 
is represented in different colours. The nal step is the production of haploid germ 
cells. Each round of meiosis in the male results in four sperm cells; in the female, 
however, only one egg cell is produced, as the other divisions are sequestered on the 
periphery of the mature egg as peripheral polar bodies.

[[p64]]
Genomics, health and disease    41
3
 G2 (second gap): repair of any errors in the replicated DNA before 
proceeding to mitosis.
 Mitosis (M) consists of four phases:
 Prophase: the chromosomes condense and become visible, 
the centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell and the nuclear 
membrane disappears.
 Metaphase: the centrioles complete their migration to opposite 
ends of the cell and the chromosomes – consisting of two 
identical sister chromatids – line up at the equator of the cell.
 Anaphase: spindle bres attach to the chromosome and pull the 
sister chromatids apart.
 Telophase: the chromosomes decondense, the nuclear 
membrane reforms and two daughter cells – each with 46 
chromosomes – are formed.
The progression from one phase to the next is tightly controlled by 
cell-cycle checkpoints. For example, the checkpoint between G2 and 
mitosis ensures that all damaged DNA is repaired prior to segregation of 
the chromosomes. Failure of these control processes is a crucial driver in 
the pathogenesis of cancer, as discussed on page 130.
 Meiosis is a special, gamete-specic, form of cell division  
(see Fig. 3.4). Like mitosis, meiosis consists of four phases 
(prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase) but differs from 
mitosis in the following ways:
 It consists of two separate cell divisions known as meiosis I and 
meiosis II.
 It reduces the chromosome number from the diploid to the 
haploid number via a tetraploid stage, i.e. from 46 to 92 (MI S) to 
46 (MI M) to 23 (MII M) chromosomes, so that when a sperm cell 
fertilises the egg, the resulting zygote will return to a diploid, 46, 
chromosome complement. This reduction to the haploid number 
occurs at the end of meiosis II.
 The 92 chromosome stage consists of 23 homologous pairs of 
sister chromatids, which then swap genetic material, a process 
known as recombination. This occurs at the end of MI prophase 
and ensures that the chromosome that a parent passes to his 
or her offspring is a mix of the chromosomes that the parent 
inherited from his or her own mother and father.
The individual steps in meiotic cell division are similar in males and 
females. However, the timing of the cell divisions is very different. In 
females, meiosis begins in fetal life but does not complete until after ovu-
lation. A single meiotic cell division can thus take more than 40 years 
to complete. As women become older, the separation of chromosomes 
at meiosis II becomes less efcient. That is why the risk of trisomies 
(p. 42) due to non-disjunction grows greater with increasing maternal 
age. In males, meiotic division does not begin until puberty and contin-
ues throughout life. In the testes, both meiotic divisions are completed 
in a matter of days.
Cell death, apoptosis and senescence
With the exception of stem cells, human cells have only a limited capac-
ity for cell division. The Hayick limit is the number of divisions a cell 
population can go through in culture before division stops and enters a 
state known as senescence. This ‘biological clock’ is of great interest in 
the study of the normal ageing process. Rare human diseases associ-
ated with premature ageing, called progeric syndromes, have been very 
helpful in identifying the importance of DNA repair mechanisms in senes-
cence. For example, in Werner syndrome, a DNA helicase (an enzyme 
that separates the two DNA strands) is mutated, leading to failure of DNA 
repair and premature ageing. A distinct mechanism of cell death is seen 
in apoptosis, or programmed cell death.
Apoptosis is an active process that occurs in normal tissues and 
plays an important role in development, tissue remodelling and the 
immune response. The signal that triggers apoptosis is specic to each 
tissue or cell type. This signal activates enzymes, called caspases, 
which actively destroy cellular components, including chromosomal 
DNA. This degradation results in cell death, but the cellular corpse 
contains characteristic vesicles called apoptotic bodies. The corpse 
is then recognised and removed by phagocytic cells of the immune 
system, such as macrophages, in a manner that does not provoke an 
inammatory response.
A third mechanism of cell death is necrosis. This is a pathological pro-
cess in which the cellular environment loses one or more of the compo-
nents necessary for cell viability. Hypoxia is probably the most common 
cause of necrosis.
Genomics, health and disease
Classes of genetic variant
There are many different classes of variation in the human genome, cat-
egorised by the size of the DNA segment involved and/or by the mecha-
nism giving rise to the variation.
Nucleotide substitutions
The substitution of one nucleotide for another is the most common type 
of genomic variation. This is caused by misincorporation of a nucleotide 
during DNA synthesis or by chemical modication of the base. When 
these substitutions occur within ORFs of a protein-coding gene, they are 
further classied into:
 synonymous – resulting in a change in the codon without altering 
the amino acid
 non-synonymous (also known as a missense variant) – resulting in a 
change in the codon and the encoded amino acid
 stop gain (or nonsense variant) – introducing a premature stop 
codon and resulting in truncation of the protein
 splicing – disruption of normal splicing and therefore most frequently 
occurring at the junctions between an intron and an exon.
These different types of gene variants are illustrated in Box 3.1 and 
examples are shown in Figs. 3.5 and 3.6.
Insertions and deletions
One or more nucleotides may be inserted or lost in a DNA sequence, 
resulting in an insertion/deletion (indel) variant (see Box 3.1 and Fig. 3.5). 
If a multiple of three nucleotides is involved, this is in-frame. If an indel 
change affects one or two nucleotides within the ORF of a protein-coding 
gene, this can have serious consequences because the triple nucleotide 
sequence of the codons is disrupted, resulting in a frameshift variant. The 
effect on the gene is typically severe because the amino acid sequence 
is totally disrupted.
Simple tandem repeat variants
Variations in the length of simple tandem repeats of DNA are thought 
to arise as the result of slippage of DNA during meiosis and are termed 
microsatellite (small) or minisatellite (larger) repeats. These repeats are 
unstable and can expand or contract in different generations. This 
instability is proportional to the size of the original repeat, in that longer 
repeats tend to be more unstable. Many microsatellites and minisat-
ellites occur in introns or in chromosomal regions between genes and 
have no obvious adverse effects. However, some genetic diseases 
are caused by microsatellite repeats that result in duplication of amino 
acids within the affected gene product or affect gene expression 
(Box 3.2).

[[p65]]
42    CLINICAL GENETICS
3.1 Classes of genetic variant
The classes of genetic variant can be illustrated using the sentence
‘THE FAT FOX WAS ILL COS SHE ATE THE OLD CAT’
Synonymous
Silent polymorphism with no 
amino acid change
THE FAT FOX WAS ILL COS SHE ATE THE OLD KAT
where the C is replaced with a K but the meaning 
remains the same
Non-synonymous
Causing an amino acid  
change
THE FAT BOX WAS ILL COS SHE ATE THE OLD CAT
where the F of FOX is replaced by B and the 
original meaning of the sentence is lost
Stop-gain (also called a nonsense variant)
Causing the generation of a 
premature stop codon
THE CAT
where the F of FAT is replaced by a C, generating a 
premature stop codon
Indel
Where the bases are either 
inserted or deleted; disruption 
of the reading frame is 
dependent on the number of 
bases inserted or deleted
THE FAT FOX WAS ILL ILL COS SHE ATE THE OLD 
CAT
where the insertion of three bases results in 
maintenance of the reading frame
THE FAT FOX WAW ASI LLC OSS HEA TET HEO 
LDC AT
where the insertion of two bases results in 
disruption of the reading frame
Fig. 3.5 Different types of mutation affecting coding exons.
Normal
Silent polymorphism
(no amino acid change)
Missense variant causing
Lys–Gln amino acid change
‘G’ insertion causing
frameshift variant
Nonsense variant causing
premature termination codon
A
B
C
D
E
mosaic distribution) does not occur, but Turner syndrome, in which there 
is monosomy for the X chromosome, affects approximately 1 in 2500 live 
births (Box 3.3).
Large insertions or deletions of chromosomal DNA also occur and are 
usually associated with a learning disability and/or congenital malforma-
tions. Such structural chromosomal anomalies usually arise as the result 
of one of two different processes:
 non-homologous end-joining
 non-allelic homologous recombination.
Random double-stranded breaks in DNA are a necessary process in 
meiotic recombination and also occur during mitosis at a predictable rate. 
The rate of these breaks is dramatically increased by exposure to ionising 
radiation. When such breaks take place, they are usually repaired accu-
rately by DNA repair mechanisms within the cell. However, in a proportion 
of breaks, segments of DNA that are not normally contiguous will be joined 
(‘non-homologous end-joining’). If the joined fragments are from different 
chromosomes, this results in a translocation. If they are from the same 
chromosome, this will result in either inversion, duplication or deletion of 
a chromosomal fragment (Fig. 3.7). Large insertions and deletions may 
be cytogenetically visible as chromosomal deletions or duplications. If the 
anomalies are too small to be detected by microscopy, they are termed 
microdeletions and microduplications. Many microdeletion syndromes 
have been described and most result from non-allelic homologous recom-
bination between repeats of highly similar DNA sequences, which leads to 
recurrent chromosome anomalies – and clinical syndromes – occurring in 
unrelated individuals (see Fig. 3.7 and Box 3.3).
Consequences of genomic variation
The consequence of an individual genomic variant depends on many 
factors, including the variant type, the nature of the gene product and the 
position of the variant in the protein. Variants can have profound or subtle 
effects on gene and cell function. Variations that have profound effects 
are responsible for ‘classical’ genetic diseases, whereas those with sub-
tle effects may contribute to the pathogenesis of common disease where 
there is a genetic component, such as diabetes.
 Neutral variants have no effect on quality or type of protein 
produced.
Copy number variations
Variation in the number of copies of an individual segment of the genome 
from the usual diploid (two copies) content can be categorised by the 
size of the segment involved. Rarely, individuals may gain (trisomy) or lose 
(monosomy) a whole chromosome. Such numerical chromosome anom-
alies most commonly occur by a process known as non-disjunction, 
where pairs of homologous chromosomes do not separate at meio-
sis II (p. 40). Common trisomies include Down syndrome (trisomy 21), 
Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) and Patau syndrome (trisomy 13). 
Monosomy of the autosomes (present in all the cells, as opposed to in a 

[[p66]]
Genomics, health and disease    43
3
Fig. 3.6 Splice-site variants.
result, splicing no longer occurs, leading to read-through of the mRNA into the intron, which contains a premature termination codon downstream of the variant.
Normal
Splice-site variant
Splice donor site
Exon
Exon
Intron
Exon
Exon
Intron
Intron removed by
splicing
Splice acceptor site
mRNA ‘reads through’ intron
Abnormal protein with
premature stop codon
A
B
3.2  Diseases associated with triplet and other repeat expansions*
Repeat
No. of repeats
Gene
Gene location
Inheritance
Normal
Mutant
Coding repeat expansion
Huntington’s disease
[CAG]
6–34
> 35
Huntingtin
4p16
AD
Spinocerebellar ataxia (type 1)
[CAG]
6–39
> 40
Ataxin
6p22–23
AD
Spinocerebellar ataxia  
(types 2, 3, 6, 7)
[CAG]
Various
Various
Various
Various
AD
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
[CAG]
7–25
> 49
Atrophin
12p12–13
AD
Machado–Joseph disease
[CAG]
12–40
> 67
MJD
14q32
AD
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy
[CAG]
11–34
> 40
Androgen receptor
Xq11–12
XL recessive
Non-coding repeat expansion
Myotonic dystrophy
[CTG]
5–37
> 50
DMPK-3 UTR
19q13
AD
Friedreich’s ataxia
[GAA]
7–22
> 200
Frataxin-intronic
9q13
AR
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy
[CCCCGCCCCGCG]4–8
2–3
> 25
Cystatin B-5 UTR
21q
AR
Fragile X mental retardation
[CGG]
5–52
> 200
FMR1–5 UTR
Xq27
XL dominant
Fragile site mental retardation 2 (FRAXE)
[GCC]
6–35
> 200
FMR2
Xq28
XL, probably recessive
*The triplet repeat diseases fall into two major groups: those with disease stemming from expansion of [CAG]n repeats in coding DNA, resulting in multiple adjacent glutamine residues (polyglutamine 
tracts), and those with non-coding repeats. The latter tend to be longer. Unaffected parents usually display ‘pre-mutation’ allele lengths that are just above the normal range.
(AD/AR = autosomal dominant/recessive; UTR = untranslated region; XL = X-linked)
 Loss-of-function variants result in loss or reduction in the normal 
protein function. Whole-gene deletions are the archetypal loss-of-
function variants but stop-gain or indel variants (early in the ORF), 
missense variants affecting a critical domain and splice-site variants 
can also result in loss of protein function.
 Gain-of-function variants result in a gain of protein function. They are 
typically non-synonymous variants that alter the protein structure, 
leading to activation/alteration of its normal function through causing 
either an interaction with a novel substrate or a change in its normal 
function.
 Dominant negative variants are the result of non-synonymous sub-
stitutions or in-frame deletions/duplications but may also, less fre-
quently, be caused by triplet repeat expansions. Dominant negative 
variants are heterozygous changes that result in the production of 
an abnormal protein that interferes with the normal functioning of the 
wild-type protein.

[[p67]]
44    CLINICAL GENETICS
3.3  Chromosome and contiguous gene disorders
Disease
Locus
Incidence
Clinical features
Numerical chromosomal abnormalities
Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
47,XY,+21 or 47,XX+21
1 in 800
Characteristic facies, IQ usually < 50, congenital heart disease, reduced life 
expectancy
Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18)
47,XY,+18 or 47,XX,+18
1 in 6000
Early lethality, characteristic skull and facies, frequent malformations of heart, kidney 
and other organs
Patau syndrome (trisomy 13)
47,XY,+13 or 47, XX,+13
1 in 15000
Early lethality, cleft lip and palate, polydactyly, small head, frequent congenital heart 
disease
Klinefelter syndrome
47,XXY
1 in 1000
Phenotypic male, infertility, gynaecomastia, small testes
XYY
47,XYY
1 in 1000
Usually asymptomatic, some impulse control problems
Triple X syndrome
47,XXX
1 in 1000
Usually asymptomatic, may have reduced IQ
Turner syndrome
45,X
1 in 5000
Phenotypic female, short stature, webbed neck, coarctation of the aorta, primary 
amenorrhoea
Recurrent deletions, microdeletions and contiguous gene defects
Di George/velocardiofacial 
syndrome
22q11.2
1 in 4000
Cardiac outow tract defects, distinctive facial appearance, thymic hypoplasia, cleft 
palate and hypocalcaemia. Major gene seems to be TBX1 (cardiac defects and cleft 
palate)
Prader–Willi syndrome
15q11–q13
1 in 15000
Distinctive facial appearance, hyperphagia, small hands and feet, distinct behavioural 
phenotype. Imprinted region, deletions on paternal allele in 70% of cases
Angelman syndrome
15q11–q13
1 in 15000
Distinctive facial appearance, absent speech, electroencephalogram (EEG) 
abnormality, characteristic gait. Imprinted region, deletions on maternal allele 
encompassing UBE3A
Williams syndrome
7q11.23
1 in 10000
Distinctive facial appearance, supravalvular aortic stenosis, learning disability and 
infantile hypercalcaemia. Major gene for supravalvular aortic stenosis is elastin
Smith–Magenis syndrome
17p11.2
1 in 25000
Distinctive facial appearance and behavioural phenotype, self-injury and rapid eye 
movement (REM) sleep abnormalities. Major gene seems to be RAI1
Fig. 3.7 Chromosomal analysis and structural chromosomal disorders.
acrocentric if the centromere is at the end. The bands of each chromosome are given a number, starting at the centromere and working out along the short (p) arm and long (q) 
arm. Translocations and inversions are balanced structural chromosome anomalies where no genetic material is missing but it is in the wrong order. Translocations can be divided 
into reciprocal (direct swap of chromosomal material between non-homologous chromosomes) and Robertsonian (fusion of acrocentric chromosomes). Deletions and duplications 
can also occur due to non-allelic homologous recombination (illustrated in part B). Deletions are classied as interstitial if they lie within a chromosome, and terminal if the terminal 
region of the chromosome is affected. Duplications can be either in tandem (where the duplicated fragment is inserted next to the region that is duplicated and orientated in the 
correct direction) or inverted (where the duplicated fragment is in the wrong direction). (N = normal; A = 
allelic homologous recombination, can occur (right panel), resulting in a deletion on one chromosome and a duplication in the homologous chromosome. The error is induced by 
tandem repeats in the DNA sequences (green), which can misalign and bind to each other, thereby ‘fooling’ the DNA into thinking the pairing prior to recombination is correct.
Chromosome
9
Cen
p
23
21
12
12
21.1
21.3
21.2
31
33
34.2
q
Cen
p
N
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
A
13 (sa)
(st)
11.2
12
21
23
24.2
31
32.2
q
Metacentric
Acrocentric
Chromosome
14
Reciprocal
translocation
Robertsonian
translocation
Inversions
Interstitial
Terminal
Tandem
Inverted
Mechanism underlying recurrent deletions and duplication: non-allelic homologous recombination
How structural chromosomal anomalies are described
Deletions
Duplications
B
A
Recombination
Normal pairing
Abnormal pairing between DNA repeats
Deletion
Duplication
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
DNA repeat
Maternal chromosome
Paternal chromosome
1
1
2
1
2

[[p68]]
Genomics, health and disease    45
3
Normal genomic variation
We each have 3–5 million variants in our genome, occurring approxi-
mately every 300 bases. These variants are mostly polymorphisms, aris-
ing in more than 1% of the population; they have no or subtle effects on 
gene and cell function, and are not associated with a high risk of disease. 
Polymorphisms can occur within exons, introns or the intergenic regions 
that comprise 98%–99% of the human genome. Each of the classes 
of genetic variant discussed in this chapter (Box 3.1) is present in the 
genome as a common polymorphism. However, the most frequent is the 
single nucleotide polymorphism, or SNP (pronounced ‘snip’), describing 
the substitution of a single base.
Polymorphisms and common disease
The protective and detrimental polymorphisms associated with common 
disease have been identied primarily through genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS, p. 52) and are the basis for many direct-to-consumer tests 
that purport to determine individual risk proles for common diseases or 
traits such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes and even male-pattern 
baldness! An example is the polymorphism in the gene SLC2A9 that not 
only explains a signicant proportion of the normal population variation in 
serum urate concentration but also predisposes ‘high-risk’ allele carriers 
to the development of gout. However, the current reality is that, until we 
have a more comprehensive understanding of the full genomic landscape 
and knowledge of the complete set of detrimental and protective poly-
morphisms, we cannot accurately assess risk.
Evolutionary selection
Genetic variants play an important role in evolutionary selection, with 
advantageous variants resulting in positive selection via improved 
reproductive tness, and variations that decrease reproductive tness 
becoming excluded through evolution. Given this simple paradigm, it 
would be tempting to assume that common variants are all advan-
tageous and all rare variants are pathogenic. Unfortunately, it is often 
difcult to classify any common variant as either advantageous or dele-
terious – or, indeed, neutral. Variants that are advantageous in early life 
and thus enhance reproductive tness may be deleterious in later life. 
There may be variants that are advantageous for survival in particular 
conditions (e.g. famine or pandemic) that may be disadvantageous in 
more benign circumstances by causing a predisposition to obesity or 
autoimmune disorders.
Constitutional genetic disease
Familial genetic disease is caused by constitutional variants, which are 
inherited through the germ line. However, different variants in the same 
gene can have different consequences, depending on the genetic mech-
anism underlying that disease. About 1% of the human population car-
ries constitutional pathogenic variants that cause disease.
Constructing a family tree
The family tree – or pedigree – is a fundamental tool of the clinical 
geneticist, who will routinely take a three-generation family history, 
on both sides of the family, enquiring about details of all medical 
conditions in family members, consanguinity, dates of birth and 
death, and any history of pregnancy loss or infant death. The basic 
symbols and nomenclature used in drawing a pedigree are shown 
in Fig. 3.8
Fig. 3.8 Drawing a pedigree and patterns of inheritance.
inheritance (see text for details).
SB
Male
Clinically affected
Deceased
individual
(with age at death)
Separated
Consanguinity
Clinically affected, 
several diagnoses
Carrier
Positive pre-
symptomatic test
Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Stillbirth
(with gestation)
Termination
Miscarriage
(with gestation)
Unknown sex
Female 
Partners
Recessive inheritance
Dominant inheritance
Mitochondrial DNA disorder
X-linked recessive inheritance
Transmission to 50% of offspring
independent of gender
Consanguinity
Affected males related through 
unaffected females
Both sexes affected but only
inherited through female meiosis
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
V
I
II
III
IV
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
3
6
7
5
6
7
8
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
d. 50 y
30 wk
SB
39 wk
16 wk
A
B

[[p69]]
46    CLINICAL GENETICS
Patterns of disease inheritance
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Take some time to draw out the following pedigree:
Anne is referred to Clinical Genetics to discuss her personal history 
of colon cancer (she was diagnosed at the age of 46 years) and family 
history of colon/endometrial cancer: her mother was diagnosed with 
endometrial cancer at the age of 60 years and her cousin through her 
healthy maternal aunt was diagnosed with colon cancer in her fties. 
Both her maternal grandmother and grandfather died of ‘old age’. 
There is no family history of note on her father’s side of the family. He 
has one brother and both his parents died of old age, in their eighties. 
Anne has two healthy daughters, aged 12 and 14 years, and a healthy 
full sister.
This family history is typical of an autosomal dominant condition (see 
Fig. 3.8): in this case, a colon/endometrial cancer susceptibility syn-
drome known as Lynch syndrome, associated with disruption of one of 
the mismatch repair genes: MSH2, MSH6, MLH1 and PMS2 (see Ch. 23
and Box 3.11).
Features of an autosomal dominant pedigree include:
 There are affected individuals in each generation (unless the patho-
genic variant has arisen de novo, i.e. for the rst time in an affected 
individual). However, variable penetrance and expressivity can 
inuence the number of affected individuals and the severity of dis-
ease in each generation. Penetrance is dened as the proportion of 
individuals bearing a mutated allele who develop the disease phe-
notype. The variant is said to be fully penetrant if all individuals who 
inherit a variant develop the disease. Expressivity describes the level 
of severity of each aspect of the disease phenotype.
 Males and females are usually affected in roughly equal numbers 
(unless the clinical presentation of the condition is gender-specic, 
such as an inherited susceptibility to breast and/or ovarian cancer).
The offspring risk for an individual affected with an autosomal domi-
nant condition is 1 in 2 (or 50%). This offspring risk is true for each preg-
nancy, since half the affected individual gametes (sperm or egg cells) will 
contain the affected chromosome/gene and half will contain the normal 
chromosome/gene.
There is a long list of autosomal dominant conditions, some of which 
are shown in Box 3.4
Autosomal recessive inheritance
As above, take some time to draw a pedigree representing the following:
Mr and Mrs Kent, a non-consanguineous couple, are referred 
because their son, Jamie, had severe neonatal liver disease. Included 
among the many investigations that the paediatric hepatologist under-
took was testing for α1-antitrypsin deciency (Box 3.5). Jamie was 
shown to have the PiZZ phenotype. Testing conrmed both parents as 
carriers with PiMZ phenotypes. In the family, Jamie has an older sister 
who has no medical problems. Mr Kent is one of four children with two 
brothers and a sister and Mrs Kent has a younger brother. Both sets 
of grandparents are alive and well. There is no family history of α1-an-
titrypsin deciency.
This family history is characteristic of an autosomal recessive disor-
der (see Fig. 3.8), where both alleles of a gene must be mutated before 
the disease is manifest in an individual; an affected individual inherits 
one mutant allele from each of their parents, who are therefore healthy 
carriers for the condition. An autosomal recessive condition might be 
suspected in a family where:
 Males and females are affected in roughly equal proportions.
 Parents are blood-related; this is known as consanguinity. Where 
there is consanguinity, the variant are usually homozygous, i.e. the 
same mutant allele is inherited from both parents.
 Individuals within one sibship in one generation are affected and so 
the condition can appear to have arisen ‘out of the blue’.
3.4 Genetic conditions dealt with by clinicians in other 
specialties
Name of condition
Gene
Reference
Autosomal dominant conditions
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney 
disease (ADPKD)
PKD1 (85%), 
PKD2 (15%)
p. 579
Box 18.28
Tuberous sclerosis
TSC1
TSC2
p. 1114
Marfan syndrome
FBN1
p. 445
Long QT syndrome
KCNQ1
p. 418
Brugada syndrome
SCN5A
p. 418
Neurobromatosis type 1
NF1
p. 1185
Box 28.76
Neurobromatosis type 2
NF2
p. 1185
Box 28.76
Hereditary spherocytosis
ANK1
p. 956
Vascular Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (EDS 
type 4)
COL3A1
p. 980
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
ENG, ALK1, 
GDF2
p. 980
Osteogenesis imperfecta
COL1A1, 
COL1A2
p. 1058
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
PMP22, MPZ, 
GJB1
p. 1193
Hereditary neuropathy with liability to 
pressure palsies
PMP22
Autosomal recessive conditions
Familial Mediterranean fever
MEFV
p. 76
Mevalonic aciduria (mevalonate kinase 
deciency)
MVK
p. 76
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney 
disease (ARPKD)
PKHD1
Box 18.28
Kartagener syndrome (primary ciliary 
dyskinesia)
DNAI1
Box 17.30
Cystic brosis
CFTR1
p. 510
Box 17.30
p. 854
Pendred syndrome
SLC26A4
p. 667
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia-21 
hydroxylase deciency
CYP21A
p. 689
Box 20.27
Haemochromatosis
HFE
p. 906
Wilson’s disease
ATP7B
p. 907
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
SERPINA1
p. 908
Gilbert syndrome
UGT1A1
p. 908
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis
ATP8B1
p. 912
Alpha-thalassaemia
HBA1, HBA2
p. 962
Beta-thalassaemia
HBB
p. 962
Sickle cell disease
HBB
p. 960
Spinal muscular atrophy
SMN1
p. 1171
X-linked conditions
Alport syndrome
COL4A5
Box 18.28
p. 577
Primary agammaglobulinaemia
BTK
p. 74
Haemophilia A (factor VIII deciency)
F8
p. 981
Haemophilia B (factor IX deciency)
F9
p. 984
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
DMD
p. 1196
Box 28.90

[[p70]]
Genomics, health and disease    47
3
Examples of some autosomal recessive conditions, discussed else-
where in this book, are shown in Box 3.4
X-linked inheritance
The following is an exemplar of an X-linked recessive pedigree (see Fig. 3.8):
Edward has a diagnosis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD, 
Box 3.6). His parents had suspected the diagnosis when he was 3 years 
old because he was not yet walking and there was a family history of 
DMD: Edward’s maternal uncle had been affected and died at the age 
of 24 years. Edward’s mother has no additional siblings. After Edward 
demonstrated a very high creatinine kinase level, the paediatrician also 
requested genetic testing, which identied a deletion of exons 2–8 of the 
dystrophin gene. Edward has a younger, healthy sister and grandparents 
on both sides of the family are well, although the maternal grandmother 
has recently developed a cardiomyopathy. Edward’s father has an older 
sister and an older brother who are both well.
Genetic diseases caused by variants on the X chromosome have spe-
cic characteristics:
 X-linked diseases are mostly recessive and predominantly affect 
males who carry the mutant allele. This is because males have 
only one X chromosome, whereas females have two (see Fig. 3.1). 
Occasionally, female carriers may exhibit signs of an X-linked dis-
ease due to a phenomenon called skewed X-inactivation. All female 
embryos, at about 100 cells in size, stably inactivate one of their 
two X chromosomes in each cell. Where this inactivation is random, 
approximately 50% of the cells will express the genes from one X 
chromosome and 50% of cells will express genes from the other. 
Where there is a mutant gene, there is often skewing away from the 
associated X chromosome, resulting in an unaffected female carrier. 
However, if, by chance, there is a disproportionate inactivation of the 
normal X chromosome with skewing towards the mutant allele, then 
an affected female carrier may be affected (albeit more mildly than 
males).
 The gene can be transmitted from female carriers to their sons: in 
families with an X-linked recessive condition, there are often a num-
ber of affected males related through unaffected females.
 Affected males cannot transmit the condition to their sons (but all 
their daughters would be carriers).
The risk of a female carrier having an affected child is 25% or half of 
her male offspring.
Mitochondrial inheritance
The mitochondrion is the main site of energy production within the 
cell. Mitochondria arose during evolution via the symbiotic associa-
tion with an intracellular bacterium. They have a distinctive structure 
with functionally distinct inner and outer membranes. Mitochondria 
produce energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP 
is mostly derived from the metabolism of glucose and fat (Fig. 3.9). 
Glucose cannot enter mitochondria directly but is rst metabolised 
to pyruvate via glycolysis. Pyruvate is then imported into the mito-
chondrion and metabolised to acetyl-co-enzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Fatty 
acids are transported into the mitochondria following conjugation with 
carnitine and are sequentially catabolised by a process called β-oxida-
tion to produce acetyl-CoA. The acetyl-CoA from both pyruvate and 
fatty acid oxidation is used in the citric acid (Krebs) cycle – a series 
of enzymatic reactions that produces CO2, the reduced form of nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and the reduced form of avine 
adenine dinucleotide (FADH2). Both NADH and FADH2 then donate 
electrons to the respiratory chain. Here these elections are transferred 
via a complex series of reactions, resulting in the formation of a pro-
ton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. The gradient 
is used by an inner mitochondrial membrane protein, ATP synthase, 
to produce ATP, which is then transported to other parts of the cell. 
Dephosphorylation of ATP is used to produce the energy required for 
many cellular processes.
3.5  Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
Inheritance pattern
 Autosomal recessive
Genetic cause
 Two common variants in the SERPINA1 gene: p.Glu342Lys and p.Glu264Val
Prevalence
 1 in 1500–3000 of European ancestry
Clinical presentation
 Variable presentation from neonatal period through to adulthood
 Neonatal period: prolonged jaundice with conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia or 
(rarely) liver disease
 Adulthood: pulmonary emphysema and/or cirrhosis. Rarely, the skin disease, 
panniculitis, develops
Disease mechanism
 SERPINA1 encodes α1-antitrypsin, which protects the body from the effects of 
neutrophil elastase. The symptoms of α1-antitrypsin deciency result from the 
effects of this enzyme attacking normal tissue
Disease variants
 M variant: if an individual has normal SERPINA1 genes and produces normal 
levels of α1-antitrypsin, they are said to have an M variant
 S variant: p.Glu264Val variant results in α1-antitrypsin levels reduced to about 
40% of normal
 Z variant: p.Glu342Lys variant results in very little α1-antitrypsin
 PiZZ: individuals who are homozygous for the p.Glu342Lys variant are likely to 
have α1-antitrypsin deciency and the associated symptoms
 PiZS: individuals who are compound heterozygous for p.Glu342Lys and 
p.Glu264Val are likely to be affected, especially if they smoke, but usually to a 
milder degree
3.6  Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Inheritance pattern
 X-linked recessive
Genetic cause
 Deletions/variants encompassing/within the DMD (dystrophin) gene located at 
Xp21
Prevalence
 1 in 3000–4000 live male births
Clinical presentation
 Delayed motor milestones
 Speech delay
 Grossly elevated creatine kinase levels (in the thousands)
 Ambulation is usually lost between the ages of 7 and 13 years
 Lifespan is reduced, with a mean age of death, usually from respiratory failure, 
in the mid-twenties
 Cardiomyopathy affects almost all boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and 
some female carriers
Disease mechanism
 DMD encodes dystrophin, a major structural component of muscle
 Dystrophin links the internal cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix
Disease variants
 Becker muscular dystrophy, although a separate disease, is also caused by 
variants in the dystrophin gene
 In Duchenne muscular dystrophy, there is no dystrophin protein, whereas in 
Becker muscular dystrophy there is a reduction in the amount or alteration in 
the size of the dystrophin protein
Approximately 1 in 4 children born to carriers of an autosomal reces-
sive condition will be affected. The offspring risk for carrier parents is 
therefore 25% and the chances of an unaffected child, with an affected 
sibling, being a carrier is 2/3.

[[p71]]
48    CLINICAL GENETICS
L
s
t
r
a
n
d
H
s
t
r
a
n
d
Outer
membrane
Inner
membrane
NADH
NAD
I
II
III
Q
Cyt
C
IV
NADH
FADH2
Fatty acid
β-oxidation
cycle
Citric acid
(Krebs)
cycle
H+
e
2e
FADH2
FADH2
Lactate
Pyruvate
PDH
Acetyl-CoA
Glucose
22 tRNAs
NADH dehydrogenase 7
subunits
Cytochrome B/C oxidase 4
subunits
2 ribosomal RNA subunits
2 ATP synthase subunits
Intragenic DNA
Inner
membrane
Cristae
Matrix
Outer
membrane
FFA
CPT I
CPT II
Carnitine
Carnitine-FA ester
C
A
B
FFA
FAD
2H+
H2O
O2
ATP
ADP
+ Pi
H+
H+
ATP
synthase
Carnitine
e
e
e
Fig. 3.9 Mitochondria.
The membranes create two compartments: the inter-membrane compartment, which plays a crucial role in the electron transport chain, and the inner compartment (or matrix), 
which contains mitochondrial DNA and the enzymes responsible for the citric acid (Krebs) cycle and the fatty acid β
contains several copies of a circular double-stranded DNA molecule, which has a non-coding region, and a coding region that encodes the genes responsible for energy production, 
conjugated to carnitine by carnitine-palmityl transferase type 1 (CPT I) and, once inside the matrix, are unconjugated by CPT II to release free fatty acids (FFA). These are broken 
down by the β-oxidation cycle to produce acetyl-co-enzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Pyruvate can enter the mitochondrion directly and is metabolised by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to 
produce acetyl-CoA. The acetyl-CoA enters the Krebs cycle, leading to the production of NADH and avine adenine dinucleotide (reduced form) (FADH 2), which are used by proteins 
in the electron transport chain to generate a hydrogen ion gradient across the inter-membrane compartment. Reduction of NADH and FADH 2 by proteins I and II, respectively, 
releases electrons (e), and the energy released is used to pump protons into the inter-membrane compartment. Coenzyme Q 10/ubiquinone (Q) is an intensely hydrophobic electron 
carrier that is mobile within the inner membrane. As electrons are exchanged between proteins in the chain, more protons are pumped across the membrane, until the electrons 
reach complex IV (cytochrome oxidase), which uses the energy to reduce oxygen to water. The hydrogen ion gradient is used to produce ATP by the enzyme ATP synthase, which 
consists of a proton channel and catalytic sites for the synthesis of ATP from ADP. When the channel opens, hydrogen ions enter the matrix down the concentration gradient, and 
energy is released that is used to make ATP. (ATP = adenosine triphosphate; NADH = the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide)
energy production, e.g. most forms of Leigh syndrome (although Leigh 
syndrome may also be caused by a mitochondrial gene variant).
The inheritance of mtDNA disorders is characterised by transmis-
sion from females, but males and females generally are equally affected 
(see Fig. 3.8). Unlike the other inheritance patterns mentioned above, 
mitochondrial inheritance has nothing to do with meiosis but reects 
the fact that mitochondrial DNA is transmitted by oöcytes: sperm do 
not contribute mitochondria to the zygote. Mitochondrial disorders tend 
to be variable in penetrance and expressivity within families, and this is 
mostly accounted for by the fact that only a proportion of multiple mtDNA 
molecules within mitochondria contain the causal variant (the degree of 
mtDNA heteroplasmy).
Each mitochondrion contains 2–10 copies of a 16-kilobase (kB) dou-
ble-stranded circular DNA molecule (mtDNA). This mtDNA contains 13 
protein-coding genes, all involved in the respiratory chain, and the ncRNA 
genes required for protein synthesis within the mitochondria (see Fig. 3.9). 
The mutational rate of mtDNA is relatively high due to the lack of protection 
by chromatin. Several mtDNA diseases characterised by defects in ATP 
production have been described. Mitochondria are most numerous in cells 
with high metabolic demands, such as muscle, retina and the basal gan-
glia, and these tissues tend to be the ones most severely affected in mito-
chondrial diseases (Box 3.7). There are many other mitochondrial diseases 
that are caused by pathogenic variants in nuclear genes, which encode 
proteins that are then imported into the mitochondrion and are critical for 

[[p72]]
Genomics, health and disease    49
3
be active while the maternally inherited may be silenced, or vice versa. 
Variants within imprinted loci lead to an unusual pattern of inheritance 
where the phenotype is manifest only if inherited from the parent who 
contributes the transcriptionally active allele. Examples of imprinting dis-
orders are given in Box 3.8
Somatic genetic disease
Somatic variants are not inherited but instead occur during post-zygotic 
mitotic cell divisions at any point from embryonic development to late 
adult life. An example of this phenomenon is polyostotic brous dysplasia 
(McCune–Albright syndrome), in which a somatic variant in the GS alpha 
gene causes constitutive activation of downstream signalling, resulting in 
focal lesions in the skeleton and endocrine dysfunction.
The most important example of human disease caused by somatic var-
iants is cancer (see Ch. 7). Here, ‘driver mutations’ occur within genes that 
are involved in regulating cell division or apoptosis, resulting in abnormal cell 
growth and tumour formation. The two general categories of cancer-caus-
ing variant are gain-of-function variants in growth-promoting genes (onco-
genes) and loss-of-function variants in growth-suppressing genes (tumour 
suppressor genes). Whichever mechanism is acting, most tumours require 
an initiating variant in a single cell that can then escape from normal growth 
controls. This cell replicates more frequently or fails to undergo programmed 
death, resulting in clonal expansion. As the size of the clone increases, one 
or more cells may acquire additional variants that confer a further growth 
advantage, leading to proliferation of these subclones, which may ultimately 
result in aggressive metastatic cancer. The cell’s complex self-regulating 
machinery means that more than one variant is usually required to produce 
a malignant tumour (see Fig. 7.3). For example, if a variant results in acti-
vation of a growth factor gene or receptor, then that cell will replicate more 
frequently as a result of autocrine stimulation. However, this mutant cell will 
still be subject to normal cell-cycle checkpoints to promote DNA integrity in 
its progeny. If additional variants in the same cell result in defective cell-cycle 
checkpoints, however, it will rapidly accumulate further genomic variants, 
which may allow completely unregulated growth and/or separation from 
its matrix and cellular attachments and/or resistance to apoptosis. As cell 
growth becomes increasingly dysregulated, cells de-differentiate, lose their 
response to normal tissue environment and cease to ensure appropriate 
mitotic chromosomal segregation. These processes combine to generate 
the classical malignant characteristics of disorganised growth, variable levels 
of differentiation and numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities. 
An increase in somatic variant rate can occur on exposure to external muta-
gens, such as ultraviolet light or cigarette smoke, or if the cell has defects in 
DNA repair systems. Cancer is thus a disease that affects the fundamental 
processes of molecular and cell biology.
3.7 The structure of the respiratory chain complexes and 
the diseases associated with their dysfunction
Complex
Enzyme
nDNA 
subunits1
mtDNA 
subunits2
Diseases
I
NADH 
dehydrogenase
38
7
MELAS, MERRF bilateral 
striatal necrosis, 
LHON, myopathy and 
exercise intolerance, 
parkinsonism, Leigh 
syndrome, exercise 
myoglobinuria, 
leucodystrophy/myoclonic 
epilepsy
II
Succinate 
dehydrogenase
4
0
Phaeochromocytoma, 
Leigh syndrome
III
Cytochrome 
bc1 complex
10
1
Parkinsonism/MELAS, 
cardiomyopathy, 
myopathy, exercise 
myoglobinuria, Leigh 
syndrome
IV
Cytochrome c 
oxidase
10
3
Sideroblastic 
anaemia, myoclonic 
ataxia, deafness, 
myopathy, MELAS, 
MERRF mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy, 
motor neuron 
disease-like, exercise 
myoglobinuria, Leigh 
syndrome
V
ATP synthase
14
2
Leigh syndrome, NARP, 
bilateral striatal necrosis
1nDNA subunits. 2mtDNA subunits = number of different protein subunits in each complex that 
are encoded in the nDNA and mtDNA, respectively.
(ATP = adenosine triphosphate; LHON = Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS = 
myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF = myoclonic 
epilepsy and ragged red bres; mtDNA = mitochondrial DNA; NADH = the reduced form of 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NARP = neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa;  
nDNA = nuclear DNA)
3.8 Imprinting disorders
Disorder
Locus
Genes
Notes
Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome
11p15
CDKN1C, 
IGF2, H19
Increased growth, macroglossia, hemihypertrophy, abdominal wall defects, ear lobe pits/creases and 
increased susceptibility to developing childhood tumours
Prader–Willi syndrome
15q11–q13
SNRPN, 
Necdin and 
others
Obesity, hypogonadism and learning disability. Lack of paternal contribution (due to deletion of paternal 
15q11–q13, or inheritance of both chromosome 15q11–q13 regions from the mother)
Angelman syndrome (AS)
15q11–q13
UBE3A
Severe mental retardation, ataxia, epilepsy and inappropriate laughing bouts. Due to loss-of-function 
variants in the maternal UBE3A gene. The neurological phenotype results because most tissues express 
both maternal and paternal alleles of UBE3A, whereas the brain expresses predominantly the maternal 
allele
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
20q13
GNAS1
Inheritance of the variant from the mother results in hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, raised 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels, ectopic calcication, obesity, delayed puberty and shortened 4th and 
5th metacarpals (the syndrome known as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, AHO). When the gene 
variant is inherited from the father, PTH, calcium and phosphate levels are normal but the other features 
are present. These differences are due to the fact that, in the kidney (the main target organ through 
which PTH regulates serum calcium and phosphate), the paternal allele is silenced and the maternal 
allele is expressed, whereas both alleles are expressed in other tissues
Imprinting
Several chromosomal regions (loci) have been identied where gene 
expression is inherited in a parent-of-origin-specic manner; these are 
called imprinted loci. Within these loci the paternally inherited gene may 

[[p73]]
50    CLINICAL GENETICS
Interrogating the genome: the changing 
landscape of genomic technologies
Looking at chromosomes
The analysis of metaphase chromosomes by light microscopy was the 
mainstay of clinical cytogenetic analysis for decades, the aim being to 
detect gain or loss of whole chromosomes (aneuploidy) or large chromo-
somal segments (>4  million bp). More recently, genome-wide microarrays 
(array comparative genomic hybridisation or array CGH) have replaced 
chromosome analysis, allowing rapid and precise detection of segmental 
gain or loss of DNA throughout the genome (see Box 3.3). Microarrays 
consist of grids of multiple wells containing short DNA sequences (refer-
ence DNA) that are complementary to known sequences in the genome. 
Patient and reference DNA are each labelled with a coloured uorescent 
dye (generally, patient DNA is labelled with a green uorescent dye and 
reference DNA with a red uorescent dye) and added to the microar-
ray grid. Where there is an equal quantity of patient and reference DNA 
bound to the spot, this results in yellow uorescence. Where there is too 
much patient DNA (representing a duplication of a chromosome region), 
the spot will be greener; it will be more red (appears orange) where there 
is 2:1 ratio of the control:patient DNA (representing heterozygous dele-
tion of a chromosome region; Fig. 3.10).
Array CGH and other array-based approaches can detect small chro-
mosomal deletions and duplications. They are also generally more sen-
sitive than conventional karyotyping at detecting mosaicism (where there 
are two or more populations of cells, derived from a single fertilised egg, 
with different genotypes). However, array-based approaches will not 
detect balanced chromosome rearrangements where there is no loss or 
gain of genes/chromosome material, such as balanced reciprocal trans-
locations, or a global increase in copy number, such as triploidy.
The widespread use of array-based approaches has brought a num-
ber of challenges for clinical interpretation, including the identication of 
copy number variants (CNVs) of uncertain clinical signicance, CNVs of 
variable penetrance and incidental ndings. A CNV of uncertain clinical 
signicance describes a loss or gain of chromosome material where 
there are insufcient data to conclude whether or not it is associated with 
a learning disability and/or medical problems. While this uncertainty can 
be difcult to prepare families for and can be associated with consider-
able anxiety, it is likely that there will be greater clarity in the future as we 
generate larger CNV datasets.
A CNV of variable penetrance, also known as a neurosusceptibility 
locus, describes a chromosome deletion or duplication associated with 
a lower threshold for manifesting a learning disability or autistic spectrum 
disorder. CNVs of variable penetrance are therefore identied at greater 
frequencies among individuals with a learning disability and/or autistic 
spectrum disorder than in the general population. The current under-
standing is that additional modifying factors (genetic, environmental or 
stochastic) must inuence the phenotypic expression of these neurosus-
ceptibility loci.
Finally, an incidental CNV nding describes a deletion or duplication 
encompassing a gene or genes that are causative of a phenotype or risk 
unrelated to the presenting complaint. For instance, if, through the array 
CGH investigation for an intellectual disability, a deletion encompassing 
the BRCA1 gene were identied, this would be considered an incidental 
nding.
Looking at genes
Gene amplication: polymerase chain reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a fundamental laboratory tech-
nique that amplies targeted sections of the human genome for fur-
ther analyses – most commonly, DNA sequencing. The method utilises 
thermal cycling: repeated cycles of heating and cooling allow the initial 
separation of double-stranded DNA into two single strands (known as 
denaturation), each of which serves as a template during the subsequent 
replication step, guided by primers designed to anneal to a specic 
genomic region. This cycle of heating/cooling and denaturation/replica-
tion is repeated many times, resulting in the exponential amplication of 
DNA between primer sites (Fig. 3.11).
Gene sequencing
In the mid-1970s, a scientist called Fred Sanger pioneered a DNA 
sequencing technique (‘Sanger sequencing’) that determined the pre-
cise order and nucleotide type (thymine, cytosine, adenine and guanine) 
in a molecule of DNA. Modern Sanger sequencing uses uorescently 
labelled, chain-terminating nucleotides that are sequentially incorporated 
into the newly synthesised DNA, generating multiple DNA chains of dif-
fering lengths. These DNA chains are subject to capillary electrophoresis, 
which separates them by size, allowing the fragments to be ‘read’ by a 
laser and producing a sequence chromatogram that corresponds to the 
target sequence (Fig. 3.12). Although transformative, Sanger sequencing 
was difcult and costly to scale, as exemplied by the Human Genome 
Project, which took 12 years to sequence the entire human genome at 
a cost approaching 3 billion US$. Recently, DNA sequencing has been 
transformed again by a group of technologies collectively known as 
‘next-generation sequencing’ (NGS; Fig. 3.13). This refers to a family 
of post-Sanger sequencing technologies that utilise the same ve basic 
principles:
 Library preparation: DNA samples are fragmented (by enzyme 
cleavage or ultrasound) and then modied with a custom adapter 
sequence.
 Amplication: the library fragment is amplied to produce DNA clus-
ters, each originating from a single DNA fragment. Each cluster will 
act as a single sequencing reaction.
 Capture: if an entire genome is being sequenced, this step will not 
be included. The capture step is required if targeted resequencing is 
necessary, such as for a panel gene test or an exome (Box 3.9).
CGH
Patient
DNA
Label DNA
with different
fluorescent
dyes
Mix equimolar
amounts of
labelled DNA
Apply DNA mix to
glass slide with
high-density array
of different DNA
probes with known
location in the
human genome
Patient/control
ratio = 0.5:1
→ deletion of
patient DNA
Patient/control
ratio = 1.5:1
→ duplication
of patient DNA
Patient/control
ratio = 1:1
→ normal
Normal control
DNA
Fig. 3.10 Detection of chromosome abnormalities by comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH). Deletions and duplications are detected by looking for deviation 
from the 1:1 ratio of patient and control DNA in a microarray. Ratios in excess of 1 indicate duplications, whereas ratios below 1 indicate deletions.

[[p74]]
Interrogating the genome: the changing landscape of genomic technologies    51
3
 Sequencing: each DNA cluster is simultaneously sequenced and 
the data from each captured; this is known as a ‘read’ and is usu-
ally between 50 and 300 bases long (see Box 3.10 for a detailed 
description of the three most commonly used sequencing methods: 
synthesis, ligation and ion semiconductor sequencing).
 Alignment and variant identication: specialised software analyses 
read sequences and compare the data to a reference template. 
This is known as ‘alignment’ or ‘mapping’ and, although there are 
approximately 3 billion bases in the human genome, allows the 
remarkably accurate determination of the genomic origin where 
a read consists of 25 nucleotides or more. Variants are identied 
as differences between the read and the reference genome. For 
instance, if there is a different nucleotide in half the reads at a given 
position compared to the reference genome, this is likely to repre-
sent a heterozygous base substitution. The number of reads that 
align at a given point is called the ‘depth’ or ‘coverage’. The higher 
the read depth, the more accurate the variant call. However, in gen-
eral, a depth of 30 or more reads is generally accepted as producing 
diagnostic-grade results.
Rather than sequencing only one small section of DNA at a time, 
NGS allows the analysis of many hundreds of thousands of DNA 
strands in a single experiment and so is also commonly referred to as 
multiple parallel sequencing technology. Today’s NGS machines can 
sequence the entire human genome in a single day at a cost of less 
than 1000 US$.
NGS capture
Although we now have the capability to sequence the entire genome in a 
single experiment, whole-genome sequencing is not always the optimal 
use of NGS. NGS capture refers to the ‘pull-down’ of a targeted region 
of the genome and may constitute several to several hundred genes 
associated with a given phenotype (a gene panel), the exons of all known 
coding genes (an exome), or the exons of all coding genes known to 
be associated with disease (a clinical exome). Each of these targeted 
resequencing approaches is associated with a number of advantages 
and disadvantages (see Box 3.9). In order for NGS to be used for opti-
mal patient benet, it is essential for the clinician to have a good under-
standing of which test is the best one to request in any given clinical 
presentation.
Challenges of NGS technologies
Genomic technologies are transforming the way that we practise med-
icine, and ever faster and cheaper DNA sequencing offers increasing 
opportunities to prevent, diagnose and treat disease. However, genomic 
technologies are not without their challenges: for instance, storing the 
enormous quantities of data generated by NGS. While the A, C, T and G 
of our genomic code could be stored on the memory of a smartphone, 
huge computers, able to store several petabytes of data (where 1 peta-
byte is 1 million gigabytes of data), are required to store the information 
needed to generate each individual’s genome.
Even if we can store and handle these huge datasets successfully, 
we then need to be able to sift through the millions of normal variants to 
identify the single (or, rarely, several) pathogenic, disease-causing variant. 
While this can, to an extent, be achieved through the application of com-
plex algorithms, these take time and considerable expertise to develop 
and are not infallible.
Furthermore, even after these data have been sifted by bioinforma-
ticians, it is highly likely that clinicians will be left with some variants for 
which there are insufcient data to enable their denitive categorisation 
as either pathogenic or non-pathogenic. This may be because we simply 
do not know enough about the gene, because the particular variant has 
not previously been reported and/or it is identied in an unaffected par-
ent. These variants must be interpreted with caution and, more usually, 
their interpretation will require input from a genetics expert in the con-
text of the clinical presentation, where an ‘innocent until proven guilty’ 
approach is often adopted.
Cool ~60°C
DNA
sample
DNA strands
separate
Primers
bind to
DNA
DNA
replicated
Heat 95°C
Heat 95°C
Cool ~60°C
Repeat cycles
20–30 times
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
10
0
5
10
15
PCR cycles
Exponential amplification
of DNA between primer sites
DNA molecules
20
25
30
DNA strands
separate
Primers bind
to DNA
Cycle
no. 1
DNA
replicated
Heat ~72°C
Heat ~72°C
Polymerase
+ dNTPs
Primers
Cycle
no. 2
Fig. 3.11 The polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR involves adding a tiny amount 
of the patient’s DNA to a reaction containing primers (short oligonucleotides 18–21 bp 
in length, which bind to the DNA anking the region of interest) and deoxynucleotide 
phosphates (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP), which are used to synthesise new DNA and a 
heat-stable polymerase. The reaction mix is rst heated to 95°C, which causes the 
double-stranded DNA molecules to separate. The reaction is then cooled to 50–60°C, 
which allows the primers to bind to the target DNA. The reaction is then heated to 
72°C, at which point the polymerase starts making new DNA strands. These cycles 
are repeated 20–30 times, resulting in exponential amplication of the DNA fragment 
between the primer sites. The resulting PCR products can then be used for further 
analysis – most commonly, DNA sequencing (see Fig. 3.12).

[[p75]]
52    CLINICAL GENETICS
Finally, if we are to interrogate the entire genome or even the exome, 
it is foreseeable that we will routinely identify ‘incidental’ or secondary 
ndings – in other words, ndings not related to the initial diagnostic 
question. Whether or not to report these incidental ndings is a topic of 
much debate in the UK, although there is growing support to feedback 
incidental ndings where there is an intervention that could slow or halt 
development/progress of the associated disease.
Uses of NGS
NGS is now frequently used, within diagnostic laboratories, to identify 
base substitutions and indels (although the latter were initially problem-
atic). The current NGS challenge is to detect large deletions or duplica-
tions spanning several hundreds or thousands of bases and therefore 
exceeding any single read copy number variants and triplet repeat dis-
orders such as those that cause Huntington’s disease, myotonic dys-
trophy and fragile X syndrome, although techniques to detect both are 
improving (see Box 3.2). Increasingly, however, disorders caused by both 
copy number variants and triplet repeat expansions are being diagnosed 
using sophisticated computational methods. Additional potential uses of 
NGS include detection of balanced and unbalanced translocations and 
mosaicism: NGS has proved remarkably sensitive at detecting the latter 
when there is high read coverage for a given region. Of note, however, 
NGS is still not able to interrogate the epigenome and so will not iden-
tify conditions caused by a disruption of imprinting, such as Beckwith–
Wiedemann, Silver–Russell, Angelman and Prader–Willi syndromes (see 
Boxes 3.8 and 3.2).
Third-generation sequencing
Increasingly, third-generation or single-molecule sequencing is entering 
the diagnostic arena. As with next- or second-generation sequencing, 
a number of different platforms are commercially available. One of the 
most successful is SMRT technology (single-molecule sequencing in 
real time), developed by Pacic Biosciences. This system utilises a sin-
gle-stranded DNA molecule (as compared to the amplied clusters used 
in NGS), which acts as a template for the sequential incorporation, using 
a polymerase, of uorescently labelled nucleotides. As each complemen-
tary nucleotide is added, the uorescence (and therefore the identity of 
the nucleotide) is recorded before it is removed and another nucleotide 
is added.
A key advantage of third-generation sequencing is the long length of 
the read it generates: in the region of 10–15 kilobases. It is also cheaper 
than NGS, as fewer reagents are required. Given these inherent advan-
tages, third-generation sequencing is likely to supersede NGS in the 
near future. Given the confusion surrounding the terminology of NGS 
and third-generation sequencing, these technologies are increasingly 
referred to as ‘massively parallel sequencing’.
Genomics and clinical practice
Genomics and health care
Genomics in rare neurodevelopmental disorders
Although, by denition, the diagnosis of a rare disorder is made infre-
quently, rare diseases, when considered together, affect about 3 million 
people in the UK, the majority of whom are children. NGS has trans-
formed the ability to diagnose individuals affected by a rare disease. 
Whereas previously, when we were restricted to the sequential analysis 
of single genes, a clinician would need to make a clinical diagnosis in 
order to target testing, NGS allows the interrogation of multiple genes in 
a single experiment. This might be done through a gene panel, a clinical 
exome or an exome (see Box 3.9 and p. 51), and has increased the 
diagnostic yield in neurodevelopmental disorders to 35%–50%. Not only 
does the identication of the genetic cause of a rare disorder potentially 
provide families with answers, prognostic information and the opportu-
nity to meet and derive support from other affected families but also it 
can provide valuable information for those couples planning further chil-
dren and wishing to consider prenatal testing in the future.
Genomics and common disease
Most common disorders are determined by interactions between a num-
ber of genes and the environment. In this situation, the genetic contribu-
tion to disease is termed polygenic. Until recently, very little progress had 
been made in identifying the genetic variants that predispose to com-
mon disorders, but this has been changed by the advent of genome-
wide association studies. A GWAS typically involves genotyping many 
(> 500 000) genetic markers (SNPs) spread across the genome in a large 
group of individuals with the disease and in controls. By comparing the 
SNP genotypes in cases and controls, it is possible to identify regions of 
the genome, and therefore genes, more strongly associated with a given 
Capillary
electrophoresis
Largest fragments
migrate slowest
Smallest fastest
Laser
fluorescence
detector
ddTTP
ddCTP
ddATP
ddGTP
DNA
sample
PCR
DNA sequence chromatogram
Key
Fragments detected by laser fluorescence
New DNA molecules terminated by
incorporation of ddNTP
Polymerase
+ ddNTPs
Primers
Fig. 3.12 Sanger sequencing of DNA, which is very widely used in DNA diagnostics. This is performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplied fragments 
of DNA corresponding to the gene of interest. The sequencing reaction is carried out with a combination dNTP and uorescently labelled di-deoxy-dNTP (ddATP, ddTTP, ddCTP 
and ddGTP), which become incorporated into the newly synthesised DNA, causing termination of the chain at that point. The reaction products are then subject to capillary 
electrophoresis and the different-sized fragments are detected by a laser, producing a sequence chromatogram that corresponds to the target DNA sequence.

[[p76]]
Genomics and clinical practice    53
3
SNP prole and therefore more likely to contribute to the disease under 
study. Increasingly there is a move to develop disease-specic polygenic 
risk scores (PRS) in order to stratify individual risk and determine person-
alised management strategies. Whilst not yet in mainstream practice, it 
is likely that PRS will be integrated into clinical management in the next 
few years.
Genomics and obstetrics
Prenatal genetic testing may be performed where a pregnancy is consid-
ered at increased risk of being affected with a genetic condition, either 
because of the ultrasound/biochemical screening results or because 
of the family history. While invasive tests, such as amniocentesis and 
chorionic villus sampling, have been the mainstay of prenatal diagnosis 
for many years, they are increasingly being superseded by non-invasive 
CCGATATCTAGCTTA
   ATATCTAGC
 CG TAGC
    TATCTAGC
CCG TAGCTAGCTTA
1 Library preparation
2 Cluster amplification
Genomic DNA
Fragmentation
Adapter ligation
Flow cell
Amplification
3 Sequencing
Reads
Reference genome
4 Alignment and variant interpretation
G
T
A
C
A
A
Fig. 3.13 Sequencing by synthesis as used in the Illumina system. (1) 
Library preparation: DNA is fragmented and specialist adapters are ligated to the 
fragmented ends. (2) Cluster amplication: the library is loaded to a ow cell and the 
adapters hybridise to the ow-cell surface. Each bound fragment is hybridised. (3) 
Sequencing. (4) Alignment and variant interpretation: reads are aligned to a reference 
sequence using complex software and differences between reference and case 
genomes are identied.
3.9  The advantages and disadvantages of whole-genome 
sequencing, whole-exome sequencing and gene panels
Test
Advantages
Disadvantages
Whole-genome 
sequencing (WGS)
The most 
comprehensive 
analysis of the 
genome available
More even coverage 
of genes, allowing 
better identication of 
dosage abnormalities
Will potentially detect 
all gene variants, 
including intronic 
variants
More expensive to 
generate and store
Will detect millions of 
variants in non-coding 
DNA, which can be very 
difcult to interpret
Associated with a 
greater risk of identifying 
incidental ndings
Shallow sequencing (few 
reads per gene) and so 
less sensitive and less 
able to detect mosaicism
Whole-exome 
sequencing (WES)
Cheaper than whole-
genome sequencing
Analysis is not 
restricted to only 
those genes known 
to cause a given 
condition
Fewer variants 
detected than in 
WGS and so easier 
interpretation
Deeper sequencing 
than WGS increases 
sensitivity and 
detection of 
mosaicism
Less even coverage 
of the genome and so 
dosage abnormalities are 
more difcult to detect
Less comprehensive 
analysis (1%–2% of the 
genome) than WGS
Increased risk of 
identifying incidental 
ndings over targeted 
gene sequencing
Gene panels
Cost-effective
Very deep 
sequencing, 
increasing the 
chances of mosaicism 
being detected
Fewer variants 
detected and so data 
easier to interpret
As analysis is 
restricted to known 
genes, the likelihood 
of a variant being 
pathogenic is greatly 
increased
Will only detect variation 
in genes known to cause 
a given condition
Difcult to add new genes 
to the panel as they are 
discovered
testing of cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA), originating from placental tropho-
blasts and detectable in the maternal circulation from 4–5 weeks’ gesta-
tion; it is present in sufcient quantities for testing by 9 weeks.
 Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT): the sequencing and quantica-
tion, using NGS, of cffDNA chromosome-specic DNA sequences 
to identify trisomy 13, 18 or 21. The accuracy of NIPT in detecting 
pregnancy-specic aneuploidy approaches 98%. A false-negative 
result can occur when there is too little cffDNA (possibly due to early 
gestation or high maternal body mass index) or when aneuploidy 
has arisen later in development and is conned to the embryo and 
not represented in the placenta. False positives can occur with 
conned placental mosaicism (describing aneuploidy in the pla-
centa, not the fetus) or with an alternative cause of aneuploidy in the 
maternal circulation, such as cell-free tumour DNA.

[[p77]]
54    CLINICAL GENETICS
3.11  Inherited cancer predisposition syndromes
Syndrome name
Gene
Associated cancers
Additional clinical features
Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome
FLCN
Renal tumour (oncocytoma, chromophobe (and mixed), 
renal cell carcinoma)
Fibrofolliculoma
Trichodiscoma
Pulmonary cysts
Breast/ovarian hereditary 
susceptibility
BRCA1
BRCA2
Breast carcinoma
Ovarian carcinoma
Pancreatic carcinoma
Prostate carcinoma
Cowden syndrome
PTEN
Breast carcinoma
Thyroid carcinoma
Endometrial carcinoma
Macrocephaly
Intellectual disability/autistic spectrum disorder
Trichilemmoma
Acral keratosis
Papillomatous papule
Thyroid cyst
Lipoma
Haemangioma
Intestinal hamartoma
Gorlin syndrome/basal cell 
naevus syndrome
PTCH1
Basal cell carcinoma
Medulloblastoma
Odontogenic keratocyst
Palmar or plantar pits
Falx calcication
Rib abnormalities (e.g. bid, fused or missing ribs)
Macrocephaly
Cleft lip/palate
Li–Fraumeni syndrome
TP53
Sarcoma (e.g. osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma)
Breast carcinoma
Brain cancer (esp. glioblastoma)
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Brain
3.10  Next-generation sequencing methods
Sequencing by synthesis (Fig. 3.13)
 The most frequently used NGS method
 Used in Illumina systems (commonly used in diagnostic laboratories)
 Uses uorescently labelled, terminator nucleotides that are sequentially incorporated into a growing DNA chain
 Library DNA samples (fragmented DNA anked by DNA adapter sequences) are anchored to a ow cell by hybridisation of the DNA adapter sequence to probes on the ow-
cell surface
 Amplication occurs by washing the ow cell in a mixture containing all four uorescently labelled terminator nucleotides: A, C, T and G
 Once the nucleotide, complementary to the rst base of the DNA template, is incorporated, no further nucleotides can be added until the mixture is washed away
 The nucleotide terminator is shed and the newly incorporated nucleotide reverts to a regular, non-uorescent nucleotide that can be extended
 The process is then repeated with the incorporation of a second base etc.
 Sequencing by synthesis is therefore space- and time-dependent: a sensor will detect the order of uorescent emissions for each spot on the plate (representing the cluster) 
and determine the sequence for that read
Sequencing by ligation
 Used in SOLiD systems
 Uses DNA ligase rather than DNA polymerase (as is used in sequencing by synthesis) and short oligonucleotides (as opposed to single nucleotides)
 Library DNA samples are washed in a mixture containing oligonucleotide probes representing 4–16 dinucleotide sequences. Only one nucleotide in the probe is uorescently 
labelled
 The complementary oligo probes will hybridise, using DNA ligase, to the target sequence, initially at a primer annealed to the anchor site and then progressively along the  
DNA strand
 After incorporation of each probe, uorescence is measured and the dye is cleaved off
 Eventually, a new strand is synthesised (composed of a series of the oligo probes)
 A new strand is then synthesised but is offset by one nucleotide
 The process is repeated a number of times (5 rounds in the SOLiD system), providing overlapping templates that are analysed and a composite of the target sequence 
determined
Ion semiconductor sequencing
 When a nucleotide is incorporated into a growing DNA strand, a hydrogen ion is released that can be detected by an alteration in the pH of the solution. This hydrogen ion 
release forms the basis of ion semiconductor sequencing
 Each amplied DNA cluster is located above a semiconductor transistor, capable of detecting differences in the pH of the solution
 The DNA cluster is washed in a mixture containing only one type of nucleotide
 If the correct nucleotide, complementary to the next base on the DNA template, is in the mixture and incorporated, a hydrogen ion is released and detected
 If a homopolymer (sequence of two or more identical nucleotides) is present, this will be detected as a decrease in pH proportionate to the number of identical nucleotides in 
the sequence

[[p78]]
Genomics and clinical practice    55
3
Syndrome name
Gene
Associated cancers
Additional clinical features
Lynch syndrome/hereditary 
non-polyposis colon cancer
MLH1
MSH2
MSH6
PMS2
Colorectal carcinoma (majority right-sided)
Endometrial carcinoma
Gastric carcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma
Ovarian carcinoma (esp. mucinous)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1
MEN1
Parathyroid tumour
Endocrine pancreatic tumour
Anterior pituitary tumour
Lipoma
Facial angiobroma
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 2a 
and 2b (formerly known as type 
2 and 3, respectively)
RET
Medullary thyroid tumour
Phaeochromocytoma
Parathyroid tumour
Polyposis, familial adenomatous 
(FAP)
APC
Colorectal adenocarcinoma (FAP is characterised by 
thousands of polyps from the second decade; without 
colectomy, malignant transformation of at least one of 
these polyps is inevitable)
Duodenal carcinoma
Hepatoblastoma
Desmoid tumour
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium 
(CHRPE)
Polyposis, MYH-associated
MYH 
(MUTYH)
Colorectal adenocarcinoma
Duodenal adenocarcinoma
Retinoblastoma, familial
RB1
Retinoblastoma
Osteosarcoma
3.11  Inherited cancer predisposition syndromes
 Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD): the identication of a fetal 
single-gene defect that either has been paternally inherited or has 
arisen de novo and so is not identiable in the maternal genome. 
Examples of conditions that are currently amenable to NIPD include 
achondroplasia and the craniosynostoses. Increasingly, however, 
NIPD is being used for autosomal recessive conditions such as 
cystic brosis, where parents are carriers for different gene variants 
and research is under way to perform more agnostic fetal gene 
sequencing through whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing.
Where a genetic diagnosis is known in a family, a couple may opt to 
undertake pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). PGD is used as an 
adjunct to in vitro fertilisation and involves the genetic testing of a single 
cell from a developing embryo, prior to implantation.
Genomics and oncology
Until recently, individuals were stratied to genetic testing if they pre-
sented with a personal and/or family history suggestive of an inherited 
cancer predisposition syndrome (Box 3.11). Relevant clinical information 
included the age of cancer diagnosis and number/type of tumours. For 
example, the diagnosis of bilateral breast cancer in a woman in her thir-
ties with a mother who had ovarian cancer in her forties is suggestive 
of BRCA1/2-associated familial breast/ovarian cancer. In many familial 
cancer syndromes, somatic gene variants act together with an inherited 
variant to cause specic cancers (p. 49). Familial cancer syndromes may 
be due to germ-line loss-of-function variants in tumour suppressor genes 
encoding DNA repair enzymes or proto-oncogenes. At the cellular level, 
loss of one copy of a tumour suppressor gene does not have any func-
tional consequences, as the cell is protected by the remaining normal 
copy. However, a somatic variant affecting the normal allele is likely to 
occur in one cell at some point during life, resulting in complete loss of 
tumour suppressor activity and a tumour developing by clonal expansion 
of that cell. This two-hit mechanism (one inherited, one somatic) for can-
cer development is known as the Knudson hypothesis. It explains why 
tumours may not develop for many years (or ever) in some members of 
these cancer-prone families. In DNA repair diseases, the inherited vari-
ants increase the somatic mutation rate. Autosomal dominant variants 
in genes encoding components of specic DNA repair systems are 
relatively common causes of familial colon cancer and breast cancer 
(e.g. BRCA1).
Increasingly, genetics is moving into the mainstream, becoming inte-
grated into routine oncological care as new gene-specic treatments are 
introduced. Testing for a genetic predisposition to cancer is therefore mov-
ing from the domain of clinical genetics, where it has informed diagnosis, 
cascade treatment and screening/prophylactic management, to oncology, 
where it is informing the immediate management of the patient following 
cancer diagnosis. This is exemplied by BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2)-
related breast cancer. Previously, women with a pathogenic variant in 
either the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene would have received similar rst-line 
chemotherapy to women with a sporadic breast cancer without a known 
genetic association. More recently, it has been shown that BRCA1/2 muta-
tion-positive tumours are sensitive to poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) 
inhibitors. PARP inhibitors block the single-strand break-repair pathway. In 
a BRCA1/2 mutation-positive tumour – with compromised double-strand 
break repair – the additional loss of the single-strand break-repair pathway 
will drive the cell towards apoptosis. Indeed, PARP inhibitors have been 
shown to be so effective at destroying BRCA1/2 mutation-positive tumour 
cells, and with such minimal side-effects, that BRCA1/2 gene testing is 
increasingly determining patient management. It is likely, with a growing 
understanding of the genomic architecture of tumours, increasing acces-
sibility of NGS and an expanding portfolio of gene-directed therapies, that 
testing for many of the other inherited cancer susceptibility genes will, in 
time, move into the mainstream.
Genomics in infectious disease
NGS technologies are also transforming infectious disease. Given that 
a microbial genome can be sequenced within a single day at a current 
cost of less than 100 US$, microbiologists are able to identify a causa-
tive microorganism and target effective treatment rapidly and accurately. 
Moreover, microbial genome sequencing enables the effective surveil-
lance of infections to reduce and prevent transmission. Finally, an under-
standing of the microbial genome will drive the development of vaccines 
and antibiotics, essential in an era characterised by increasing microbial 
resistance to established antibiotic agents.

[[p79]]
56    CLINICAL GENETICS
Treatment of genetic disease
Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacogenomics is the science of dissecting the genetic determi-
nants of drug kinetics and effects using information from the human 
genome. For more than 50 years it has been appreciated that poly-
morphic variants within genes can affect individual responses to some 
drugs, such as loss-of-function variants in CYP2D6 that cause hyper-
sensitivity to debrisoquine, an adrenergic-blocking medication formerly 
used for the treatment of hypertension, in 3% of the population. This 
gene is part of a large family of highly polymorphic genes encoding 
cytochrome P450 proteins, mostly expressed in the liver, which deter-
mine the metabolism of a host of specic drugs. Polymorphisms in 
the CYP2D6 gene also determine codeine activation, while those in 
the CYP2C9 gene affect warfarin inactivation. Polymorphisms in these 
and other drug metabolic genes determine the persistence of drugs 
and, therefore, should provide information about dosages and toxicity. 
With the increasing use of NGS, genetic testing for assessment of drug 
response is seldom employed routinely, but in the near future it may be 
possible to predict the best specic drugs and dosages for individual 
patients based on genetic proling: so-called ‘personalised medicine’. 
An example is the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), which 
catabolises azathioprine, a drug that is used in the treatment of auto-
immune diseases and in cancer chemotherapy. Genetic screening for 
polymorphic variants of TPMT can be useful in identifying patients who 
have increased sensitivity to the effects of azathioprine and who can be 
treated with lower doses than normal.
Gene therapy and genome editing
Replacing or repairing mutated genes (gene therapy) is challenging in 
humans. Retroviral-mediated ex vivo replacement of the defective gene 
in bone marrow cells for the treatment of severe combined immune de-
ciency syndrome has been successful. The major problems with clinical 
use of virally delivered gene therapy have been oncogenic integration of 
the exogenous DNA into the genome and severe immune response to 
the virus.
Other therapies for genetic disease include PTC124, a compound 
that can ‘force’ cells to read through a nonsense variant that results in 
a premature termination codon in an ORF with the aim of producing a 
near-normal protein product. This therapeutic approach could be applied 
to any genetic disease caused by nonsense variants.
The most exciting development in genetics for a generation has been 
the discovery of accurate, efcient and specic techniques to enable 
editing of the genome in cells and organisms. This technology is known 
as CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic 
repeats and CRISPR-associated) genome editing. It is likely that ex vivo 
correction of genetic disease will become commonplace over the next 
few years. In vivo correction is not yet possible and will take much longer 
to become part of clinical practice.
Induced pluripotent stem cells and regenerative 
medicine
Adult stem-cell therapy has been in wide use for decades in the form of 
bone marrow transplantation. The identication of adult stem cells for 
other tissues, coupled with the ability to purify and maintain such cells in 
vitro, now offers exciting therapeutic potential for other diseases. It was 
recently discovered that many different adult cell types can be trans-dif-
ferentiated to form cells (induced pluripotent stem cells or iPS cells) with 
almost all the characteristics of embryonal stem cells derived from the 
early blastocyst. In mammalian model species, such cells can be taken 
and used to regenerate differentiated tissue cells, such as in heart and 
brain. They have great potential both for the development of tissue mod-
els of human disease and for regenerative medicine.
Pathway medicine
The ability to manipulate pathways that have been altered in genetic 
disease has tremendous therapeutic potential for Mendelian disease, but 
a rm understanding of both disease pathogenesis and drug action at 
a biochemical level is required. An exciting example has been the dis-
covery that the vascular pathology associated with Marfan syndrome 
is due to the defective brillin molecules causing up-regulation of trans-
forming growth factor (TGF)-β signalling in the vessel wall. Losartan is 
an antihypertensive drug that is marketed as an angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist. However, it also acts as a partial antagonist of TGF-β signalling 
and is effective in preventing aortic dilatation in a mouse model of Marfan 
syndrome, showing promising effects in early human clinical trials.
Ethics in a genomic age
As genomic technology is increasingly moving into mainstream clinical 
practice, it is essential for clinicians from all specialties to appreciate the 
complexities of genetic testing and consider whether genetic testing is 
the right thing to do in a given clinical scenario. To exemplify the ethical 
considerations associated with genetic testing, it may be helpful to think 
about them in the context of a clinical scenario. As you read the scenario, 
try to think what counselling/ethical issues might arise:
A 32-year-old woman is referred to discuss BRCA2 testing; she is 
currently pregnant with her second child (she already has a 2-year-old 
daughter) and has an identical twin sister. Her mother, a healthy 65-year-
old with Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, participated in direct-to-consumer 
testing (DCT) for ‘a bit of fun’ and a BRCA2 gene variant – common in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish population – was identied. There is no signicant 
cancer family history of note.
Consider the following issues:
 Pre-symptomatic/predictive testing: this describes testing for a 
known familial gene variant in an unaffected individual (compared 
with diagnostic testing, where genetic testing is undertaken in 
an affected individual). Although this could be considered for the 
unaffected patient, in the current scenario any testing would also 
have implications for her identical twin sister. This needs to be fully 
explored with the patient and her sister prior to testing. There is also 
the potential issue of predictive testing in the patient’s rst child. 
A fundamental tenet in clinical genetics is that predictive genetic 
testing should be avoided in childhood for adult-onset conditions. 
This is because, if no benet to the patient is accrued through 
childhood testing, it is better to retain the child’s right to decide for 
herself, when she is old enough, whether she wishes to participate 
in genetic testing or not.
 Prenatal testing: the principles behind predictive genetic testing in 
childhood can be extended to prenatal testing, i.e. if a pregnancy 
is being continued, a baby should not be tested for an adult-on-
set condition that cannot be prevented or treated in childhood. 
However, prenatal testing itself is hugely controversial and there 
is much debate as to how severe a condition should be to justify 
prenatal diagnosis, which would determine ongoing pregnancy 
decisions.
 DCT: while DCT can be interesting and empowering for individuals 
wishing to nd out more about their genetic backgrounds, it also has 
several drawbacks. Perhaps the main one is that, unlike face-to-face 
genetic counselling (which usually precedes any genetic testing, 
certainly where there are serious health implications for the individ-
ual and their family, such as is associated with BRCA1/2 variants), 
DCT is undertaken in isolation with no direct access to professional 
support. Furthermore, in addition to some (common) single-gene 
variants, such as the founder BRCA1/2 variants frequently identied 
in the Ashkenazi Jewish population and discussed in this example, 
current DCT packages utilise a series of SNPs to determine an 
overall risk prole; they evaluate the number of detrimental and 

[[p80]]
Further information    57
3
protective SNPs for a given disease. However, given that only a 
minority of the risk SNPs have so far been characterised, this is 
often inaccurate. Individuals may be falsely reassured that they are 
not at increased risk of a genetic condition despite a family history 
suggesting otherwise, resulting in inadequate surveillance and/or 
management.
The ethical considerations listed in this clinical scenario give just a a-
vour of some of the issues frequently encountered in clinical genetics. 
They are not meant to be an exhaustive summary and whole textbooks 
and meetings are devoted to the discussion of hugely complex ethical 
issues in genetics. However, a guiding principle is that, although each 
counselling situation will be unique with specic communication and eth-
ical challenges, a genetic result is permanent and has implications for 
the whole family, not just the individual. Where possible, therefore, an 
informed decision regarding genetic testing should be taken by a com-
petent adult following counselling by an experienced and appropriately 
trained clinician.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Alberts B, Bray D, Hopkin K, etal. Essential cell biology, 4th edn. New York: 
Garland Science; 2013.
Firth H, Hurst JA. Oxford desk reference: clinical genetics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; 2005.
Read A, Donnai D. New clinical genetics, 2nd edn. Banbury: Scion; 2010.
Strachan T, Read A. Human molecular genetics, 4th edn. New York: Garland 
Science; 2010.
Websites
bsgm.org.uk British Society for Genetic Medicine; has a report on genetic testing 
of children.
decipher.sanger.ac.uk Excellent, comprehensive genomic database.
ensembl.org Annotated genome databases from multiple organisms.
futurelearn.com/courses/the-genomics-era Has a Massive Open Online Course 
on genomics, for which the author of the current chapter is the lead educator .
genome.ucsc.edu Excellent source of genomic information.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM).
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1116/ Gene Reviews: excellent US-based source of 
information about many rare genetic diseases.
orpha.net/consor/cgi-bin/index.php Orphanet: European-based database on rare 
disease.

[[p81]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p82]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 3.1. Which of the following best describes a missense or non-
synonymous variant?
 A. A base substitution that results in the introduction of a 
premature stop codon
 B. A base substitution that results in a different codon and 
different amino acid
 C. The deletion of two bases that results in a shift of reading frame 
and the introduction of a downstream premature stop codon
 D. A base substitution that introduces a cryptic splice site
 E. A base substitution that results in a different codon but same 
amino acid
Answer: B.
The most common type of genomic variation is the substitution of one 
nucleotide for another, caused by either misincorporation of a nucleotide 
during DNA synthesis or chemical modication of the base. If a nucleo-
tide substitution occurs within the open reading frame of a protein-coding 
gene it will affect a codon within that gene. A missense/non-synonymous 
variant refers to a nucleotide substitution in which the effect on the codon 
in which it occurs is to cause it to encode a different amino acid.
 3.2. Approximately how many genes are there in the average human 
genome?
 A. 2000
 B. 20 000
 C. 200 000
 D. 2 000 000
 E. 20 000 000
Answer: B.
The human genome contains over 20  000 genes. Many of these are 
inactive or silenced in different cell types, reecting the variable gene 
expression responsible for cell-specic characteristics.
 3.3. Which of the following is a cardinal feature of an X-linked recessive 
disorder?
 A. Male-to-male transmission
 B. Affected individuals in each generation.
 C. Increased frequency in consanguineous unions
 D. Predominantly males affected
 E. There is characteristically highly variable penetrance and 
expressivity in the same family
Answer: D.
In X-linked recessive diseases females who carry a copy of the mutant 
allele on one of their X chromosomes (unaffected carriers) will pass the 
allele on to 50% of their offspring. Only the male offspring will be affected, 
because they have only one X chromosome. The female offspring will be 
carriers, as they will inherit a ‘normal’ X chromosome from their fathers. 
The overall risk of a female carrier having an affected child is therefore 
25%, or half of her male offspring.
Male-to-male transmission of an X-linked recessive condition does not 
occur because fathers will pass on their Y chromosome to their sons 
(not the X chromosome with mutant allele). The presence of affected 
individuals in each generation is a characteristic feature of autosomal 
dominant inheritance with full penetrance, in which half of the offspring 
of an affected parent will be affected irrespective of their sex. Increased 
frequency in consanguineous unions would suggest an autosomal 
recessive disorder, because the chance of both the female and the male 
parent carrying the same mutant allele would be increased by consan-
guinity. Highly variable penetrance and expressivity in the same family is 
a feature of mitochondrial disorders.
 3.4. Which type of genomic variant will an array comparative genomic 
hybridisation (CGH) best detect?
 A. A balanced chromosome translocation
 B. A frameshift variant
 C. A 2 MB deletion
 D. A missense variant
 E. An essential splice variant
Answer: C.
Array CGH allows rapid and precise detection of segmental gain or loss 
of DNA throughout the genome. Microarrays consist of grids of multiple 
wells containing short DNA sequences (reference DNA) that are comple-
mentary to known sequences in the genome. Patient and reference DNA 
are each labelled with a coloured uorescent dye (generally, patient DNA 
is labelled with a green uorescent dye and reference DNA with a red u-
orescent dye) and added to the microarray grid. Where there is an equal 
quantity of patient and reference DNA bound to the spot, this results in 
yellow uorescence. Where there is too much patient DNA (representing a 
duplication of a chromosome region), the spot will be greener; and it will be 
more red (appears orange) where there is a 2 : 1 ratio of the control : patient 
DNA (representing heterozygous deletion of a chromosome region).
Array CGH can detect small chromosomal deletions and duplications and 
is also more sensitive than conventional karyotyping at detecting mosaicism. 
However, array CGH and other array-based approaches will not detect 
balanced chromosome rearrangements where there is no loss or gain of 
genes/chromosome material, such as balanced reciprocal translocations, or 
a global increase in copy number, such as triploidy. In addition, an array CGH 
will not detect small insertions/deletions or single nucleotide substitutions.
 3.5. Which of the following is an imprinted condition?
 A. Huntington’s disease
 B. Patau syndrome
 C. Neurobromatosis type 1
 D. Pseudohypoparathyroidism
 E. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
Answer: D.
Several chromosomal regions (loci) have been identied where gene 
expression is inherited in a parent-of-origin-specic manner; these are 
called imprinted loci. Within these loci the paternally inherited gene may 
be active while the maternally inherited may be silenced, or vice versa. 
Variants within imprinted loci lead to an unusual pattern of inheritance 
where the phenotype is manifest only if inherited from the parent who 
contributes the transcriptionally active allele.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is caused by the maternal inher-
itance of a GNAS1 variant (located at 20q13) and is characterised by 
hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, raised parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) levels, ectopic calcication, obesity, delayed puberty and short-
ened 4th and 5th metacarpals (the syndrome also known as Albright 
hereditary osteodystrophy, AHO). When the gene variant is inherited from 
the father, PTH, calcium and phosphate levels are normal but the other 
(skeletal) features are present and the condition is known as pseudpseu-
dohypoparathyroidism (PPHP). GNAS1 encodes Gsα which is primar-
ily expressed from the maternal allele in the kidney, pituitary, thyroid 
and gonadal cells (and their disruption is the cause of the biochemical 
defects) whereas both alleles are expressed in other tissues (responsible 
for the skeletal features). Therefore where a GNAS1 variant is maternally 
inherited the individual will have both biochemical and skeletal features 
(PHP) but where it is paternally inherited they will not have the biochem-
ical features (PPHP).

[[p83]]
Clinical immunology
4
SL Johnston
Functional anatomy and physiology 60
The innate immune system 60
The adaptive immune system 65
The inammatory response 67
Acute inammation 67
Chronic inammation 69
Laboratory features of inammation 69
Presenting problems in immune disorders 70
Recurrent infections 70
Intermittent fever 71
Anaphylaxis 72
Immune deciency 72
Primary phagocyte deciencies 72
Complement pathway deciencies 73
Primary antibody deciencies 73
Primary T-lymphocyte deciencies 75
Secondary immune deciencies 75
Periodic fever syndromes 76
Amyloidosis 77
Autoimmune disease 78
Allergy 80
Angioedema 82
Pregnancy and the immune system 84
Transplantation and graft rejection 84
Transplant rejection 84
Complications of transplant immunosuppression 85
Organ donation 85
Tumour immunology 85

[[p84]]
60    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
The immune system has evolved to identify and destroy pathogens 
while minimising damage to host tissue. Despite the ancient observa-
tion that recovery from an infectious disease frequently results in pro-
tection against that condition, the existence of the immune system as 
a functional entity was not recognised until the end of the 19th century. 
More recently, it has become clear that the immune system not only 
protects against infection but also regulates tissue repair following injury, 
and when dysregulated, governs the responses that can lead to auto-
immune and auto-inammatory diseases. Dysfunction or deciency of 
the immune response can lead to a wide variety of diseases that may 
potentially involve every organ system in the body.
The aim of this chapter is to provide a general understanding of the 
immune system, how it contributes to human disease and how manipu-
lation of the immune system can be put to therapeutic use. A review of 
the key components of the immune response is followed by sections that 
illustrate the clinical presentation of the most common forms of immune 
dysfunction: immune deciency, inammation, autoimmunity and allergy. 
More detailed discussion of individual conditions can be found in the 
relevant organ-specic, emergency and critical care medicine chapters
Functional anatomy and physiology
The immune system consists of an intricately linked network of lymphoid 
organs, cells and proteins that are strategically placed to protect against 
infection (Fig. 4.1). Immune defences are normally categorised into the 
innate immune response, which provides immediate protection against 
an invading pathogen, and the adaptive or acquired immune response, 
which takes more time to develop but confers exquisite specicity and 
long-lasting protection. Innate and adaptive immunity do not work in iso-
lation, but rather in concert, largely driven by cytokines produced by the 
specic immune cell populations.
The innate immune system
Innate defences against infection include anatomical barriers, phagocytic 
cells, soluble molecules such as complement and acute phase proteins, 
and natural killer cells. The innate immune system recognises generic 
microbial structures present on non-mammalian tissue and can be mobi-
lised within minutes. A specic stimulus will elicit essentially identical 
responses in different individuals, in contrast with adaptive antibody and 
T-cell responses, which vary greatly between individuals.
Physical barriers
The tightly packed keratinised cells of the skin physically limit coloni-
sation by microorganisms. The hydrophobic oils that are secreted by 
sebaceous glands further repel water and microorganisms, and micro-
bial growth is inhibited by the skin's low pH and low oxygen tension. 
Sweat also contains lysozyme, an enzyme that destroys the structural 
integrity of bacterial cell walls; ammonia, which has antibacterial prop-
erties; and several antimicrobial peptides such as defensins. Similarly, 
the mucous membranes of the respiratory, gastrointestinal and geni-
tourinary tracts provide a physical barrier to infection. Secreted mucus 
traps invading pathogens, and immunoglobulin A (IgA), generated by 
the adaptive immune system, prevents bacteria and viruses attaching 
to and penetrating epithelial cells. As in the skin, lysozyme and antimi-
crobial peptides within mucosal membranes directly kill invading path-
ogens, and lactoferrin acts to starve invading bacteria of iron. Within 
the respiratory tract, cilia directly trap pathogens and contribute to 
removal of mucus, assisted by physical manœuvres such as sneez-
ing and coughing. In the gastrointestinal tract, hydrochloric acid and 
salivary amylase chemically destroy bacteria, while normal peristal-
sis and induced vomiting or diarrhoea assist clearance of invading 
organisms.
Adenoids
Lymph nodes
Tonsils
Thoracic
duct
Spleen
Bone
marrow
Liver
Appendix
Germinal centre
Proliferating B cells after
antigen exposure
Afferent lymph
Paracortex
T cells
Dendritic cells
Cortex
B cells in primary
lymphoid follicles
Efferent lymph
Medulla
Plasma cells
Sinuses with
macrophages
Blood vessels
Capsule
Lymph node section
Lymphatics
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Cells of the innate immune
system
Natural
killer cell
Basophil
Mast cell
Monocyte
Macrophage
T lymphocyte
Cells of the adaptive immune
system
Antigen-presenting cell
B lymphocyte
Thymus
Peyer’s patches in small
intestine
Fig. 4.1 Anatomy of the immune system.

[[p85]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    61
4
The microbiome, which is made up of endogenous commensal bacteria, 
provides an additional constitutive defence against infection. Approximately 
1014 bacteria normally reside at epithelial surfaces in symbiosis with the 
human host. They compete with pathogenic microorganisms for scarce 
resources, including space and nutrients, and produce fatty acids and 
bactericidins that inhibit the growth of many pathogens. In addition, recent 
research has demonstrated that commensal bacteria help to shape the 
immune response by inducing specic regulatory T cells within the intestine. 
Eradication of the normal ora with broad-spectrum antibiotics commonly 
results in opportunistic infection by organisms such as Clostridioides dif-
cile, which rapidly colonise an undefended ecological niche.
These constitutive barriers are highly effective, but if external defences 
are breached by a wound or pathogenic organism, the specic soluble 
proteins and cells of the innate immune system are activated.
Phagocytes
Phagocytes (‘eating cells’) are specialised cells that ingest and kill 
microorganisms, scavenge cellular and infectious debris, and produce 
inammatory molecules that regulate other components of the immune 
system. They include neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages, and are 
particularly important for defence against bacterial and fungal infections. 
Phagocytes express a wide range of surface receptors, including pattern 
recognition receptors (PRRs), which recognise pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) on invading microorganisms, allowing their 
identication. The PRRs include Toll-like receptors, nucleotide oligom-
erisation domain (NOD) protein-like receptors and mannose receptors, 
whereas the PAMPs they recognise are molecular motifs not present on 
mammalian cells, including bacterial cell wall components, bacterial DNA 
and viral double-stranded RNA. Interaction between the PRRs and their 
PAMPs leads to activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), which stim-
ulates expression of pro-inammatory genes, and of nucleotide-binding 
oligomerisation domain (NOD)-like receptor proteins (NLRP), which form 
complexes with other intracellular proteins to form the inammasome 
(Fig. 4.2). The inammasome results in activation of interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1β), which is excreted extracellularly and plays a key pathogenic role 
in familial fever syndromes (p. 76) and acute gout (Ch. 26). While phago-
cytes can recognise microorganisms through PRRs alone, engulfment of 
microorganisms is greatly enhanced by opsonisation. Opsonins include 
acute phase proteins produced by the liver, such as C-reactive protein 
and complement component C3b. Antibodies generated by the adaptive 
immune system also act as opsonins. They bind both to the pathogen 
and to phagocyte receptors, acting as a bridge between the two to facili-
tate phagocytosis (see Fig. 4.2). This is followed by intracellular pathogen 
destruction and downstream activation of pro-inammatory genes, result-
ing in the generation of pro-inammatory cytokines as discussed below.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils, also known as polymorphonuclear leucocytes, are derived 
from the bone marrow and circulate freely in the blood. They are short-
lived cells with a half-life of 6 hours, and are produced at the rate of 
1011 cells daily. Their functions are to kill microorganisms, to facilitate 
rapid transit of cells through tissues and to amplify the immune response 
non-specically. These functions are mediated by enzymes contained 
in granules, which also provide an intracellular milieu for the killing and 
degradation of microorganisms.
Two main types of granule are recognised: primary or azurophil gran-
ules, and the more numerous secondary or specic granules. Primary 
granules contain myeloperoxidase and other enzymes important for 
intracellular killing and digestion of ingested microbes. Secondary gran-
ules are smaller and contain lysozyme, collagenase and lactoferrin, 
which can be released into the extracellular space. Enzyme production 
is increased in response to infection, which is reected by more intense 
granule staining on microscopy, known as ‘toxic granulation’.
Microbes
C3b
Antibody
C-reactive
protein
Fc
receptor
Pattern
recognition
receptors
NOD-like
receptors
Microbial DNA
Microbial
RNA
Microbial
proteins
Pathogen-
associated
molecular
patterns
LPS
Peptidoglycans
Crystals
NFκB
NFκB
Lysosome
C3b
receptor
Phagocytic cell
Pro-inflammatory
gene expression
Pro-IL-1β
IL-1β
NLRP
NLRP
expression
Inflammasome
Fig. 4.2 Phagocytosis and opsonisation. Phagocytosis of microbes can be augmented by several opsonins, such as C-reactive protein, antibodies and complement 
fragments like C3b, which enhance the ability of phagocytic cells to engulf microorganisms and destroy them. Phagocytes also recognise components of microbes, such as 
lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycans, DNA and RNA, collectively known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). These activate pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 
such as Toll-like receptors and nucleotide oligomerisation domain (NOD)-like receptors, which promote inammatory gene expression through the nuclear factor kappa B 
(NFκB) pathway. Uric acid and other crystals can also promote inammation through the NOD pathway. (IL = interleukin; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; NLRP = nucleotide-binding 
oligomerisation domain (NOD)-like receptor proteins)

[[p86]]
62    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
Changes in damaged or infected cells trigger local production of 
inammatory molecules and cytokines. These cytokines stimulate the 
production and maturation of neutrophils in the bone marrow, and their 
release into the circulation. Neutrophils are recruited to specic sites of 
infection by chemotactic agents, such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), and by acti-
vation of local endothelium. Up-regulation of cellular adhesion molecules 
on neutrophils and the endothelium also facilitates neutrophil migration. 
The transit of neutrophils through the blood stream is responsible for the 
rise in neutrophil count that occurs in early infection. Once present within 
infected tissue, activated neutrophils seek out and engulf invading micro-
organisms. These are initially enclosed within membrane-bound vesicles, 
which fuse with cytoplasmic granules to form the phagolysosome. Within 
this protected compartment, killing of the organism occurs through a 
combination of oxidative and non-oxidative killing. Oxidative killing, also 
known as the respiratory burst, is mediated by the nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)–oxidase enzyme complex, which con-
verts oxygen into reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide 
and superoxide that are lethal to microorganisms. The myeloperoxidase 
enzyme within neutrophils produces hypochlorous acid, which is a pow-
erful oxidant and antimicrobial agent. Non-oxidative (oxygen-independ-
ent) killing occurs through the release of bactericidal enzymes into the 
phagolysosome. Each enzyme has a distinct antimicrobial spectrum, 
providing broad coverage against bacteria and fungi.
An additional, recently identied form of neutrophil-mediated killing is 
neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation. Activated neutrophils can 
release chromatin with granule proteins such as elastase to form an 
extracellular matrix that binds to microbial proteins. This can immobilise 
or kill microorganisms without requiring phagocytosis. The process of 
phagocytosis and NET formation (NETosis) depletes neutrophil glycogen 
reserves and is followed by neutrophil death. As the cells die, their con-
tents are released and lysosomal enzymes degrade collagen and other 
components of the interstitium, causing liquefaction of closely adjacent 
tissue. The accumulation of dead and dying neutrophils results in the 
formation of pus, which, if extensive, may lead to abscess formation.
Monocytes and macrophages
Monocytes are the precursors of tissue macrophages. They are pro-
duced in the bone marrow and enter the circulation, where they con-
stitute about 5% of leucocytes. From the blood stream they migrate to 
peripheral tissues, where they differentiate into tissue macrophages and 
reside for long periods. Specialised populations of tissue macrophages 
include Kupffer cells in the liver, alveolar macrophages in the lung, mesan-
gial cells in the kidney, and microglial cells in the brain. Macrophages, like 
neutrophils, are capable of phagocytosis and killing of microorganisms 
but also play an important role in the amplication and regulation of the 
inammatory response (Box 4.1). They are particularly important in tissue 
surveillance and constantly survey their immediate surroundings for signs 
of tissue damage or invading organisms.
Dendritic cells
Dendritic cells are specialised antigen-presenting cells that are present 
in tissues in contact with the external environment, such as the skin and 
mucosal membranes. They can also be found in an immature state in 
the blood. They sample the environment for foreign particles and, once 
activated, carry microbial antigens to regional lymph nodes, where they 
interact with T cells and B cells to initiate and shape the adaptive immune 
response.
Cytokines
Cytokines are signalling proteins produced by cells of the immune sys-
tem and a variety of other cell types. More than 100 have been identied. 
Cytokines have complex and overlapping roles in cellular communication 
and regulation of the immune response. Subtle differences in cytokine 
production, particularly at the initiation of an immune response, can have 
a major impact on outcome. Cytokines bind to specic receptors on 
target cells and activate downstream intracellular signalling pathways, 
ultimately leading to changes in gene transcription and cellular func-
tion. Two important signalling pathways are illustrated in Figure 4.3. The 
nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) pathway is activated by tumour necrosis 
factor (TNF), by other members of the TNF superfamily such as receptor 
activator of nuclear kappa B ligand (RANKL), and by the Toll-like recep-
tors and NOD-like receptors (see Fig. 4.2). In the case of TNF superfamily 
members, receptor binding causes the inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKK) 
complex of three proteins to be recruited to the receptor by binding TNF 
receptor-associated proteins (TRAF). This activates IKK, which in turn 
leads to phosphorylation of the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B pro-
tein (IκB), causing it to be degraded by the proteasome, allowing NFκB 
to translocate to the nucleus and activate gene transcription. The Janus 
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT) 
pathway is involved in transducing signals downstream of many cytokine 
receptors, including those for IL-2, IL-6 and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ). 
On receptor binding, JAK proteins are recruited to the intracellular por-
tion of the receptor and are phosphorylated. These in turn phosphorylate 
STAT proteins, which translocate to the nucleus and activate gene tran-
scription, altering cellular function. The function and disease associations 
of several important cytokines are shown in Box 4.2. Cytokine inhibitors 
are now routinely used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases, most 
of which are monoclonal antibodies to cytokines or their receptors. In 
addition, small-molecule inhibitors have been developed that inhibit the 
intracellular signalling pathways used by cytokines. These include the 
Janus kinase inhibitors tofacitinib, baracitinib and upadacitinib and l-
gotinib which are used in the treatment of various inammatory rheu-
matic diseases and inammatory bowel disease, and the tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor imatinib, which is used in chronic myeloid leukaemia and other 
haematological malignancies.
Integrins
Integrins are transmembrane proteins that play important roles in cell–cell 
and cell–matrix interactions. They are expressed on lymphocytes as well 
as a variety of other cell types and mediate attachment of cells to the 
endothelium and the extracellular matrix, affecting cell migration and sig-
nal transduction. Their role in autoimmune disease has been extensively 
studied and therapeutic agents are now being developed which modify 
binding of integrins to their targets. For example, natalizumab is a mono-
clonal antibody which targets the a4 integrin which is expressed on lym-
phocytes. Natalizumab prevents α4β1 integrin binding to VCAM-1 and 
the α4β7 integrin binding to MAdCAM-1 resulting in an anti-inammatory 
4.1 Functions of macrophages
Amplication of the inammatory response
 Stimulate the acute phase response (through production of IL-1 and IL-6)
 Activate vascular endothelium (IL-1, TNF-α)
 Stimulate neutrophil maturation and chemotaxis (IL-1, IL-8)
 Stimulate monocyte chemotaxis
Killing of microorganisms
 Phagocytosis
 Microbial killing through oxidative and non-oxidative mechanisms
Clearance, resolution and repair
 Scavenging of necrotic and apoptotic cells
 Clearance of toxins and other inorganic debris
 Tissue remodelling (elastase, collagenase, matrix proteins)
 Down-regulation of inammatory cytokines
 Wound healing and scar formation (IL-1, platelet-derived growth factor, broblast 
growth factor)
Link between innate and adaptive immune systems
 Activate T cells by presenting antigen in a recognisable form
 T cell-derived cytokines increase phagocytosis and microbicidal activity of 
macrophages in a positive feedback loop
(IL = interleukin; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)

[[p87]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    63
4
effect. It is an effective treatment for multiple sclerosis, which works by 
preventing immune cells from entering the central nervous system by 
interfering with lymphocyte binding the α4β1 integrin. This treatment is 
not without risk, however, since there are reports of progressive multifo-
cal leucoencephalopathy (PML) in MS treated patients, as a result of JC 
virus infection of the central nervous system. Similarly, vedolizumab, a 
monoclonal antibody directed against the α4/β7 integrin, is an effective 
treatment for Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis which works selec-
tively by preventing lymphocytes entering gut endothelium by inhibiting 
the interaction with MAdCAM-1.
Complement
The complement system comprises a group of more than 20 tightly reg-
ulated, functionally linked proteins that act to promote inammation and 
eliminate invading pathogens. Complement proteins are produced in the 
liver and are present in inactive form in the circulation. When the comple-
ment system is activated, it sets in motion a rapidly amplied biological 
cascade analogous to the coagulation cascade.
There are three mechanisms by which the complement cascade can 
be activated (Fig. 4.4):
 The alternate pathway is triggered directly by binding of C3 to bac-
terial cell-wall components, such as lipopolysaccharide of Gram-
negative bacteria and teichoic acid of Gram-positive bacteria.
 The classical pathway is initiated when two or more IgM or IgG 
antibody molecules bind to antigen. The associated conformational 
change exposes binding sites on the antibodies for the rst protein 
in the classical pathway, C1, which is a multiheaded molecule that 
can bind up to six antibody molecules. Once two or more ‘heads’ of 
a C1 molecule are bound to antibody, the classical cascade is trig-
gered. An important inhibitor of the classical pathway is C1 inhibitor 
(C1inh), as illustrated in Figure 4.4
 The lectin pathway is activated when mannose-binding lectin inter-
acts with microbial cell surface carbohydrates. This directly stimu-
lates the classical pathway at the level of C4, bypassing the need for 
immune complex formation.
Activation of complement by any of these pathways results in activation 
of C3. This in turn activates the nal common pathway, in which the com-
plement proteins C5–C9 assemble to form the membrane attack complex 
(MAC). This can puncture the cell wall, leading to osmotic lysis of target cells. 
JAK
JAK inhibitor
Response
genes
Response
genes
Proteasome
JAK
Cytokines
Cytokine receptor
P
P
P
P
P
STAT
STAT
P
P
STAT
STAT
DNA
TNF
TNF receptor
TRAF
IκB
P
IκB
NFκB
NFκB
IKKκ
IKKα IKKβ
IFN-γ
IL-6
IL-2
Fig. 4.3 Cytokines signalling pathways and the immune response. Cytokines regulate the immune response through binding to specic receptors that activate a variety 
of intracellular signalling pathways, two of which are shown. Members of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily and the Toll-like receptors and NOD-like receptors (see 
Fig. 4.2) signal through the nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) pathway. Several other cytokines, including IL-2, IL-6 and interferons, employ the Janus kinase/signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway to regulate cellular function (see text for more details). (IFN, interferon; IκB = inhibitor of kappa B; IKK = I kappa B kinase; 
IL=interleukin; P = phosphorylation of the signalling protein; TRAF = tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor)
Smooth muscle
contraction
Activation of cells
Vascular permeability
Lysis of
bacteria
Membrane
attack
complex
(MAC)
Opsonisation
of bacteria
Direct
activation
Lectin
pathway
Mannose-
binding lectin
Classical
pathway
Antibody–antigen
complexes
Alternate
pathway
C4
C2
C3
C3a
C1inh
C5a
C5
C3b
C5b
C6
C7
C8
C1
C9
Fig. 4.4 The complement pathway. The classical pathway is activated by binding 
of antigen–antibody complexes to C1 but is blocked by C1 inhibitor (C1inh), whereas 
mannose-binding lectins, which are macromolecules that bind to carbohydrates 
on the surface of various microorganisms, activate the pathway by binding C4. 
Bacteria can directly activate the pathway through C3, which plays a pivotal role in 
complement activation through all three pathways.

[[p88]]
64    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
There are a number of control proteins within the complement system 
that prevent activation on host cells, thereby preventing host cell damage, 
some of which are membrane bound, others soluble, such as C1 inhibi-
tor. Factor H is an important example in control of the alternate pathway, 
CD59 and decay accelerating factor (DAF) are important in the terminal 
complement pathway. Deciencies in factor H can lead to atypical haemo-
lytic uraemic syndrome and failure of binding of CD59 and DAF due to 
deciency in the anchoring glycosylphosphatidylinositol on red blood cells 
can lead to paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobulinuria as a result of comple-
ment-mediated haemolysis. A monoclonal antibody directed against the 
central complement molecule C5, eculizumab, has been developed for 
therapeutic use in these conditions. Invasive infection, including menin-
gococcal sepsis, has been reported with eculizumab therapy, highlighting 
the importance of the complement system in preventing such infections.
4.2 Important cytokines in the regulation of the immune response
Cytokine
Source
Actions
Biologic therapies
Interferon-alpha (IFN-α)
T cells and macrophages
Antiviral activity
Activates NK cells, CD8+ T cells and 
macrophages
Recombinant IFN-α used in hepatitis C and 
some malignancies
Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ)
T cells and NK cells
Increases antimicrobial activity of 
macrophages
Regulates cytokine production by  
T cells and macrophages
Interferon-γ used in chronic 
granulomatous disease
Tumour necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-α)
Macrophages, NK cells and others, 
including T cells
Pro-inammatory
Increases expression of other 
cytokines and adhesion molecules
Causes apoptosis of some target cells
Directly cytotoxic
TNF-α inhibitors used in rheumatoid 
arthritis, inammatory bowel disease, 
psoriasis and many other inammatory 
conditions
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
Macrophages and neutrophils
Stimulates neutrophil recruitment, 
fever, and T-cell and macrophage 
activation as part of the inammatory 
response
IL-1 inhibitors used in systemic juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis, periodic fever 
syndromes and acute gout
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
CD4+ T cells
Stimulates proliferation and 
differentiation of antigen-specic  
T lymphocytes
IL-2 inhibitors used in the treatment of 
transplant rejection
Interleukin-4 (IL-4)
CD4+ T cells
Stimulates maturation of B and  
T cells, and production of IgE antibody
Antibodies to IL-4 receptor used in severe 
atopic dermatitis
Interleukin-5 (IL-5)
CD4+ T cells, mast cells, eosinophils 
and basophils
Growth and differentiation factor for  
B cells and eosinophils
Antibodies to IL-5 or the IL-5 receptor 
used in treatment refractory eosinophilic 
asthma and more recently anti-IL-5 
antibodies used in eosinophilic vasculitis
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
Monocytes and macrophages
Stimulates neutrophil recruitment, 
fever, and T-cell and macrophage 
activation as part of the inammatory 
response, stimulates maturation of  
B cells into plasma cells
Antibodies to IL-6 receptor used in 
rheumatoid arthritis and giant cell arteritis
Interleukin-12 (IL-12)
Monocytes and macrophages
Stimulates IFN-γ and TNF-α release 
by T cells
Activates NK cells
Antibody to p40 subunit of IL-12 used in 
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis
Interleukin-17 (IL-17)
Th17 cells (T helper), NK cells, NK-T 
cells
Pro-inammatory cytokine
Involved in mucosal immunity and 
control of extracellular pathogens, 
synergy with IL-1 and TNF
Antibody to IL-17 used in psoriasis, 
psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing 
spondylitis
Interleukin-22 (IL-22)
Th17 cells
Induction of epithelial cell proliferation 
and antimicrobial proteins in 
keratinocytes
Interleukin-23 (IL-23)
Activated macrophages and dendritic 
cells in peripheral tissues
Pro-inammatory cytokine, 
proliferation of Th17 T cells with 
induction of IL-17
Antibody to IL-23 used in psoriasis, 
psoriatic arthritis and inammatory bowel 
disease
(IgE = immunoglobulin E; NK = natural killer)
This step is particularly important in the defence against encapsulated 
bacteria such as Neisseria spp. and Haemophilus inuenzae.
Complement fragments generated by activation of the cascade can 
also act as opsonins, rendering microorganisms more susceptible to 
phagocytosis by macrophages and neutrophils (see Fig. 4.2). In addi-
tion, they are chemotactic agents, promoting leucocyte trafcking to 
sites of inammation. Some fragments act as anaphylotoxins, binding to 
complement receptors on mast cells and triggering release of histamine, 
which increases vascular permeability. The products of complement acti-
vation also help to target immune complexes to antigen-presenting cells, 
providing a link between the innate and the adaptive immune systems. 
Finally, activated complement products dissolve the immune complexes 
that triggered the cascade, minimising bystander damage to surrounding 
tissues.

[[p89]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    65
4
Mast cells and basophils
Mast cells and basophils are bone marrow-derived cells that play a cen-
tral role in allergic disorders. Mast cells reside predominantly in tissues 
exposed to the external environment, such as the skin and gut, while 
basophils circulate in peripheral blood and are recruited into tissues 
in response to inammation. Both contain large cytoplasmic granules 
that enclose vasoactive substances such as histamine (see Fig. 4.14). 
Mast cells and basophils express IgE receptors on their cell surface, 
which bind IgE antibody. On encounter with specic antigen, the cell 
is triggered to release histamine and other mediators present within the 
granules and to synthesise additional mediators, including leukotrienes, 
prostaglandins and cytokines. An inammatory cascade is initiated that 
increases local blood ow and vascular permeability, stimulates smooth 
muscle contraction and increases secretion at mucosal surfaces.
Natural killer cells
Natural killer (NK) cells are large granular lymphocytes that play a major 
role in defence against tumours and viruses. They exhibit features of both 
the adaptive and the innate immune systems in that they are morpho-
logically similar to lymphocytes and recognise similar ligands, but they 
are not antigen-specic and cannot generate immunological memory. NK 
cells express a variety of cell surface receptors, some of which are stim-
ulatory and others inhibitory. The effects of inhibitory receptors normally 
predominate. These recognise human leucocyte antigen (HLA) molecules 
that are expressed on normal nucleated cells, preventing NK cell-medi-
ated attack, whereas the stimulatory receptors recognise molecules that 
are expressed primarily when cells are damaged. This allows NK cells 
to remain tolerant to healthy cells but not to damaged ones. When cells 
become infected by viruses or undergo malignant change, expression of 
HLA class I molecules on the cell surface can be down-regulated. This 
is an important mechanism by which these cells then evade adaptive 
T-lymphocyte responses. In this circumstance, however, NK cell defences 
becomes important, as down-regulation of HLA class I abrogates the 
inhibitory signals that normally prevent NK activation. The net result is NK 
attack on the abnormal target cell. NK cells can also be activated by bind-
ing of antigen–antibody complexes to surface receptors. This physically 
links the NK cell to its target in a manner analogous to opsonisation and is 
known as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Activated NK cells can kill their targets in various ways. They secrete 
pore-forming proteins such as perforin into the membrane of the target 
cell, and proteolytic enzymes called granzymes into the target cell, which 
cause apoptosis. In addition, NK cells produce a variety of cytokines such 
as TNF-α and IFN-γ, which have direct antiviral and anti-tumour effects.
The adaptive immune system
If the innate immune system fails to provide effective protection against 
an invading pathogen, the adaptive immune system is mobilised (see 
Fig. 4.1). This has three key characteristics:
 It has exquisite specicity and can discriminate between very small 
differences in molecular structure.
 It is highly adaptive and can respond to an almost unlimited number 
of molecules.
 It possesses immunological memory, and changes consequent 
to initial activation by an antigen allow a more effective immune 
response on subsequent encounters.
There are two major arms of the adaptive immune response. Humoral 
immunity involves the production of antibodies by B lymphocytes, and 
cellular immunity involves the activation of T lymphocytes, which syn-
thesise and release cytokines that affect other cells, as well as directly 
killing target cells. These interact closely with each other and with the 
components of the innate immune system to maximise effectiveness of 
the immune response.
Lymphoid organs
The primary lymphoid organs are involved in lymphocyte development. 
They include the bone marrow, where T and B lymphocytes differentiate 
from haematopoietic stem cells and where B lymphocytes also mature, 
and the thymus, the site of T-cell maturation (see Fig. 4.1). After matu-
ration, lymphocytes migrate to the secondary lymphoid organs. These 
include the spleen, lymph nodes and mucosa-associated lymphoid tis-
sue. These trap and concentrate foreign substances and are the major 
sites of interaction between naïve lymphocytes and microorganisms.
The thymus
The thymus is a bi-lobed structure in the anterior mediastinum, and is 
organised into cortical and medullary areas. The cortex is densely pop-
ulated with immature T cells, which migrate to the medulla to undergo 
selection and maturation. The thymus is most active in the fetal and neo-
natal period, and involutes after puberty. Failure of thymic development is 
associated with profound T-cell immune deciency but surgical removal 
of the thymus in childhood (usually during major cardiac surgery) is not 
associated with signicant immune dysfunction.
The spleen
The spleen is the largest of the secondary lymphoid organs. It is highly 
effective at ltering blood and is an important site of phagocytosis of 
senescent erythrocytes, bacteria, immune complexes and other debris, 
and of antibody synthesis. It is important for defence against encap-
sulated bacteria, and asplenic individuals are at risk of overwhelming 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and H. inuenzae infection (see Box 4.5).
Lymph nodes
These are positioned to maximise exposure to lymph draining from sites 
of external contact, and are highly organised (see Fig. 4.1).
 The cortex contains primary lymphoid follicles, which are the site of 
B-lymphocyte interactions. When B cells encounter antigen, they 
undergo intense proliferation, forming germinal centres.
 The paracortex is rich in T lymphocytes and dendritic cells.
 The medulla is the major site of antibody-secreting plasma cells.
 Within the medulla there are many sinuses, which contain large 
numbers of macrophages.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) consists of diffusely distrib-
uted lymphoid cells and follicles present along mucosal surfaces. It has a 
similar function to the more organised, encapsulated lymph nodes. They 
include the tonsils, adenoids and Peyer's patches in the small intestine.
Lymphatics
Lymphoid tissue is connected by a network of lymphatics, with three 
major functions: lymphatics provide access to lymph nodes, return inter-
stitial uid to the venous system and transport fat from the small intestine 
to the blood stream (see Fig. 19.12). The lymphatics begin as blind-
ending capillaries, which come together to form lymphatic ducts, enter-
ing and leaving regional lymph nodes as afferent and efferent ducts, 
respectively. They eventually coalesce and drain into the thoracic duct 
and left subclavian vein. Lymphatics may be either deep or supercial, 
and follow the distribution of major blood vessels.
Humoral immunity
Humoral immunity is mediated by B lymphocytes, which differentiate from 
haematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Their major functions are 
to produce antibody and interact with T cells, but they are also involved 
in antigen presentation. Mature B lymphocytes can be found in the bone 
marrow, lymphoid tissue, spleen and, to a lesser extent, the blood stream. 
They express a unique immunoglobulin receptor on their cell surface, 
the B-cell receptor, which binds to soluble antigen targets (Fig. 4.5). 

[[p90]]
66    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
Encounters with antigen usually occur within lymph nodes. If provided with 
appropriate cytokines and other signals from nearby T lymphocytes, anti-
gen-specic B cells respond by rapidly proliferating in a process known as 
clonal expansion (see Fig. 4.5). This is accompanied by a highly complex 
series of genetic rearrangements known as somatic hypermutation, which 
generates B-cell populations that express receptors with greater afnity 
for antigen than the original. These cells differentiate into either long-lived 
memory cells, which reside in the lymph nodes, or plasma cells, which pro-
duce antibody. Memory cells allow production of a more rapid and more 
effective response on subsequent exposure to that pathogen.
Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins (Ig) play a central role in humoral immunity. They are solu-
ble proteins produced by plasma cells and are made up of two heavy and 
two light chains (Fig. 4.6). The heavy chain determines the antibody class 
or isotype, such as IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE or IgD. Subclasses of IgG and IgA 
also occur. The antigen is recognised by the antigen-binding regions (Fab) 
of both heavy and light chains, while the consequences of antibody bind-
ing are determined by the constant region of the heavy chain (Fc) (Box4.3). 
Antibodies have several functions. They facilitate phagocytosis by acting 
as opsonins (see Fig. 4.2) and facilitate cell killing by cytotoxic cells, par-
ticularly NK cells by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Binding of 
antibodies to antigen can trigger activation of the classical complement 
pathway (see Fig. 4.4). In addition, antibodies can directly neutralise the 
biological activity of their antigen target. This is a particularly important 
feature of IgA antibodies, which act predominantly at mucosal surfaces.
The humoral immune response is characterised by immunological 
memory, in which the antibody response to successive exposures to an 
antigen is qualitatively and quantitatively improved from the rst expo-
sure. When a previously unstimulated or ‘naïve’ B lymphocyte is acti-
vated by antigen, the rst antibody to be produced is IgM, which appears 
in the serum after 5–10 days. Depending on additional stimuli provided 
by T lymphocytes, other antibody classes (IgG, IgA and IgE) are pro-
duced 1–2 weeks later. If the memory B cell is subsequently re-exposed 
to the same antigen, the lag time between exposure and production of 
antibody is decreased to 2–3 days, the amount of antibody produced is 
increased, and the response is dominated by IgG antibodies of high afn-
ity. Furthermore, in contrast to the initial antibody response, secondary 
antibody responses do not require additional input from T lymphocytes. 
This allows the rapid generation of highly specic responses on re-expo-
sure to a pathogen and is an important mechanism in vaccine efcacy.
Cellular immunity
Cellular immunity is mediated by T lymphocytes, which play important 
roles in defence against viruses, fungi and intracellular bacteria. They 
also play an important immunoregulatory role, by orchestrating and 
regulating the responses of other components of the immune system. 
T-lymphocyte precursors differentiate from haematopoietic stem cells in 
the bone marrow and are exported to the thymus when they are still 
immature (see Fig. 4.1). Individual T cells express a unique receptor that 
is highly specic for a single antigen. Within the thymus T cells undergo 
a process of stringent selection to ensure that autoreactive cells are 
destroyed. Mature T lymphocytes leave the thymus and expand to pop-
ulate other organs of the immune system. It has been estimated that 
an individual possesses 107–109 T-cell clones, each with a unique T-cell 
receptor, ensuring at least partial coverage for any antigen encountered.
Unlike B cells, T cells cannot recognise intact protein antigens in their 
native form. Instead, the protein must be broken down into component pep-
tides by antigen-presenting cells for presentation to T lymphocytes in asso-
ciation with HLA molecules on the antigen-presenting cell surface (Fig. 4.7). 
This process is known as antigen processing and presentation, and it is the 
complex of peptide and HLA together that is recognised by individual T cells. 
The structure of HLA molecules varies widely between individuals. Since 
each HLA molecule has the capacity to present a subtly different peptide 
repertoire to T lymphocytes, this ensures enormous diversity in recognition 
of antigens by the T-cell population. All nucleated cells have the capacity to 
process and present antigens, but cells with specialised antigen-presenting 
functions include dendritic cells, macrophages and B lymphocytes. These 
cells carry additional co-stimulatory molecules, such as CD80 and CD86, 
providing the necessary ‘second signal’ for full T-cell activation (Fig. 4.8). 
Mechanisms also exist to inhibit activation of T-cells. One of the most impor-
tant is the programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) pathway. The PD1 receptor is 
expressed on lymphocytes and inhibits lymphocyte activation when bound 
by its ligand (PDL-1) which is a molecule expressed on antigen-present-
ing cells, endothelial; cells and come tumour cells (Fig. 4.8). Monoclonal 
antibodies which inhibit this interaction are important treatments for certain 
types of cancer (see tumour immunology later in this chapter).
T lymphocytes can be divided into two subgroups on the basis of 
function and recognition of HLA molecules. These are designated CD4+
and CD8+ T cells, according to the ‘cluster of differentiation’ (CD) antigen 
number of key proteins expressed on their cell surface.
CD8+ T lymphocytes
These cells recognise antigenic peptides in association with HLA class 
I molecules (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C). They kill infected cells directly 
Variable
region (Fab)
Constant
region (Fc)
Light chain
Heavy chain
Fig. 4.6 The structure of an immunoglobulin (antibody) molecule. The variable 
region is responsible for antigen binding, whereas the constant region can interact 
with immunoglobulin receptors expressed on immune cells.
T-helper cell
Immunoglobulin
receptor
Antigen
CD40L
CD40
TCR
HLA
B-cell activation
B cell
Clonal
expansion
Plasma cells
Antibodies
Memory B cells
IL-4
IL-5
Fig. 4.5 B-cell activation. Activation of B cells is initiated through binding of 
an antigen with the immunoglobulin receptor on the cell surface. For activation 
to proceed, an interaction with T-helper cells is also required, providing additional 
signals through binding of CD40 ligand (CD40L) to CD40; an interaction between 
the T-cell receptor (TCR) and processed antigenic peptides presented by human 
leucocyte antigen (HLA) molecules on the B-cell surface; and cytokines released by 
the T-helper cells. Fully activated B cells undergo clonal expansion with differentiation 
towards plasma cells that produce antibody. Following activation, memory cells are 
generated that allow rapid antibody responses when the same antigen is encountered 
on a second occasion. (IL = interleukin)

[[p91]]
The inflammatory response    67
4
through the production of pore-forming molecules such as perforin and 
release of digesting enzymes triggering apoptosis of the target cell, and 
are particularly important in defence against viral infection.
CD4+ T lymphocytes
These cells recognise peptides presented on HLA class II molecules 
(HLA-DR, HLA-DP and HLA-DQ) and have mainly immunoregulatory 
functions. They produce cytokines and provide co-stimulatory signals 
that support the activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes and assist the pro-
duction of mature antibody by B cells. In addition, their close interaction 
with phagocytes determines cytokine production by both cell types. 
CD4+ lymphocytes can be further subdivided into subsets on the basis 
of the cytokines they produce:
 Th1 (T-helper) cells typically produce IL-2, IFN-γ and TNF-α, 
and support the development of delayed-type hypersensitivity 
responses.
 Th2 cells typically produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-13, and promote 
allergic responses.
 T-regulatory cells (T-regs) are a further subset of specialised CD4+
lymphocytes that are important in actively suppressing activation 
of other cells and preventing autoimmune disease. They produce 
cytokines such as TGF-β and IL-10.
 Th17 cells are pro-inammatory cells dened by their production of 
IL-17. They are related to regulatory T cells. Th17 cells have a key 
role in defence against extracellular bacteria and fungi. They also 
have a role in the development of autoimmune disease.
T-cell activation is regulated by a balance between co-stimulatory mol-
ecules, the second signal required for activation, and inhibitory molecules 
that down-regulate T-cell activity. One such inhibitory molecule, CTLA4, 
has been harnessed therapeutically in the form of abatacept, which is a 
fusion protein comprised of the Fc fragment of immunoglobulin linked to 
CTLA4. This is used to inhibit T-cell activation in rheumatoid arthritis and 
solid organ transplantation.
The inammatory response
Inammation is the response of tissues to injury or infection, and is nec-
essary for normal repair and healing. This section focuses on the general 
principles of the inammatory response and its multisystem manifesta-
tions. The role of inammation in specic diseases is discussed in many 
other chapters of this book.
Acute inammation
Acute inammation is the result of rapid and complex interplay between 
the cells and soluble molecules of the innate immune system. The clas-
sical external signs include heat, redness, pain and swelling (Fig. 4.9). 
The inammatory process is initiated by local tissue injury or infection. 
Damaged epithelial cells produce cytokines and antimicrobial peptides, 
causing early inltration of phagocytic cells. Production of leukotrienes, 
4.3 Classes and properties of antibody
Antibody
Concentration in adult 
serum
Complement 
activation*
Opsonisation
Presence in external 
secretions
Other properties
IgG
6.0–16.0 g/L
IgG1 +++
IgG2 +
IgG3 +++
IgG1 ++
IgG3 ++
++
Four subclasses: IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4
Distributed equally between blood and 
extracellular uid, and transported across 
placenta
IgG2 is particularly important in defence 
against polysaccharides antigens
IgA
1.5–4.0 g/L
–
–
++++
Two subclasses: IgA1, IgA2
Highly effective at neutralising toxins
Particularly important at mucosal surfaces
IgM
0.5–2.0 g/L
++++
+
Highly effective at agglutinating pathogens
IgE
0.003–0.04 g/L
–
–
–
Majority of IgE is bound to mast cells, 
basophils and eosinophils
Important in allergic disease and defence 
against parasite infection
IgD
Not detected
–
–
–
Function in B-cell development
*Activation of the classical pathway, also called ‘complement xation’.
(IgG = immunoglobulin)
CD80/86
CD28
T cell
T-cell
proliferation
T-cell effector
function
Pathogen
PAMP
PAMP internalised
by PRR and degraded
in lysosome
PRR
APC
CD4/CD8
TCR
Processed
antigenic peptide
HLA
Antigenic peptide
IL-2
positive
feedback
Co-stimulation
T-cell
activation
Fig. 4.7 Antigen presentation. For T-cell activation, antigen has to be processed 
via antigen-presenting cells (APC). Pathogens, bearing pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) on their surface, are recognised by pattern recognition 
receptors (PRRs) on the APC. Following endocytosis, the pathogen is broken down 
intracellularly. Antigenic peptides are then loaded onto human leucocyte antigens 
(HLA), also known as major histocompatibility complexes (MHC), and presented at 
the APC surface. The combination of peptide and HLA is then recognised by the 
T-cell receptor (TCR). For T-cell activation, a second, co-stimulatory signal is required 
through binding of CD80 or CD86 on the APC to CD28 on the T cell (see also 
Fig.4.8). (CD28 and CD80/86 = co-stimulatory molecules; IL = interleukin)

[[p92]]
68    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
prostaglandins, histamine, kinins, anaphylotoxins and inducible nitric 
oxide synthase also occurs within inamed tissue. These mediators 
cause vasodilatation and increased vascular permeability, causing traf-
cking of uid and cells into the affected tissue. In addition, pro-inam-
matory cytokines, such as IL-1, TNF-α and IL-6 produced at the site 
of injury, are released systemically and act on the hypothalamus to cause 
fever, and on the liver to stimulate production of acute phase proteins.
The acute phase response
The acute phase response refers to the production of a variety of proteins 
by the liver in response to inammatory stimuli. These proteins have a 
wide range of activities. Circulating levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and 
serum amyloid A may be increased 100- to 1000-fold, contributing to 
host defence and stimulating repair and regeneration. Fibrinogen plays an 
essential role in wound healing, and α1-antitrypsin and α1- antichymotrypsin 
control the pro-inammatory cascade by neutralising the enzymes pro-
duced by activated neutrophils, preventing widespread tissue destruction. 
In addition, antioxidants such as haptoglobin and manganese superoxide 
dismutase scavenge for oxygen free radicals, while increased levels of iron- 
binding proteins such as ferritin and lactoferrin decrease the iron available 
for uptake by bacteria. Immunoglobulins are not acute phase proteins but 
are often increased in chronic inammation.
Septic shock
Septic shock is the clinical manifestation of overwhelming inammation. 
It is characterised by excessive production of pro-inammatory cytokines 
by macrophages, causing hypotension, hypovolaemia and tissue 
oedema. In addition, uncontrolled neutrophil activation causes release 
of proteases and oxygen free radicals within blood vessels, damaging 
the vascular endothelium and further increasing capillary permeability. 
Direct activation of the coagulation pathway combines with endothelial 
cell disruption to form clots within the damaged vessels. The clinical con-
sequences include cardiovascular collapse, acute respiratory distress 
syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, multi-organ failure 
and often death. Septic shock most frequently results from infection with 
Gram-negative bacteria, because lipopolysaccharide produced by these 
organisms is particularly effective at activating the inammatory cascade. 
Early recognition and appropriate early intervention can improve patient 
outcome. More details on the diagnosis and management of septic 
shock are provided in Chapter 9.
Resolution of inammation
Resolution of an inammatory response is crucial for normal healing. 
This involves active down-modulation of inammatory stimuli and repair 
CD80/CD86
CD80/CD86
CD4+
Th2 cells
B-cell activation
IL-4, IL-5, IL-10,
IL-13
Th1 cells
Pro-inflammatory
TNF-α, IFN-γ
Th17 cells
Mucosal immunity
Pro-inflammatory
IL-17
Regulatory
T cells
Memory
T cells
Fas ligand
TNF-α, IFN-γ
Direct cell killing
CD8+
Anti-inflammatory
IL-10, TGF-β
PD-L1
Tumour cell
Proliferation
HLA
TCR
T-cell
activation
Antigenic
peptide
PD-1
CTLA4
CD28
CD4/CD8
Antigen-presenting cell
IL-2
Fig. 4.8 T-cell activation. Activation of T cells is initiated when an antigenic peptide bound to a human leucocyte antigen (HLA) molecule on antigen-presenting cells interacts 
with the T-cell receptor expressed by T lymphocytes. Additional signals are required for T-cell activation, however. These include binding of the co-stimulatory molecules 
CD80 and CD86 with CD28 on the T cell, and interleukin 2 (IL-2), which is produced in an autocrine manner by T cells that are undergoing activation. Other molecules are 
present that can inhibit T-cell activation, however, including cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4), which competes with CD28 for binding to CD80 and CD86; 
and PD-1, which, by binding PD-L1, is also inhibitory. Following activation, T cells proliferate and, depending on their subtype, have various functions with distinct patterns of 
cytokine production, as indicated. Memory cells are also generated that can mount a rapid immune response on encountering the same antigen. (IFN-γ = interferon-gamma; 
IL = interleukin; PD-1 = programmed cell death 1; PD-L1 = programmed death ligand 1; TCR = T-cell receptor; TGF-β = transforming growth factor beta; TNF-α = tumour 
necrosis factor alpha)

[[p93]]
The inflammatory response    69
4
of bystander damage to local tissues. Extravasated neutrophils undergo 
apoptosis and are phagocytosed by macrophages, along with the remains 
of microorganisms. Macrophages also synthesise collagenase and 
elastase, which break down local connective tissue and aid in the removal 
of debris. Normal tissue homeostasis is also associated with reversion of 
parenchymal cells to a non-inammatory phenotype. Macrophage-derived 
cytokines, including transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) and plate-
let-derived growth factor, stimulate broblasts and promote the synthesis 
of new collagen, while angiogenic factors stimulate new vessel formation.
Chronic inammation
In most instances, the development of an active immune response 
results in clearance and control of the inammatory stimulus and res-
olution of tissue damage. Failure of this process may result in chronic 
inammation, with signicant associated bystander damage, known as 
hypersensitivity responses. Persistence of microorganisms can result in 
ongoing accumulation of neutrophils, macrophages and activated T lym-
phocytes within the lesion. If this is associated with local deposition of 
brous tissue, a granuloma may form. Granulomas are characteristic of 
tuberculosis and leprosy (Hansen's disease), in which the microorgan-
ism is protected by a robust cell wall that shields it from killing, despite 
phagocytosis.
Laboratory features of inammation
Inammation is associated with changes in many laboratory investi-
gations. Leucocytosis is common, and reects the transit of activated 
neutrophils and monocytes to the site of infection. The platelet count 
may also be increased. The most widely used laboratory measure of 
acute inammation is CRP. Circulating levels of many other acute phase 
reactants, including brinogen, ferritin and complement components, are 
also increased in response to acute inammation, while albumin levels 
are reduced. Chronic inammation is frequently associated with a nor-
mocytic normochromic anaemia.
C-reactive protein
C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute phase reactant synthesised by the liver, 
which opsonises invading pathogens. Circulating concentrations of CRP 
increase within 6 hours of the start of an inammatory stimulus. Serum con-
centrations of CRP provide a direct biomarker of acute inammation and, 
because the serum half-life of CRP is 18 hours, levels fall promptly once 
the inammatory stimulus is removed. Sequential measurements are useful 
in monitoring disease activity (Box 4.4). For reasons that remain unclear, 
some diseases are associated with only minor elevations of CRP despite 
Hypothalamus:
  Change in temperature set point
Fever
  Sweating
  Neuro-endocrine and autonomic stress responses
Flushing
↑Respiratory rate
↑Heart rate, flow murmur
Adrenal release of glucocorticoids
and catecholamines
Release of insulin
from pancreas
Bone marrow:
↑Production and mobilisation
  of neutrophils
Vasodilatation
↑Local vascular
permeability
Neutrophils
+
Macrophages
Inflammatory mediators
and cytokines
Tissue damage
Bacteria
Local infection
Skin rupture
Phagocytosis
Cytokine production
Vasodilatation
↑Local vascular
  permeability
↑Leucocyte influx
Headache
Delirium
Anorexia
Low blood pressure
Liver:
↑Synthesis of acute
phase proteins
Enlarged draining
lymph nodes
Ascending
lymphangitis
Local cellulitis
Pain
Redness
Swelling
Nail
Fig. 4.9 Clinical features of acute inammation. In this example, the response is to a penetrating injury and infection of the foot.

[[p94]]
70    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
unequivocal evidence of active inammation. These include systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), systemic sclerosis, ulcerative colitis and leukaemia. 
An important practical point is that if the CRP is raised in these conditions, 
it suggests intercurrent infection rather than disease activity. Since the CRP 
is a more sensitive early indicator of the acute phase response, it is gener-
ally used in preference to the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). If both 
ESR and CRP are used, any discrepancy should be resolved by assessing 
the individual determinants of the ESR, which are discussed below.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
The ESR is an indirect measure of inammation. It measures how fast 
erythrocytes fall through plasma, which is determined by the composi-
tion of plasma proteins and the morphology of circulating erythrocytes. 
These factors govern the propensity of red cells to aggregate, the major 
determinant of the ESR. Erythrocytes are inherently negatively charged, 
which prevents them from clumping together in the blood stream. Since 
plasma proteins such as brinogen and immunoglobulins are posi-
tively charged, increased concentrations of these proteins neutralise 
an increase in plasma protein concentrations neutralises the negative 
charge of erythrocytes, overcoming their inherent repulsive forces and 
causing them aggregate, resulting in rouleaux formation. Rouleaux have 
a higher mass-to-surface area ratio than single red cells, and therefore 
sediment faster. The most common reason for an increased ESR is an 
acute phase response, which causes an increase in the concentration of 
acute phase proteins, including CRP. However, other conditions that do 
not affect acute phase proteins may alter the composition and concen-
tration of other plasma proteins (see Box 4.4). For example, immuno-
globulins comprise a signicant proportion of plasma proteins but do not 
participate in the acute phase response. Thus any condition that causes 
an increase in serum immunoglobulins will increase the ESR without a 
corresponding increase in CRP. In addition, abnormal red cell morphol-
ogy can make rouleaux formation impossible. For these reasons, an 
inappropriately low ESR occurs in spherocytosis and sickle-cell anaemia.
Plasma viscosity
Plasma viscosity is another surrogate measure of plasma protein concen-
tration. Like the ESR, it is affected by the concentration of large plasma 
proteins, including brinogen and immunoglobulins. It is not affected by 
properties of erythrocytes and is generally considered to be more reliable 
than the ESR as a marker of inammation.
Presenting problems in immune disorders
Recurrent infections
Infections can occur in otherwise healthy individuals but recurrent infec-
tion raises suspicion of an immune deciency. Depending on the compo-
nent of the immune system affected, the infections may involve bacteria, 
viruses, fungi or protozoa, as summarised in Box 4.5. T-cell deciencies 
can involve pathogens from all groups.
Aetiology
Infections secondary to immune deciency occur because of defects in 
the number or function of phagocytes, B cells, T cells or complement, as 
described later in this chapter.
Clinical assessment
Clinical features that may indicate immune deciency are listed in Box 
4.6. Frequent or severe infections, or ones caused by unusual organisms 
or at unusual sites, are typical of immune deciency.
Investigations
Initial investigations should include full blood count and white cell differ-
ential, CRP, renal and liver function tests, urine dipstick, serum immu-
noglobulins with protein electrophoresis, and HIV testing. Additional 
microbiological tests, virology and imaging are required to identify the 
causal organism and localise the site of infection, as outlined in Box 4.7. 
If primary immune deciency is suspected on the basis of initial investi-
gations, more specialised tests should be considered, as summarised 
in Box 4.8
Management
If an immune deciency is suspected but has not yet been formally char-
acterised, patients should not receive live vaccines because of the risk of 
vaccine-induced disease. Further management depends on the underly-
ing cause and details are provided later.
4.4 Conditions commonly associated with abnormal C-reactive protein (CRP) and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Condition
Consequence
Effect on CRP 1
Effect on ESR2
Acute bacterial, fungal or viral 
infection
Stimulates acute phase response
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L; in 
severe infections may be > 300 mg/L)
Increased
Necrotising bacterial infection
Stimulates profound acute 
inammatory response
Greatly increased (may be  
> 300 mg/L)
Increased
Chronic bacterial or fungal infection
Localised abscess, bacterial 
endocarditis or tuberculosis
Stimulates acute and chronic 
inammatory response with polyclonal 
increase in immunoglobulins, as well 
as increased acute phase proteins
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L)
Increased disproportionately to CRP
Acute inammatory diseases
Crohn's disease, polymyalgia 
rheumatica, inammatory arthritis
Stimulates acute phase response
Increased (range 50–150 mg/L)
Increased
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 
Sjögren syndrome, ulcerative colitis
Chronic inammatory response
Normal
Increased
Multiple myeloma
Monoclonal increase in serum 
immunoglobulin without acute 
inammation
Normal
Increased
Pregnancy, old age, end-stage renal 
disease
Increased brinogen
Normal
Moderately increased
1Reference range <5 mg/L. 2Reference range: adult males <10 mm/hr, adult females <3–15 mm/hr.

[[p95]]
Presenting problems in immune disorders    71
4
Intermittent fever
Intermittent fever has a wide differential diagnosis, including recurrent 
infection, malignancy and certain rheumatic disorders, such as Still's dis-
ease, vasculitis and SLE but a familial fever syndrome is a potential cause.
Aetiology
Familial fever syndromes are genetic disorders caused by mutations 
in genes responsible for regulating the inammatory response. The 
symptoms are caused by activation of intracellular signalling pathways 
involved in the regulation of inammation, with over-production of pro-in-
ammatory cytokines such as IL-1.
Clinical assessment
A full clinical history and physical examination should be performed, pay-
ing attention to the patient's ethnic background and any family history 
of a similar disorder. If this assessment shows no evidence of underly-
ing infection, malignancy or a rheumatic disorder and there is a positive 
4.6 Warning signs of primary immune deciency*
In children
In adults
≥ 4 new ear infections within 1 year
≥ 2 new ear infections within 1 year
≥ 2 serious sinus infections within 
1 year
≥ 2 new sinus infections within 1 
year, in the absence of allergy
≥ 2 months on antibiotics with little 
effect
Recurrent viral infections
≥ 2 pneumonias within 1 year
≥ 1 pneumonia per year for more 
than 1 year
Failure of an infant to gain weight or 
grow normally
Chronic diarrhoea with weight loss
Recurrent deep skin or organ 
abscesses
Recurrent deep skin or organ 
abscesses
Persistent thrush in mouth or 
elsewhere on skin after infancy
Persistent thrush or fungal infection 
on skin or elsewhere
Need for intravenous antibiotics to 
clear infections
Recurrent need for intravenous 
antibiotics to clear infections
≥ 2 deep-seated infections such as 
sepsis, meningitis or cellulitis
Infection with atypical mycobacteria
A family history of primary immune 
deciency
A family history of primary immune 
deciency
*The presence of two or more of the listed features may indicate the presence of an underlying 
primary immunodeciency.
©Jeffrey Modell Foundation
4.5 Immune deciencies and common patterns of infection
Phagocyte deciency
Complement deciency
Antibody deciency
T-lymphocyte deciency
Bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Burkholderia cenocepacia
Nocardia
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria
Neisseria meningitidis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Haemophilus inuenzae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus inuenzae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria
Fungi
Candida spp.
Aspergillus spp.
–
–
Candida spp.
Aspergillus spp.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Viruses
–
–
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Enteroviruses
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
Herpes zoster virus
Human papillomavirus
Human herpesvirus 8
Protozoa
Giardia lamblia
Toxoplasma gondii
Cryptosporidia
4.7 Initial investigations in suspected immune deciency
Test
Value
Comment
Full blood count
Full white cell 
differential
May dene pathway for 
further investigation
Acute phase 
reactants
Help determine 
presence of active 
infection
Serum 
immunoglobulins
Detection of antibody 
deciency
Serum protein 
electrophoresis
Detection of 
paraprotein
May be the cause 
of immune paresis; 
paraprotein should 
be excluded prior to 
diagnosis of primary 
antibody deciency
Serum free light 
chains/Bence Jones 
proteins
Detection of 
paraprotein
Human 
immunodeciency 
virus (HIV) test
To exclude HIV as 
cause of secondary 
immune deciency
Imaging according 
to history and 
examination 
ndings
Detection of active 
infection/end-organ 
damage
To support treatment 
decisions

[[p96]]
72    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
family history and early age at onset, then the likelihood of a familial 
fever syndrome is increased.
Investigations
Blood should be taken for a full blood count, measurement of ESR and 
CRP, and assessment of renal and liver function. Serum ferritin should 
be checked, as very high levels support the diagnosis of Still's disease. 
Blood and urine cultures should also be performed, along with an auto-
immune screen that includes measurement of antinuclear antibodies 
and consideration of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies to check for 
evidence of SLE or vasculitis, respectively. Imaging may be required to 
exclude occult infection. If these investigations provide no evidence of 
infection or another cause, then genetic analysis should be considered 
to conrm the diagnosis of a familial fever syndrome. Negative genetic 
testing does not, however, entirely exclude a periodic fever syndrome.
Management
Symptomatic management with non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) should be initiated, pending the results of investigations. If the 
response to NSAIDs is inadequate, glucocorticoids can be tried, pro-
vided that infection has been excluded. If a familial fever syndrome is 
conrmed, then denitive therapy should be initiated, depending on the 
underlying diagnosis, as discussed later in this chapter (p. 76).
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a potentially life-threatening, systemic allergic reaction 
characterised by circulatory collapse, bronchospasm, laryngeal stridor, 
often associated with angioedema, and urticaria. The risk of death is 
increased in patients with pre-existing asthma, particularly if this is poorly 
controlled, and in situations where treatment with adrenaline (epineph-
rine) is delayed. Further details are provided in the ‘Presenting problems 
in acute medicine’ section in Chapter 9
Immune deciency
The consequences of immune deciency include recurrent infection, 
autoimmunity as a result of immune dysregulation, and increased sus-
ceptibility to malignancy, especially malignancy driven by viral infec-
tions such as Epstein–Barr virus. Immune deciency may arise through 
intrinsic defects in immune function but is much more commonly due 
to secondary causes, including infection, drug therapy, malignancy 
and ageing. This section gives an overview of primary immune de-
ciencies. More than a hundred such deciencies have been described, 
most of which are genetically determined and present in childhood 
or adolescence. The presentation of immune deciency depends on 
the component of the immune system that is defective (see Box 4.5). 
There is considerable overlap and redundancy in the immune network, 
however, and some diseases do not fall easily into this classication.
Primary phagocyte deciencies
Primary phagocyte deciencies typically present with recurrent bacterial 
and fungal infections, which may involve unusual sites. Affected patients 
require aggressive management of infections, including intravenous anti-
biotics and surgical drainage of abscesses, and long-term prophylaxis 
with antibacterial and antifungal agents. The most important examples 
are illustrated in Figure 4.10 and discussed below.
Chronic granulomatous disease
This is caused by mutations in genes that encode NADPH oxidase 
enzymes, which results in failure of oxidative killing. The defect leads 
to susceptibility to catalase-positive organisms such as Staphylococcus 
aureus, Burkholderia cenocepacia and Aspergillus. Intracellular killing of 
mycobacteria in macrophages is also impaired. Infections most com-
monly involve the lungs, lymph nodes, soft tissues, bone, skin and uri-
nary tract, and are characterised histologically by granuloma formation. 
Most cases are X-linked
Leucocyte adhesion deciencies
These very rare disorders of phagocyte migration occur because of fail-
ure to express adhesion molecules on the surface of leucocytes, result-
ing in their inability to exit the blood stream. The most common cause is 
loss-of-function mutations affecting the ITGB2 gene, which encodes the 
integrin β-2 chain, a component of the adhesion molecule LFA1. They 
are characterised by recurrent bacterial infections but sites of infection 
lack evidence of neutrophil inltration, such as pus formation. Peripheral 
blood neutrophil counts may be very high during acute infection because 
of the failure of mobilised neutrophils to exit blood vessels. Specialised 
tests show reduced or absent expression of adhesion molecules on 
neutrophils.
4.8 Specialist investigations in suspected immune deciency
Test
Value
Comment
Complement (C3/C4/CH50/AP50)
Investigation of recurrent pyogenic bacterial 
infection
Inherited complement deciency likely to give low/
absent results on functional assays
Test vaccination
Determination of functional humoral immune 
response
Helpful in patients with borderline low or normal 
immunoglobulins but conrmed recurrent infection
Neutrophil function
Investigation of recurrent invasive bacterial and 
fungal infection, especially with catalase-positive 
organisms
Respiratory burst low/absent in chronic 
granulomatous disease
Investigation of leucocyte adhesion deciency
Leucocytosis with absent CD11a, b, c expression
Lymphocyte immunophenotyping (by ow 
cytometry)
Determination of specic lymphocyte subsets, T cell, 
B cell, NK cell
May dene specic primary immune deciency, e.g. 
absent B cells in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia
Lymphocyte proliferation
Determination of lymphocyte proliferation in 
response to mitogenic stimulation
Poor responses seen in certain T-cell immune 
deciencies
Cytokine production
To determine T-cell immune function in response to 
antigen stimulation; limited availability, not routine
Can be helpful, for example, in investigation of 
atypical mycobacterial infection
Genetic testing
Under specialist supervision when specic primary 
immune deciency suspected
May conrm genetic cause, with implications for 
family members and future antenatal testing
(NK = natural killer)

[[p97]]
Immune deficiency    73
4
Defects in cytokines and cytokine receptors
Mutations of the genes encoding cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-12, IL-23 or 
their receptors result in failure of intracellular killing by macrophages, and 
affected individuals are particularly susceptible to mycobacterial infections.
Complement pathway deciencies
Loss-of-function mutations have been identied in almost all the com-
plement pathway proteins (see Fig. 4.4). While most complement de-
ciencies are rare, mannose-binding lectin deciency is common and 
affects about 5% of the northern European population, many of whom 
are asymptomatic (see below).
Clinical features
Patients with deciency in complement proteins can present in differ-
ent ways. In some cases, the presenting feature is recurrent infection 
with encapsulated bacteria, particularly Neisseria spp., reecting the 
importance of the membrane attack complex in defence against these 
organisms. However, genetic deciencies of the classical complement 
pathway (C1, C2 and C4) also present with an increased risk of auto-
immune disease, particularly SLE. Individuals with mannose-binding 
lectin deciency have an increased incidence of bacterial infections if 
subjected to an additional cause of immune compromise, such as pre-
mature birth or chemotherapy. The signicance of this condition has 
been debated, however, since population studies have shown no overall 
increase in infectious disease or mortality in patients with this disorder. 
Deciency of the regulatory protein Cl inhibitor is not associated with 
recurrent infection but causes recurrent angioedema.
Investigations
Screening for complement deciencies usually involves specialised func-
tional tests of complement-mediated haemolysis. These are known as 
the CH50 (classical haemolytic pathway 50) and AP50 (alternative path-
way 50) tests. If abnormal, haemolytic tests are followed by measure-
ment of individual complement components.
Management
Patients with complement deciencies should be vaccinated with 
meningococcal, pneumococcal and H. inuenzae B vaccines to boost 
their adaptive immune responses. Lifelong prophylactic penicillin to 
prevent meningococcal infection is recommended, as is early access 
to acute medical assessment in the event of infection. Patients should 
also carry a MedicAlert or similar. At-risk family members should be 
screened for complement deciencies with functional complement 
assays. The management of C1 esterase deciency is discussed 
elsewhere.
Primary antibody deciencies
Primary antibody deciencies occur as the result of abnormalities in 
B-cell function, as summarised in Figure 4.11. They are characterised 
by recurrent bacterial infections, particularly of the respiratory and gas-
trointestinal tract. The most common causative organisms are encap-
sulated bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and H. inuenzae. 
These disorders usually present in infancy, when the protective benet 
of placental transfer of maternal immunoglobulin has waned. The most 
important causes are discussed in more detail below.
Neutrophils traverse endothelium
through binding of LFA1 to ICAM1
Normal
Primary phagocyte deficiency
Leucocyte adhesion deficiency
Neutrophils cannot traverse
endothelium due to defects in
ITGB2, a component of LFA1
Chronic granulomatous
disease
Cytokines activate
macrophages
Destruction of microorganisms through
NADPH oxidase-mediated killing
Cytokine defects
LFA1
IL-23
IL-12
IFN-γ
Phagocytes cannot be
activated due to defects in
cytokines or their receptors
Microorganisms cannot be
destroyed in lysosomes due
to NADPH oxidase deficiency
IL-23
IL-12
IFN-γ
IL-23
IL-12
IFN-γ
ICAM1
Fig. 4.10 Normal phagocyte function and mechanisms of primary phagocyte deciency. Under normal circumstances, neutrophils traverse the endothelium to enter 
tissues by the cell surface molecule lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1), which binds to intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) on endothelium. In order for 
macrophages to engulf and kill microorganisms, they need to be activated by cytokines and also require nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase to 
generate free radicals. Primary phagocyte deciencies can occur as the result of leucocytes being unable to traverse endothelium due to defects in LFA1, because of mutations 
in cytokines or their receptors, or because of defects in NADPH oxidase. (IFN-γ = interferon-gamma; IL = interleukin)

[[p98]]
74    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia
This rare X-linked disorder is caused by mutations in the BTK gene, which 
encodes Bruton tyrosine kinase, a signalling protein that is required for 
B-cell development. Affected males present with severe bacterial infec-
tions during infancy. There is a marked reduction in B-cell numbers and 
immunoglobulin levels are low or undetectable. Management is with 
immunoglobulin replacement therapy and anti biotics to treat infections.
Selective IgA deciency
This is the most common primary antibody deciency, affecting 1:600 
northern Europeans. Although IgA deciency is usually asymptomatic 
with no clinical sequelae, about 30% of individuals experience recurrent 
mild respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. The diagnosis can be 
conrmed by measurement of IgA levels, which are low or undetectable 
(< 0.05 g/L). In some patients, there is a compensatory increase in serum 
IgG levels. Specic treatment is generally not required.
Common variable immune deciency
Common variable immune deciency (CVID) is characterised by low 
serum IgG levels and failure to make antibody responses to exoge-
nous pathogens. It is a heterogeneous adult-onset primary immune 
deciency, the underlying cause is unknown in most cases, although 
genetic mutations have been identied in a minority of patients. The 
presentation is with recurrent infections, and bronchiectasis is a recog-
nised complication. Paradoxically, antibody-mediated autoimmune dis-
eases, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia, are common in CVID. It is also associated with an 
increased risk of malignancy, particularly lymphoproliferative disease.
Specic antibody deciency
This is a poorly characterised condition resulting in defective anti-
body responses to polysaccharide antigens. Some patients are also 
decient in the antibody subclasses IgG2 and IgG4, and this con-
dition was previously called IgG subclass deciency. There is over-
lap between specic antibody deciency, IgA deciency and CVID, 
and some patients may progress to a more global antibody deciency 
over time.
Investigations
Serum immunoglobulins (Box 4.9) should be measured in conjunction 
with protein and urine electrophoresis to exclude secondary causes of 
hypogammaglobulinaemia, and B- and T-lymphocyte subsets should 
be measured. Specic antibody responses to known pathogens should 
be assessed by measuring IgG antibodies against tetanus, H. inuen-
zae and Strep. pneumoniae (most patients will have been exposed to 
these antigens through infection or immunisation). If specic antibody 
levels are low, immunisation with the appropriate killed vaccine should 
Failure of lymphocyte precursors:
Severe combined immune deficiency
Stem cells
Lymphoid
progenitors
Bone marrow
Failure of production of IgG antibodies:
Common variable immune deficiency
Specific antibody deficiency
IgM-producing
B cells
Failure of B-cell maturation:
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia
Immature
B cells
IgG
IgE
IgA
Plasma cells
Failure of IgA production:
Selective IgA deficiency
Fig. 4.11 B lymphocytes and primary antibody deciencies (green boxes). (Ig = immunoglobulin)
4.9 Investigation of primary antibody deciencies
Selective IgA 
deciency
Normal
Often elevated
Absent
Normal
Normal
Normal
Not applicable*
Common 
variable 
immune 
deciency
Normal or low
Low
Low or absent
Low or absent
Variable
Variable
No antibody 
response
Specic 
antibody 
deciency
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
No antibody 
response to 
polysaccharide 
antigens
*Test immunisation is not usually performed in IgA deciency but some patients may have impaired responses.

[[p99]]
Immune deficiency    75
4
be followed by repeat antibody measurement 6–8 weeks later; failure 
to mount a response indicates a signicant defect in antibody produc-
tion. These functional tests have generally superseded IgG subclass 
quantitation.
Management
The mainstay of treatment in most patients with antibody deciency is 
immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Human normal immunoglobulin 
(Box 4.10) is derived from plasma from hundreds of donors and contains 
IgG antibodies to a wide variety of common organisms. Replacement 
immunoglobulin may be administered either intravenously or subcutane-
ously, with the aim of maintaining trough IgG levels (the IgG level just prior 
to an infusion) within the normal range. This has been shown to mini-
mise progression of end-organ damage and improve clinical outcome. 
Patients with antibody deciencies also require aggressive treatment of 
infections when they occur; prophylactic antibiotics may be indicated. 
Treatment may be self-administered and is life-long. Benets of immu-
nisation are limited because of the defect in IgG antibody production, 
but patients may derive some T cell benet from vaccination. As with all 
primary immune deciencies, live vaccines should be avoided.
Primary T-lymphocyte deciencies
These are a group of diseases characterised by recurrent viral, proto-
zoal and fungal infections (see Box 4.5). Many T-cell deciencies are also 
associated with defective antibody production because of the impor-
tance of T cells in providing help for B cells. These disorders generally 
present in childhood. Several causes of T-cell deciency are recognised. 
These are summarised in Figure 4.12 and discussed in more detail below.
DiGeorge syndrome
This results from failure of development of the third and fourth phary-
ngeal pouches, and is usually caused by a deletion of chromosome 
22q11. The immune deciency is accounted for by failure of thymic 
development; however, the immune deciency can be very heterogene-
ous. Affected patients can have very low numbers of circulating T cells 
despite normal development in the bone marrow. It is associated with 
multiple developmental anomalies, including congenital heart disease, 
hypoparathyroidism, tracheo-oesophageal stulae, cleft lip and palate.
Bare lymphocyte syndromes
These very rare disorders are caused by mutations in a variety of genes 
that regulate expression of HLA molecules or their transport to the cell 
surface. If HLA class I molecules are affected, CD8+ lymphocytes fail 
to develop normally, while absent expression of HLA class II molecules 
affects CD4+ lymphocyte maturation. In addition to recurrent infections, 
failure to express HLA class I is associated with systemic vasculitis 
caused by uncontrolled activation of NK cells.
Severe combined immune deciency
Severe combined immune deciency (SCID) results from mutations in 
a number of genes that regulate lymphocyte development, with fail-
ure of T-cell maturation, with or without accompanying B- and NK-cell 
maturation. The most common cause is X-linked SCID, resulting from 
loss-of-function mutations in the interleukin-2 receptor gamma (IL2RG) 
gene. The gene product is a component of several interleukin receptors, 
including those for IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15, which are absolutely required 
for T-cell and NK development. This results in T-cell-negative, NK-cell-
negative, B-cell-positive SCID. Another cause is deciency of the 
enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA), which causes lymphocyte death 
due to accumulation of toxic purine metabolites intracellularly, resulting in 
T-cell-negative, B-cell-negative and NK-cell-negative SCID.
The absence of an effective adaptive immune response causes recur-
rent bacterial, fungal and viral infections soon after birth. Stem cell trans-
plantation (SCT) is the treatment option of rst choice. Gene therapy has 
been approved for treatment of ADA deciency when there is no suitable 
donor for SCT, has been used successfully in X-linked SCID and is under 
investigation for a number of other causes of SCID.
Investigations
The principal tests for T-lymphocyte deciencies are a total lymphocyte 
count and quantitation of individual lymphocyte subpopulations. Serum 
immunoglobulins should also be measured. Second-line, functional tests 
of T-cell activation and proliferation may be indicated. Patients in whom 
T-lymphocyte deciencies are suspected should be tested for HIV infec-
tion. Genetic testing to identify the underlying cause is usually under-
taken following specialist referral.
Management
Patients with T-cell deciencies should be considered for anti- Pneumocystis
and antifungal prophylaxis, and require aggressive management of infec-
tions when they occur. Immunoglobulin replacement is indicated for asso-
ciated defective antibody production. Stem cell transplantation or gene 
therapy may be appropriate in some disorders. Where a family history is 
known and antenatal testing conrms a specic defect, stem cell therapy 
prior to recurrent invasive infection can improve outcome.
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
This rare disorder is caused by failure of normal lymphocyte apoptosis, 
most commonly due to mutations in the FAS gene, which encodes Fas, 
a signalling protein that regulates programmed cell death in lymphocytes. 
This results in massive accumulation of autoreactive T cells, which cause 
autoimmune-mediated anaemia, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia. 
Other features include lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and a variety 
of other autoimmune diseases. Susceptibility to infection is increased 
because of the neutropenia.
Secondary immune deciencies
Secondary immune deciencies are much more common than primary 
immune deciencies and occur when the immune system is compromised 
by external factors (Box 4.11). Common causes include infections, such 
as HIV and measles, and cytotoxic and immunosuppressive drugs, par-
ticularly those used in the management of transplantation, autoimmunity 
and cancer. Physiological immune deciency occurs at the extremes of 
4.10 Types of immunoglobulin preparations for therapeutic use
Normal human Immunoglobulin
Derived from multiple plasma donors and provides passive immunity to 
those unable to produce immunoglobulin, be that as a result of primary or 
secondary antibody deciency. Immunoglobulin replacement therapy provides 
short-term protection, lasting for the duration of the passively transferred 
antibodies, IgG having a half-life of approximately 21 days. Treatment is 
therefore required on an ongoing basis
Hyperimmune globulin
Concentrated antibody products, initially derived from animal sources 
(diphtheria and tetanus anti-toxins), but more recently of human origin, 
developed for the prevention of a number of infectious diseases, including 
rabies as post-exposure treatment, hepatitis B and varicella zoster virus as 
post-exposure prophylaxis and cytomegalovirus as prophylaxis in patients on 
immune suppressive therapy, particularly transplant recipients
Convalescent plasma
Convalescent plasma derived from individual donors with high antibody 
levels against certain pathogens following recovery from natural infection, 
recently under investigation for the treatment of epidemic/pandemic 
infection, such as Ebola virus infection and more recently COVID-19, where 
clinical trials of ABO-compatible convalescent plasma for severe COVID-19 
pneumonia have to date proved disappointing, possibly as a result of such 
intervention being given too late in the course of infection.

[[p100]]
76    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
life; the decline of the immune response in the elderly is known as immune 
senescence (Box 4.12). Management of secondary immune deciency is 
described in the relevant chapters on infectious diseases (Ch. 13), HIV (Ch. 
14), haematological disorders (Ch. 25) and oncology (Ch. 7).
Periodic fever syndromes
These rare disorders are characterised by recurrent episodes of fever and 
organ inammation, associated with an elevated acute phase response.
Familial Mediterranean fever
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common of the familial 
periodic fevers, predominantly affecting Mediterranean people, including 
Arabs, Turks, Sephardic Jews and Armenians. It results from mutations of 
the MEFV gene, which encodes a protein called pyrin that regulates neutro-
phil-mediated inammation by indirectly suppressing the production of IL-1. 
FMF is characterised by recurrent painful attacks of fever associated with 
peritonitis, pleuritis and arthritis, which last for a few hours to 4 days and are 
associated with markedly increased CRP levels. Symptoms resolve com-
pletely between episodes. Most individuals have their rst attack before the 
age of 20. The major complication of FMF is AA amyloidosis (see below). 
Colchicine signicantly reduces the number of febrile episodes in 90% of 
patients but is ineffective during acute attacks. Anti-cytokine therapy block-
ing IL-1, for example anakinra or the monoclonal antibody canakinumab, 
can be effective for patients with colchicine refractory symptoms.
Mevalonate kinase deciency
Mevalonate kinase deciency, previously known as hyper-IgD syndrome, 
is an autosomal recessive disorder that causes recurrent attacks of fever, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, skin lesions and 
aphthous ulceration. Most patients are from Western Europe, particularly 
the Netherlands and northern France. It is caused by loss-of-function 
mutations in the gene encoding mevalonate kinase, which is involved 
in the metabolism of cholesterol. It remains unclear why this causes an 
inammatory periodic fever. Serum IgD and IgA levels may be persistently 
elevated, and CRP levels are increased during acute attacks. Standard 
anti-inammatory drugs, including colchicine and glucocorticoids, are 
ineffective in suppressing the attacks but IL-1 inhibitors, such as ana-
kinra, and TNF inhibitors, such as etanercept, may improve symptoms 
and can induce complete remission in some patients.
TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome
TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) also known as 
Hibernian fever, is an autosomal dominant syndrome caused by muta-
tions in the TNFRSF1A gene. The presentation is with recurrent attacks of 
Failure of lymphocyte
precursors:
Severe combined
immune deficiency
Stem
cells
Lymphoid progenitors
Bone
marrow
Failure of expression
of HLA molecules:
Bare lymphocyte
syndromes
Failure of thymic
development:
DiGeorge syndrome
Proliferation and
maturation of thymocytes
Export of mature
T lymphocytes
to periphery
T-lymphocyte activation
and effector function
Apoptotic cell death
Failure of apoptosis:
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndromes
Thymus
Failure of cytokine production:
Cytokine deficiencies
Fig. 4.12 T-lymphocyte function and dysfunction (green boxes). (HLA = human leucocyte antigen)
4.11 Causes of secondary immune deciency
Physiological
 Ageing
 Prematurity
 Pregnancy
Infection
 HIV infection
 Measles
 Mycobacterial infection
Iatrogenic
 Immunosuppressive therapy
 Antineoplastic agents
 Glucocorticoids
 Stem cell transplantation
 Radiation injury
 Antiepileptic agents
Malignancy
  B-cell malignancies including 
leukaemia, lymphoma and 
myeloma
 Solid tumours
 Thymoma
Biochemical and nutritional disorders
 Malnutrition
 Renal insufciency/dialysis
 Diabetes mellitus
  Specic mineral deciencies (iron, 
zinc)
Other conditions
 Burns
 Asplenia/hyposplenism

[[p101]]
Amyloidosis    77
4
fever, arthralgia, myalgia, serositis and rashes. Attacks may be prolonged 
for 1 week or more. During a typical attack, laboratory ndings include 
neutrophilia, increased CRP and elevated IgA levels. The diagnosis can 
be conrmed by low serum levels of the soluble type 1 TNF receptor and 
by mutation screening of the TNFRSF1A gene. As in FMF, the major com-
plication is amyloidosis, and regular screening for proteinuria is advised. 
Acute episodes respond to systemic glucocorticoids. Therapy with IL-1 
inhibitors, such as anakinra, can be effective in preventing attacks.
Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS)
This disorder includes three phenotypes: familial cold auto-inammatory 
syndrome, Muckle–Wells syndrome and neonatal-onset multisystem 
inammatory disease. CAPS results from gain of function mutation of 
the NLRP3 gene coding cryopyrin, which forms part of the inammas-
ome. Defects lead to overproduction of IL-1, resulting in the inammatory 
manifestations. Treatments are now targeted at the IL-1 pathway.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is the name given to a group of acquired and hereditary dis-
orders characterised by the extracellular deposition of insoluble proteins.
Pathophysiology
Amyloidosis is caused by deposits consisting of brils of the specic pro-
tein involved, linked to glycosaminoglycans, proteoglycans and serum 
amyloid P. Protein accumulation may be localised or systemic, and the 
clinical manifestations depend on the organ(s) affected. Amyloid diseases 
are classied by the aetiology and type of protein deposited (Box 4.13).
Clinical features
The clinical presentation may be with nephrotic syndrome, cardiomyopa-
thy or peripheral neuropathy. Amyloidosis should always be considered 
as a potential diagnosis in patients with these disorders when the cause 
is unclear.
Investigations
The diagnosis is established by biopsy, which may be of an affected 
organ, rectum or subcutaneous fat. The pathognomonic histological fea-
ture is apple-green birefringence of amyloid deposits when stained with 
Congo red dye and viewed under polarised light. Immunohistochemical 
staining can identify the type of amyloid bril present. Quantitative scin-
tigraphy with radiolabelled serum amyloid P is a valuable tool in deter-
mining the overall load and distribution of amyloid deposits.
Management
The aims of treatment are to support the function of affected organs and, 
in acquired amyloidosis, to prevent further amyloid deposition through 
treatment of the primary cause. When the latter is possible, regression of 
existing amyloid deposits may occur.
4.12 Immune senescence
 T-cell responses: decline, with reduced delayed-type hypersensitivity responses.
 Antibody production: decreased for many exogenous antigens. Although 
autoantibodies are frequently detected, autoimmune disease is less common.
 Response to vaccination: reduced; 30% of healthy older people may not  
develop protective immunity after inuenza vaccination.
 Allergic disorders and transplant rejection: less common.
 Susceptibility to infection: increased; community-acquired pneumonia by 
threefold and urinary tract infection by 20-fold. Latent infections, including 
tuberculosis and herpes zoster, may be reactivated.
 Manifestations of inammation: may be absent, with lack of pyrexia or 
leucocytosis.
 Secondary immune deciency: common.
4.13 Causes of amyloidosis
Disorder
Pathological 
basis
Predisposing 
conditions
Other features
Acquired systemic amyloidosis
Reactive (AA) 
amyloidosis
Increased 
production of 
serum amyloid 
A as part of 
prolonged or 
recurrent acute 
inammatory 
response
Chronic infection 
(tuberculosis, 
bronchiectasis, 
chronic abscess, 
osteomyelitis)
Chronic 
inammatory 
diseases 
(untreated 
rheumatoid 
arthritis, familial 
Mediterranean 
fever)
90% of patients 
present with 
non-selective 
proteinuria 
or nephrotic 
syndrome
Light chain 
amyloidosis (AL)
Increased 
production of 
monoclonal light 
chain
Monoclonal 
gammopathies, 
including 
myeloma, 
benign 
gammopathies 
and 
plasmacytoma
Restrictive 
cardiomyopathy, 
peripheral and 
autonomic 
neuropathy, 
carpal tunnel 
syndrome, 
proteinuria, 
spontaneous 
purpura, amyloid 
nodules and 
plaques
Macroglossia 
occurs 
rarely but is 
pathognomonic
Prognosis is 
poor
Dialysis-
associated 
(Aβ2M) 
amyloidosis
Accumulation 
of circulating 
β2-microglobulin 
due to failure of 
renal catabolism 
in kidney failure
Renal dialysis
Carpal tunnel 
syndrome, 
chronic 
arthropathy and 
pathological 
fractures 
secondary to 
amyloid bone 
cyst formation
Manifestations 
occur 5–10 
years after the 
start of dialysis
Senile systemic 
amyloidosis
Normal 
transthyretin 
protein 
deposited in 
tissues
Age > 70 years
Feature of 
normal ageing 
(affects > 90% 
of 90-year-olds)
Usually 
asymptomatic
Hereditary systemic amyloidosis
> 20 forms 
of hereditary 
systemic 
amyloidosis
Production of 
protein with 
an abnormal 
structure that 
predisposes to 
amyloid bril 
formation. Most 
commonly due 
to mutations in 
transthyretin
gene
Autosomal 
dominant 
inheritance
Peripheral and 
autonomic 
neuropathy, 
cardiomyopathy
Renal 
involvement 
unusual
10% of gene 
carriers are 
asymptomatic 
throughout life

[[p102]]
78    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
Autoimmune disease
Autoimmunity can be dened as the presence of immune responses 
against self-tissue. This may be a harmless phenomenon, identied 
only by the presence of low-titre autoantibodies or autoreactive T cells. 
However, if these responses cause signicant organ damage, autoim-
mune diseases occur. These are a major cause of chronic morbidity and 
disability, affecting up to 1 in 30 adults at some point during life.
Pathophysiology
Autoimmune diseases result from the failure of immune tolerance, the pro-
cess by which the immune system recognises and accepts self-tissue. 
Central immune tolerance occurs during lymphocyte development, when 
T and B lymphocytes that recognise self-antigens are eliminated before 
they develop into fully immunocompetent cells. This process is most active 
in fetal life but continues throughout life as immature lymphocytes are gen-
erated. Some autoreactive cells inevitably evade deletion and escape into 
the circulation, however, and are controlled through peripheral tolerance 
mechanisms. Peripheral immune tolerance mechanisms include the sup-
pression of autoreactive cells by regulatory T cells; the generation of func-
tional hyporesponsiveness (anergy) in lymphocytes that encounter antigen 
in the absence of the co-stimulatory signals that accompany inammation; 
and cell death by apoptosis. Autoimmune diseases develop when self-re-
active lymphocytes escape from these tolerance mechanisms.
Multiple genetic and environmental factors contribute to the devel-
opment of autoimmune disease. Autoimmune diseases are much more 
common in women than in men, for reasons that remain unclear. Many 
are associated with genetic variations in the HLA loci, reecting the impor-
tance of HLA genes in shaping lymphocyte responses. Other important 
susceptibility genes include those determining cytokine activity, co-stimu-
lation (the expression of second signals required for full T-cell activation; see 
Figs. 4.7 and 4.8) and cell death. Many of the same gene variants under-
lie multiple autoimmune disorders, reecting their common pathogenesis 
(Box 4.14). Even though some of these associations are the strongest that 
have been identied in complex genetic diseases, they have very limited 
predictive value and are generally not useful in determining management of 
individual patients. Several environmental factors may be associated with 
autoimmunity in genetically predisposed individuals, including infection, 
cigarette smoking and hormone levels. The most widely studied of these is 
infection, as occurs in acute rheumatic fever following streptococcal infec-
tion or reactive arthritis following bacterial infection. Several mechanisms 
have been invoked to explain the autoimmunity that occurs after an infec-
tious trigger. These include cross-reactivity between proteins expressed 
by the pathogen and the host (molecular mimicry), such as Guillain–Barré 
syndrome and Campylobacter infection; release of sequestered antigens 
from tissues that are damaged during infections that are not usually visi-
ble to the immune system; and production of inammatory cytokines that 
overwhelm the normal control mechanisms that prevent bystander dam-
age. Occasionally, autoimmune disease may be an adverse effect of drug 
treatment. For example, metabolic products of the anaesthetic agent hal-
othane can bind to liver enzymes, resulting in a structurally novel protein 
that is recognised as a foreign antigen by the immune system. This can 
provoke the development of autoantibodies and activated T cells, which 
can cause hepatic necrosis.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of autoimmune disease is highly variable. 
Autoimmune diseases can be classied by organ involvement or by the 
predominant mechanism responsible for tissue damage. The Gell and 
Coombs classication of hypersensitivity is the most widely used, and 
distinguishes four types of immune response that result in tissue damage 
(Box 4.15).
 Type I hypersensitivity is relevant in allergy but is not associated with 
autoimmune disease.
 Type II hypersensitivity causes injury to a single tissue or organ and 
is mediated by specic autoantibodies.
 Type III hypersensitivity results from deposition of immune complexes, 
which initiates activation of the classical complement cascade, as well 
as recruitment and activation of phagocytes and CD4+ lymphocytes. 
The site of immune complex deposition is determined by the relative 
amount of antibody, size of the immune complexes, nature of the 
4.14 Association of specic gene polymorphisms with 
autoimmune diseases
Gene
Function
Diseases
HLA complex
Key determinants of 
antigen presentation to 
T cells
Most autoimmune 
diseases
PTPN22
Regulation of T- and 
B-cell receptor 
signalling
Rheumatoid arthritis, 
type 1 diabetes, 
systemic lupus 
erythematosus
CTLA4
Important co-
stimulatory molecule 
that transmits inhibitory 
signals to T cells
Rheumatoid arthritis, 
type 1 diabetes
IL23R
Cytokine-mediated 
control of T cells
Inammatory bowel 
disease, psoriasis, 
ankylosing spondylitis
TNFRSF1A
Control of tumour 
necrosis factor network
Multiple sclerosis
ATG5
Autophagy
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
4.15 Gell and Coombs classication of hypersensitivity 
diseases
Type
Mechanism
Example of 
disease in 
response to 
exogenous 
agent
Example of 
autoimmune 
disease
Type I
Immediate 
hypersensitivity
IgE-mediated 
mast cell 
degranulation
Allergic disease
None described
Type II
Antibody-
mediated
Binding of 
cytotoxic IgG or 
IgM antibodies 
to antigens on 
cell surface 
causes cell 
killing
ABO blood 
transfusion 
reaction
Hyperacute 
transplant 
rejection
Autoimmune 
haemolytic 
anaemia
Idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Goodpasture's 
disease
Type III
Immune 
complex-
mediated
IgG or IgM 
antibodies 
bind soluble 
antigen to 
form immune 
complexes that 
trigger classical 
complement 
pathway 
activation
Serum sickness
Farmer's lung
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Cryoglobulinaemia
Type IV
Delayed type
Activated T 
cells, and 
phagocytes
Acute cellular 
transplant 
rejection
Nickel 
hypersensitivity
Type 1 diabetes
Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis

[[p103]]
Autoimmune disease    79
4
antigen and local haemodynamics. Generalised deposition of immune 
complexes gives rise to systemic diseases such as SLE.
 Type IV hypersensitivity is mediated by activated T cells and mac-
rophages, which together cause tissue damage.
Investigations
Autoantibodies
Many autoantibodies have been identied and are used in the diagnosis 
and monitoring of autoimmune diseases, as discussed elsewhere in this 
book. Antibodies can be quantied either by titre (the maximum dilution 
of the serum at which the antibody can be detected) or by concentra-
tion in standardised units using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) in which the antigen is used to coat microtitre plates to which 
the patient's serum is added (Fig. 4.13A). Immunoblotting (Fig. 4.13B) 
can also be employed for autoantibody detection as well as qualitative 
tests in which the pattern of immunouorescence staining is recorded 
(Fig.4.13C). Antibody testing can also be performed using Luminex 
technology. In this case  multiple test antigens are individually bound 
to red and infra-red uorescently labelled polystyrene or paramagnetic 
beads. Each antigen-coated bead is coated with a unique proportion of 
red and infrared dyes. The patient sample is incubated with these beads 
and if antibodies are present in the sample these will bind to the test anti-
gens coating the beads. After washing  to remove unbound antibodies, 
a third uorescent dye is added and the sample is processed through a 
dual laser Luminex analyser, which can detect the unique spectral sig-
natures arising from beads coated with different test antigens allowing 
detection of multiple antibodies present in a single patient sample.
Complement
Measurement of complement components can be useful in the evalu-
ation of immune complex-mediated diseases. Classical complement 
pathway activation leads to a decrease in circulating C4 levels and is 
A
B
C
Antibodies bind to target
Target antigen
Wash
Detection of bound antibody
Quantitate on plate reader
Target antigen
Wash
Nucleolar
Homogenous
Speckled
P-ANCA
Fig. 4.13 Autoantibody testing.
plates to which patient serum is added. If autoantibodies are present, these bind to the target antigen on the microtitre plate. The amount of bound antibody is quantitated 
autoantibodies by immunoblotting. Test strips are coated with puried antigens in parallel lines. The strips are incubated with patient serum or plasma and controls. After 
washing to remove unbound antibody, strips are incubated with enzyme-conjugated alkaline phosphatase-labelled anti-human IgG. After washing and addition of a chromogenic 
substrate, an enzyme-mediated colour reaction develops. After a nal wash, the strips are dried and any observed banding pattern is scanned for band intensity against an 
electronic template. The black bars on the strip separate the antigens being tested.  Positive results are seen as vertical grey lines  below the test antigen and  the intensity 
of staining corresponds to the concentration of antibody in the patient’s serum. The strength of staining is expressed both as a number and as a grade from + (weak) to +++ 
(strong). Note that all strips contain an internal quality control (marked as Ko or Co), to ensure the assay has worked. In the example shown, the patient sample was positive for 
of indirect immunouorescence staining. In this assay, patient serum is added to cell substrate and a secondary antibody is added with a uorescent label to detect any bound 
antibody. If antibodies are present, they are detected as bright green staining using a uorescence microscope. Different antinuclear antibody patterns may be seen in different 
types of connective tissue disease using a HEp2 or HEp2000 (human epithelial cell line) as substrate (see Ch. 26). Immunouorescence can be undertaken using different 
substrates, according to the autoantibody under investigation. An antinucleolar ANA can be seen in systemic sclerosis, a homogenous ANA can be seen in SLE and a speckled 
ANA can be seen in SLE or Sjögren syndrome. In the context of small vessel vasculitis, the tissue substrate is ethanol-xed neutrophils. Two main staining patterns of anti-
neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are clinically relevant, cytoplasmic and perinuclear, seen in granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microspcopic polyangiitis (see Ch. 26), 
the autoantibodies recognising proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase respectively. (B and C, Nucleolar and Homogenous) Courtesy of Juliet Dunphy, Biomedical Scientist, Royal 
United Hospital Bath, UK; (C, Speckled and P-ANCA) Courtesy of Mr Richard Brown, Clinical Scientist in Immunology, Southwest Pathology Services, UK

[[p104]]
80    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
often also associated with decreased C3 levels. Serial measurement of 
C3 and C4 can be helpful as a surrogate measure of disease activity in 
conditions such as SLE.
Cryoglobulins
Cryoglobulins are antibodies that can be directed against other immuno-
globulins, which form immune complexes that precipitate in the cold. They 
can lead to type III hypersensitivity reactions, with typical clinical manifes-
tations including purpuric rash, often of the lower extremities, arthralgia 
and peripheral neuropathy. Cryoglobulins are classied into three types, 
depending on the properties of the immunoglobulin involved (Box 4.16). 
Testing for cryoglobulins requires the transport of a serum specimen to 
the laboratory at 37°C. Cryoglobulins should not be confused with cold 
agglutinins; the latter are autoantibodies specically directed against the I/i 
antigen on the surface of red cells, which can cause intravascular haemol-
ysis in the cold (p. 958).
Management
The management of autoimmune disease depends on the organ sys-
tem involved and further details are provided elsewhere in this book. In 
general, treatment of autoimmune diseases involves the use of gluco-
corticoids and immunosuppressive agents, which are increasingly used 
in combination with biologic agents targeting disease-specic cytokines 
and their receptors. Not all conditions require immune suppression, how-
ever. For example, the management of coeliac disease involves dietary 
gluten withdrawal, while autoimmune hypothyroidism requires appropri-
ate thyroxine supplementation.
Allergy
Allergic diseases are a common and increasing cause of illness, affecting 
between 15% and 20% of the population at some time. They comprise a 
range of disorders from mild to life-threatening and affect many organs. 
Atopy is the tendency to produce an exaggerated IgE immune response 
to otherwise harmless environmental substances, while an allergic dis-
ease can be dened as the clinical manifestation of this inappropriate IgE 
immune response.
Pathophysiology
The immune system does not normally respond to the many environ-
mental substances to which it is exposed on a daily basis. In allergic indi-
viduals, however, an initial exposure to a normally harmless exogenous 
substance (known as an allergen) triggers the production of specic IgE 
antibodies by activated B cells. These bind to high-afnity IgE receptors 
on the surface of mast cells, a step that is not itself associated with clin-
ical sequelae. However, re-exposure to the allergen binds to and cross-
links membrane-bound IgE, which activates the mast cells, releasing a 
variety of vasoactive mediators (the early phase response; Fig. 4.14 and 
see Chapter 9). This type I hypersensitivity reaction forms the basis of 
an allergic reaction, which can range from sneezing and rhinorrhea to 
anaphylaxis (Box 4.17). In some individuals, the early phase response 
is followed by persistent activation of mast cells, manifest by ongoing 
swelling and local inammation. This is known as the late phase reac-
tion and is mediated by mast cell metabolites, basophils, eosinophils 
and macrophages. Long-standing or recurrent allergic inammation may 
give rise to a chronic inammatory response characterised by a complex 
inltrate of macrophages, eosinophils and T lymphocytes, in addition to 
mast cells and basophils. Once this has been established, inhibition of 
mast cell mediators with antihistamines is clinically ineffective in isolation. 
Mast cell activation may also be non-specically triggered through other 
signals, such as neuropeptides, anaphylotoxins and bacterial peptides.
The increasing incidence of allergic diseases is largely unexplained 
but one widely held theory is the ‘hygiene hypothesis’. This proposes 
that infections in early life are critically important in maturation of the 
immune response and bias the immune system against the development 
of allergies; the high prevalence of allergic disease is the penalty for the 
decreased exposure to infection that has resulted from improvements 
in sanitation and health care. Genetic factors also contribute strongly to 
the development of allergic diseases. A positive family history is com-
mon in patients with allergy, and genetic association studies have iden-
tied a wide variety of predisposing variants in genes controlling innate 
immune responses, cytokine production, IgE levels and the ability of the 
epithelial barrier to protect against environmental agents. The expression 
of a genetic predisposition is complex; it is governed by environmental 
factors, such as pollutants and cigarette smoke, and the incidence of 
bacterial and viral infection.
4.16 Classication of cryoglobulins
Type I
Type II
Type III
Immunoglobulin (Ig) isotype and 
specicity
Isolated monoclonal IgM paraprotein 
with no particular specicity
Immune complexes formed by 
monoclonal IgM paraprotein 
directed towards constant region 
of IgG
Immune complexes formed by polyclonal 
IgM or IgG directed towards constant region 
of IgG
Prevalence
25%
25%
50%
Disease association
Lymphoproliferative disease, 
especially Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia
Infection, particularly hepatitis C; 
lymphoproliferative disease
Infection, particularly hepatitis C; 
autoimmune disease, including rheumatoid 
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus
Symptoms
Hyperviscosity:
Raynaud's phenomenon
Acrocyanosis
Retinal vessel occlusion
Arterial and venous thrombosis
Small-vessel vasculitis:
Purpuric rash
Arthralgia
Neuropathy
Cutaneous ulceration, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
glomerulonephritis, Raynaud's 
phenomenon
Small-vessel vasculitis:
Purpuric rash, arthralgia
Cutaneous ulceration hepatosplenomegaly, 
glomerulonephritis
Raynaud's phenomenon
Protein electrophoresis
Monoclonal IgM paraprotein
Monoclonal IgM paraprotein
No monoclonal paraprotein
Rheumatoid factor
Negative
Strongly positive
Strongly positive
Complement
Usually normal
Decreased C4
Decreased C4
Serum viscosity
Raised
Normal
Normal

[[p105]]
Allergy    81
4
Clinical features
Common presentations of allergic disease are shown in Box 4.17. Those 
that affect the respiratory system and skin are discussed in more detail 
in Chapters 17 and 27, respectively. Here we focus on general principles 
of the approach to the allergic patient and some specic allergies. The 
management of acute anaphylaxis is discussed in Chapter 9
Insect venom allergy
Local non-IgE-mediated reactions to insect stings are common and may 
cause extensive swelling around the site lasting up to 7 days. These 
usually do not require specic treatment. Toxic reactions to venom after 
multiple (50–100) simultaneous stings may mimic anaphylaxis. In addi-
tion, exposure to large amounts of insect venom frequently stimulates 
the production of IgE antibodies, and thus may be followed by allergic 
reactions to single stings. Allergic IgE-mediated reactions vary from mild 
to life-threatening. Antigen-specic immunotherapy (desensitisation; see 
below) with bee or wasp venom can reduce the incidence of recurrent 
anaphylaxis from 50% to 60% to approximately 10%, but requires 3–5 
years of treatment or more.
Peanut allergy
Peanut allergy is the most common food-related allergy. More than 50% 
of patients present before the age of 3 years and some individuals react 
to their rst known exposure to peanuts, thought to result from sensi-
tisation to arachis oil in topical creams. Peanuts are ubiquitous in the 
Western diet, and every year up to 25% of peanut-allergic individuals 
experience a reaction as a result of inadvertent exposure.
Birch oral allergy syndrome
This syndrome is characterised by the combination of birch pollen hay 
fever and local oral symptoms, including itch and angioedema, after con-
tact with certain raw fruits, raw vegetables and nuts. Cooked fruits and 
vegetables are tolerated without difculty. It is due to shared or cross- 
reactive allergens that are destroyed by cooking or digestion, and can be 
conrmed by skin-prick testing using fresh fruit. Severe allergic reactions 
are unusual.
Diagnosis
When assessing a patient with a complaint of allergy, it is important to 
identify what the patient means by the term, as up to 20% of the UK 
population describe themselves as having a food allergy; in fact, less 
than 1% have true allergy, as dened by an IgE-mediated hypersensi-
tivity reaction conrmed on double-blind challenge. The nature of the 
symptoms should be established and specic triggers identied, along 
with the predictability of a reaction, and the time lag between exposure to 
a potential allergen and onset of symptoms. An allergic reaction usually 
occurs within minutes of exposure and provokes predictable, reproduc-
ible symptoms such as angioedema, urticaria and wheezing. Specic 
enquiry should be made about other allergic symptoms, past and pres-
ent, and about a family history of allergic disease. Potential allergens in 
the home and workplace should be identied. A detailed drug history 
should always be taken, including details of adherence to medication, 
possible adverse effects and the use of over-the-counter or complemen-
tary therapies.
Investigations
Skin-prick tests
Skin-prick testing is a key investigation in the assessment of patients 
suspected of having allergy. A droplet of diluted standardised allergen 
is placed on the forearm and the skin is supercially punctured through 
the droplet with a sterile lancet. Positive and negative control mate-
rial must be included in the assessment. After 15 minutes, a positive 
response is indicated by a local weal and are response 2 mm or more 
larger than the negative control. A major advantage of skin-prick test-
ing is that the patient can clearly see the results, which may be useful 
in gaining adherence to avoidance measures. Disadvantages include 
the remote risk of a severe allergic reaction, so resuscitation facilities 
should be available. Results are unreliable in patients with extensive 
skin disease. Antihistamines inhibit the magnitude of the response and 
should be discontinued for at least 3 days before testing; low-dose glu-
cocorticoids do not inuence test results. A number of other prescribed 
medicines can also lead to false-negative results, including amitriptyline 
and risperidone.
B
B
B
T
T
B
B
B
B
Allergen
T and B cells
IgE antibody
IgE receptor
Mast cell
Histamine, tryptase and
vasoactive peptides
A
B
C
Fig. 4.14 Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity response.
mast cells. This cross-linking of the IgE triggers mast cell activation with release of vasoactive mediators.
4.17 Clinical manifestations of allergy
Dermatological
 Urticaria
 Atopic eczema if chronic
 Allergic contact eczema
 Angioedema
Respiratory
 Asthma
 Atopic rhinitis
Ophthalmological
 Allergic conjunctivitis
Gastrointestinal
 Food allergy
Other
 Anaphylaxis
 Drug allergy
 Allergy to insect venom

[[p106]]
82    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
Specic IgE tests
An alternative to skin-prick testing is the quantitation of IgE directed 
against the suspected allergen. The sensitivity and specicity of specic 
IgE tests (previously known as radioallergosorbent tests, RAST) are lower 
than those of skin-prick tests. However, IgE tests may be very useful if 
skin testing is inappropriate, such as in patients taking antihistamines 
or those with severe skin disease or dermatographism. They can also 
be used to test for cross-reactivity – for example, with multiple insect 
venoms, where component-resolved diagnostics, using recombinant 
allergens, is now increasingly used rather than crude allergen extract. 
Component resolved diagnostics (CRD) is a more recent development 
in allergic investigation. CRD uses puried native or recombinant aller-
gens to detect specic IgE directed against individual allergenic mole-
cules. CRD can discriminate genuine sensitisation from sensitisation due 
to cross reactivity and in some cases can be used in risk stratication. For 
example, in patients with hazelnut allergy, the clinical features can be mild 
and most consistent with the oral allergy syndrome rather than primary 
nut allergy, in which case CRD may conrm specic IgE to Cor a1, a birch 
pollen homologue, hence the association with the oral allergy syndrome, 
whereas patients with primary hazelnut allergy positive for Cor a9 or Cor 
a14 tend to have more severe allergy. Severity of reaction in peanut allergy 
can also be associated with specic Ara h allergens, which are present in 
peanuts. Such risk stratication can impact on patient management, for 
example, identifying patients who may require an adrenaline auto-injector.
Supervised exposure to allergen
Tests involving supervised exposure to an allergen (allergen challenge) 
are usually performed in specialist centres on carefully selected patients, 
and include bronchial provocation testing, nasal challenge, and food or 
drug challenge. These may be particularly useful in the investigation of 
occupational asthma or food allergy. Patients can be considered for chal-
lenge testing when skin tests and/or IgE tests are negative, as they can 
be helpful in ruling out allergic disease.
Mast cell tryptase
Measurement of serum mast cell tryptase is extremely useful in investi-
gating a possible anaphylactic event. Ideally, measurements should be 
made at the time of the reaction following appropriate resuscitation, and 
3 hours and 24 hours later. The basis of the test is the fact that circulat-
ing levels of mast cell degranulation products rise dramatically to peak 
1–2hours after a systemic allergic reaction. Tryptase is the most stable 
of these and is easily measured in serum.
Serum total IgE
Serum total IgE measurements are not routinely indicated in the investi-
gation of allergic disease, other than to aid in the interpretation of specic 
IgE results, as false-positive specic IgEs are common in patients with 
atopy, who often have a high total IgE level. Although atopy is the most 
common cause of an elevated total IgE in developed countries, there 
are many other causes, including parasitic and helminth infections, lym-
phoma, drug reactions and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(previously known as Churg–Strauss vasculitis). Normal total IgE levels 
do not exclude allergic disease.
Eosinophilia
Peripheral blood eosinophilia is common in atopic individuals but lacks 
specicity. Eosinophilia of more than 20% or an absolute eosinophil count 
over 1.5 ×109/L should initiate a search for a non-atopic cause, such as 
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis or parasitic infection.
Management
Several approaches can be deployed in the management of allergic indi-
viduals, as discussed below.
Avoidance of the allergen
This is indicated in all cases and should be rigorously attempted, with the 
advice of specialist dietitians and occupational physicians as necessary.
Antihistamines
Antihistamines are useful in the management of allergy as they inhibit the 
effects of histamine on tissue H1 receptors. Long-acting, non-sedating 
preparations are particularly useful for prophylaxis.
Glucocorticoids
These are highly effective in allergic disease, and if used topically, adverse 
effects can be minimised.
Sodium cromoglicate
Sodium cromoglicate stabilises the mast cell membrane, inhibiting 
release of vasoactive mediators. It is effective as a prophylactic agent 
in asthma and allergic rhinitis but has no role in management of acute 
attacks. It is poorly absorbed and therefore generally ineffective in the 
management of food allergies.
Antigen-specic immunotherapy
This involves the sequential administration of increasing doses of aller-
gen extract over a prolonged period of time. The mechanism of action 
is not fully understood but it is highly effective in the prevention of insect 
venom anaphylaxis and of allergic rhinitis secondary to grass pollen 
allergy. The traditional route of administration is by subcutaneous injec-
tion, which carries a risk of anaphylaxis and should be performed only 
in specialised centres. Sublingual immunotherapy is also increasingly 
used. Clinical studies to date do not support the use of allergen immu-
notherapy for food hypersensitivity, although this is an area of active 
investigation.
Omalizumab
Omalizumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against IgE; it inhibits the 
binding of IgE to mast cells and basophils. It is licensed for treatment of 
refractory chronic spontaneous urticaria and also for severe persistent 
allergic asthma that has failed to respond to standard therapy. The dose 
and frequency are determined by baseline IgE (measured before the start 
of treatment) and body weight. It is under investigation for allergic rhinitis 
but not yet approved for this indication.
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Adrenaline given by injection in the form of a pre-loaded self-injectable device 
can be life-saving in the acute management of anaphylaxis (see Ch. 9).
Angioedema
Angioedema is an episodic, localised, non-pitting swelling of submucous 
or subcutaneous tissues.
Pathophysiology
The causes of angioedema are summarised in Box 4.18. It may be a 
manifestation of allergy or non-allergic degranulation of mast cells in 
response to drugs and toxins. In these conditions the main cause is mast 
cell degranulation with release of histamine and other vasoactive media-
tors. In hereditary angioedema, the cause is C1 inhibitor deciency, which 
leads to increased local release of bradykinin. Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor-induced angioedema also occurs as the result of 
increased bradykinin levels due to inhibition of its breakdown.
Clinical features
Angioedema is characterised by soft-tissue swelling that most frequently 
affects the face (Fig. 4.15) but can also affect the extremities and gen-
italia. Involvement of the larynx or tongue may cause life-threatening 
respiratory tract obstruction, and oedema of the intestinal mucosa may 
cause abdominal pain and distension.
Investigations
Differentiating the mechanism of angioedema is important in determin-
ing the most appropriate treatment. A clinical history of allergy or drug 

[[p107]]
Angioedema    83
4
exposure can give clues to the underlying diagnosis. If no obvious trigger 
can be identied, measurement of complement C4 is useful in differenti-
ating hereditary and acquired angioedema from other causes. If C4 levels 
are low, further investigations should be initiated to look for evidence of 
C1 inhibitor deciency.
Management
Management depends on the underlying cause. Angioedema associated 
with allergen exposure generally responds to antihistamines and gluco-
corticoids. Following acute management of angioedema secondary to 
drug therapy, drug withdrawal should prevent further attacks, although 
ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema can continue for a limited period post 
drug withdrawal. Management of angioedema associated with C1 inhib-
itor deciency is discussed below.
Hereditary angioedema
Hereditary angioedema (HAE), also known as inherited C1 inhibitor de-
ciency, is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by decreased produc-
tion or activity of C1 inhibitor protein. This complement regulatory protein 
inhibits spontaneous activation of the classical complement pathway (see 
Fig. 4.4). It also acts as an inhibitor of the kinin cascade, activation of which 
increases local bradykinin levels, giving rise to local pain and swelling.
Clinical features
The angioedema in HAE may be spontaneous or triggered by local 
trauma or infection. Multiple parts of the body may be involved, especially 
the face, extremities, upper airway and gastrointestinal tract. Oedema of 
the intestinal wall causes severe abdominal pain and many patients with 
undiagnosed HAE undergo exploratory laparotomy. The most important 
complication is laryngeal obstruction, often associated with minor dental 
procedures, which can be fatal. Episodes of angioedema are self-limiting 
and usually resolve within 48 hours. Patients with HAE generally present 
in adolescence but may go undiagnosed for many years. A family history 
can be identied in 80% of cases. HAE is not associated with allergic 
diseases and is specically not associated with urticaria.
Investigations
Acute episodes are accompanied by low C4 levels; a low C4 during an 
episode of angioedema should therefore trigger further investigation. The 
diagnosis can be conrmed by measurement of C1 inhibitor levels and 
function.
Management
Severe acute attacks should be treated with plasma-derived or recombi-
nant C1 inhibitor or the bradykinin receptor antagonist icatibant. Anabolic 
4.18  Types of angioedema
Allergic reaction to specic 
trigger
Idiopathic angioedema
Hereditary angioedema
ACE-inhibitor associated 
angioedema
Pathogenesis
IgE-mediated degradation of 
mast cells
Non-IgE-mediated 
degranulation of mast cells
C1 inhibitor deciency, with 
resulting increased local 
bradykinin concentration
Inhibition of breakdown of 
bradykinin
Key mediator
Histamine
Histamine
Bradykinin
Bradykinin
Prevalence
Common
Common
Rare autosomal dominant 
disorder
0.1%–0.2% of patients 
treated with ACE inhibitors
Clinical features
Usually associated with 
urticaria
History of other allergies 
common
Follows exposure to specic 
allergen, in food, animal 
dander or insect venom
Usually associated with 
urticaria
May be triggered by physical 
stimuli such as heat, pressure 
or exercise
Dermatographism common
Occasionally associated with 
underlying infection or thyroid 
disease
Not associated with urticaria 
or other features of allergy
Does not cause anaphylaxis
May cause life-threatening 
respiratory tract obstruction
Can cause severe abdominal 
pain
Not associated with urticaria
Does not cause anaphylaxis
Usually affects the head and 
neck, and may cause life-
threatening respiratory tract 
obstruction
Can occur years after the 
start of treatment
Investigations
Specic IgE tests or skin-
prick tests
Specic IgE tests and skin-
prick tests often negative
Hypothyroidism should be 
excluded
Complement C4 (invariably 
low in acute attacks)
C1 inhibitor levels
No specic investigations
Treatment
Allergen avoidance
Antihistamines
Antihistamines are mainstay 
of treatment and prophylaxis
Unresponsive to 
antihistamines
Anabolic steroids
C1 inhibitor concentrate or 
icatibant for acute attacks
ACE inhibitor should be 
discontinued
ARBs should be avoided if 
possible unless there is a 
strong indication
Associated drug reactions
Specic drug allergies
NSAIDs
Opioids, radiocontrast media
ACE inhibitors, ARBs
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs = angiotensin II receptor blockers; IgE = immunoglobulin E; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
B
A
Fig. 4.15 Angioedema.
From Helbert M. Flesh and bones of 
immunology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2006.

[[p108]]
84    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
steroids, such as danazol, can be used to prevent attacks and act by 
increasing endogenous production of complement proteins, but is limited 
by treatment toxicity. Tranexamic acid can be helpful as prophylaxis in 
some patients. C1 inhibitor concentrate can also be used as prophylaxis, 
for example for surgical or dental intervention. Patients can be taught to 
self-administer therapy and should be advised to carry a MedicAlert or 
similar. More recently, a humanised monoclonal antibody which inhibits 
plasma kallikrein activity, limiting the production of bradykinin, has been 
developed for the prevention of recurrent attacks in patients with C1 
inhibitor deciency. This is not licensed for acute attacks.
Acquired C1 inhibitor deciency
This rare disorder is clinically indistinguishable from HAE but presents 
in late adulthood. It is associated with autoimmune and lymphoprolif-
erative diseases. Most cases are due to the development of autoan-
tibodies to C1 inhibitor, but the condition can also be caused by 
autoantibodies that activate C1. Treatment of the underlying disorder 
may induce remission of angioedema. As with HAE, a low C4 is seen 
during acute episodes.
Pregnancy and the immune system
Major adaptations occur in the immune system during pregnancy so 
that the mother does not mount an immune response to the developing 
fetus. These adaptations can inuence the risk and severity of certain 
infectious diseases such as varicella pneumonia (see p. 1271) as well 
as the activity of some autoimmune diseases. Some considerations for 
the development and management of immunological diseases during 
pregnancy and breastfeeding are summarised in Box 4.19
Transplantation and graft rejection
Transplantation provides the opportunity for denitive treatment of end-
stage organ disease. The major complications are graft rejection, drug 
toxicity and infection consequent to immunosuppression. Transplant 
survival continues to improve, as a result of the introduction of less toxic 
immunosuppressive agents and increased understanding of the pro-
cesses of transplant rejection. Stem cell transplantation and its compli-
cations are discussed in more detail in Chapter 25
Transplant rejection
Solid organ transplantation inevitably stimulates an aggressive immune 
response by the recipient, unless the transplant is between monozygotic 
twins. The type and severity of the rejection response is determined by 
the genetic disparity between the donor and recipient, the immune sta-
tus of the host and the nature of the tissue transplanted (Box 4.20). The 
most important genetic determinant is the difference between donor and 
recipient HLA proteins. The extensive polymorphism of these proteins 
means that donor HLA antigens are almost invariably recognised as for-
eign by the recipient immune system, unless an active attempt has been 
made to minimise incompatibility.
 Hyperacute rejection results in rapid and irreversible destruction 
of the graft (see Box 4.20). It is mediated by pre-existing recipient 
antibodies against donor HLA antigens, which arise as a result of 
previous exposure through transplantation, blood transfusion or 
pregnancy. It is very rarely seen in clinical practice, as the use of 
screening for anti-HLA antibodies and pre-transplant cross-match-
ing ensures the prior identication of such recipient–donor 
incompatibility.
 Acute cellular rejection is the most common form of graft rejection. It 
is mediated by activated T lymphocytes and results in deterioration 
in graft function. If allowed to progress, it may cause fever, pain and 
tenderness over the graft. It is usually amenable to increased immu-
nosuppressive therapy.
 Acute vascular rejection is mediated by antibody formed de novo 
after transplantation. It is more curtailed than the hyperacute 
response because of the use of intercurrent immunosuppression but 
it is also associated with reduced graft survival. Aggressive immu-
nosuppressive therapy is indicated and physical removal of antibody 
through plasmapheresis may be indicated in severe causes. Not 
all post-transplant anti-donor antibodies cause graft damage; their 
consequences are determined by specicity and ability to trigger 
other immune components, such as the complement cascade.
4.19 Immunological diseases in pregnancy
Allergic disease
 Maternal dietary restrictions during pregnancy or lactation: current 
evidence does not support these for prevention of allergic disease.
 Breastfeeding for at least 4 months: prevents or delays the occurrence 
of atopic dermatitis, cow's milk allergy and wheezing in early childhood, as 
compared with feeding formula milk containing intact cow's milk protein.
Autoimmune disease
 Suppressed T-cell-mediated immune responses in pregnancy: may suddenly 
reactivate post-partum. Some autoimmune diseases may improve during pregnancy 
but are immediately after delivery. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an 
exception, however, as it is prone to exacerbation in pregnancy or the puerperium.
 Passive transfer of maternal antibodies: can mediate autoimmune disease in 
the fetus and newborn, including SLE, Graves' disease and myasthenia gravis.
 Antiphospholipid syndrome (p. 987): an important cause of fetal loss, 
intrauterine growth restriction and pre-eclampsia.
 HIV in pregnancy: see p. 367.
4.20 Classication of transplant rejection
Type
Time
Pathological ndings
Mechanism
Treatment
Hyperacute rejection
Minutes to hours
Thrombosis, necrosis
Pre-formed antibody to 
donor antigens results in 
complement activation (type II 
hypersensitivity)
None – irreversible graft loss
Acute cellular rejection
5–30 days
Cellular inltration
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (type 
IV hypersensitivity)
Increase immunosuppression
Acute vascular rejection
5–30 days
Vasculitis
Antibody and complement 
activation
Increase immunosuppression
Chronic allograft failure
> 30 days
Fibrosis, scarring
Immune and non-immune 
mechanisms
Minimise drug toxicity, 
control hypertension and 
hyperlipidaemia

[[p109]]
Tumour immunology    85
4
 Chronic allograft failure, also known as chronic rejection, is a major 
cause of graft loss. It is associated with proliferation of transplant 
vascular smooth muscle, interstitial brosis and scarring. The 
pathogenesis is poorly understood but contributing factors include 
immunological damage caused by subacute rejection, hypertension, 
hyperlipidaemia and chronic drug toxicity.
Investigations
Pre-transplantation testing
HLA typing determines an individual's HLA polymorphisms and facili-
tates donor–recipient matching. Potential transplant recipients are also 
screened for the presence of anti-HLA antibodies. The recipient is 
excluded from receiving a transplant that carries these alleles.
Donor–recipient cross-matching is a functional assay that directly 
tests whether serum from a recipient (which potentially contains anti-do-
nor antibodies) is able to bind and/or kill donor lymphocytes. It is specic 
to a prospective donor–recipient pair and is done immediately prior to 
transplantation. A positive cross-match is a contraindication to trans-
plantation because of the risk of hyperacute rejection.
Post-transplant biopsy: C4d staining
C4d is a fragment of the complement protein C4 (see Fig. 4.4). 
Deposition of C4d in graft capillaries indicates local activation of the 
classical complement pathway and provides evidence of antibody-me-
diated damage. This is useful in the early diagnosis of vascular rejection.
Complications of transplant immunosuppression
Transplant recipients require indenite treatment with immunosuppres-
sive agents. In general, two or more immunosuppressive drugs are 
used in synergistic combination in order to minimise adverse effects 
(Box 4.21). The major complications of long-term immunosuppression 
are infection and malignancy. The risk of some opportunistic infections 
may be minimised through the use of prophylactic medication, such as 
ganciclovir for cytomegalovirus prophylaxis and trimethoprim–sulfameth-
oxazole for Pneumocystis prophylaxis. Immunisation with killed vaccines 
is appropriate, although the immune response may be curtailed. Live 
vaccines should not be given.
The increased risk of malignancy arises because T-cell suppression 
results in failure to control viral infections associated with malignant 
transformation. Virus-associated tumours include lymphoma (associated 
with Epstein–Barr virus), Kaposi's sarcoma (associated with human her-
pesvirus 8) and skin tumours (associated with human papillomavirus). 
Immunosuppression is also linked with a small increase in the incidence 
of common cancers not associated with viral infection (such as lung, 
breast and colon cancer), reecting the importance of T cells in anti-can-
cer surveillance.
Organ donation
The major problem in transplantation is the shortage of organ donors. 
Cadaveric organ donors are usually previously healthy individuals who 
experience brainstem death, frequently as a result of road trafc acci-
dents or cerebrovascular events. Even if organs were obtained from all 
potential cadaveric donors, though, their numbers would be insufcient 
to meet current demands. An alternative is the use of living donors. 
Altruistic living donation, usually from close relatives, is widely used in 
renal transplantation. Living organ donation is inevitably associated with 
some risk to the donor and it is highly regulated to ensure appropriate 
appreciation of the risks involved. Because of concerns about coercion 
and exploitation, non-altruistic organ donation (the sale of organs) is ille-
gal in most countries.
Tumour immunology
Surveillance by the immune system is critically important in monitor-
ing and removing damaged and mutated cells as they arise. The abil-
ity of the immune system to kill cancer cells effectively is inuenced 
by tumour immunogenicity and specicity. Many cancer antigens are 
poorly expressed and specic antigens can mutate, either sponta-
neously or in response to treatment, which can result in evasion of 
immune responses. In addition, the inhibitory pathways that are used 
to maintain self-tolerance and limit collateral tissue damage during anti-
microbial immune responses can be co-opted by cancerous cells to 
evade immune destruction. Recognition and understanding of these 
immune checkpoint pathways has led to the development of a number 
of new treatments for cancers that are otherwise refractory to treat-
ment. Immune checkpoint blockade enhances anti-tumour immunity 
by blocking down-regulators of immune activation. Immune check-
point inhibitors targeting CTLA-4, PD1 and PD-L1, such as ipilimimab, 
nivolumab, and pembrolizumab, have shown benet in a number of 
tumour types, including melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, urothe-
lial cancers, colorectal malignancy and classic Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
These agents can, however, have serious inammatory side effects, 
with immune-related adverse events most commonly involving the 
skin, liver, endocrine and gastrointestinal tracts, which may be treat-
ment limiting. The effects of the different agents vary, with lung and 
thyroid involvement being more common with anti-PD1 therapy, colitis 
and hypophysitis being more common with anti-CTLA-4 therapy, with 
4.21 Immunosuppressive drugs used in transplantation
Drug
Mechanism of action
Major adverse effects
Anti-proliferative 
agents
Azathioprine, 
mycophenolate mofetil
Inhibit lymphocyte 
proliferation by 
blocking DNA synthesis
May be directly 
cytotoxic at high doses
Increased susceptibility 
to infection
Leucopenia
Hepatotoxicity
Calcineurin inhibitors
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus
Inhibit T-cell signalling; 
prevent lymphocyte 
activation; block 
cytokine transcription
Increased susceptibility 
to infection
Hypertension
Nephrotoxicity
Diabetogenic 
(especially tacrolimus)
Gingival hypertrophy, 
hirsutism (ciclosporin)
Glucocorticoids
Decrease phagocytosis 
and release of 
proteolytic enzymes; 
decrease lymphocyte 
activation and 
proliferation; decrease 
cytokine production; 
decrease antibody 
production
Increased susceptibility 
to infection
Multiple other 
complications
Anti-thymocyte 
globulin (ATG)
Antibodies to cell 
surface proteins 
deplete or block T cells
Profound non-specic 
immunosuppression
Increased susceptibility 
to infection
Basiliximab
Monoclonal antibody 
directed against 
CD25 (IL-2Rα chain), 
expressed on activated 
T cells
Increased susceptibility 
to infection
Gastrointestinal side-
effects
Belatacept
Selectively inhibits 
T-cell activation 
through blockade of 
CD80/CD86
Increased susceptibility 
to infection and 
malignancy
Gastrointestinal side-
effects
Hypertension
Anaemia/leucopenia

[[p110]]
86    CLINICAL IMMUNOLOGY
anti-CTLA-4 therapy-related events often being more severe. However, 
patients who have had a favourable response to immune checkpoint 
blockade but discontinue as a result of immune-related adverse events 
may maintain their anti-tumour response. Glucocorticoids are consid-
ered rst line therapy for these side effects, with additional immune 
suppression if required. The development of autoimmunity reects the 
importance of these pathways in the control of self-tolerance.
Another recent advance is CAR-T cell therapy, in which genetically 
engineered, chimaeric antigen receptor T cells are specically developed 
for an individual patient, with effective reprogramming of the patient’s 
immune cells, which are then used to target their cancer. This has been 
applied to certain otherwise treatment-refractory haematological malig-
nancies (Ch. 25). Not only is it a very expensive treatment, but cytokine 
storm and subsequent antibody deciency are predictable side effects of 
the CAR T-cell therapies directed at B-cell antigens, requiring manage-
ment in their own right.
Further information
Websites
allergy.org.au An Australasian site providing information on allergy, asthma and 
immune diseases.
allergyuk.org UK site for patients and health-care professionals.
anaphylaxis.org.uk Provides information and support for patients with severe 
allergies.
info4pi.org A US site managed by the non-prot Jeffrey Modell Foundation, which 
provides extensive information about primary immune deciencies .
niaid.nih.gov National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: provides useful 
information on a variety of allergic diseases, immune deciency syndromes and 
autoimmune diseases.

[[p111]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 4.1. In the investigation of allergy, which of the following statements are 
correct?
 A. Mast cell tryptase is labile in serum and therefore not a useful 
biomarker of mast cell activation
 B. Measurement of total IgE is not useful
 C. Component resolved diagnostics can have predictive value in 
some food allergies
 D. Skin testing is not affected by antihistamine medication
 E. Some antidepressant medications can lead to false-negative 
skin test results
Answer: C and E.
Mast cell tryptase is stable in serum, making it a particularly con-
venient biomarker of mast cell activation. A total IgE can be helpful in 
atopic patients as a high total level can be associated with false-positive 
specic IgEs. Component resolved diagnostics uses puried native or 
recombinant allergens to detect specic IgE directed against individual 
allergenic molecules. CRD can discriminate genuine sensitisation from 
sensitisation due to cross reactivity and in some cases can be used in 
risk stratication, having predictive value, such as in peanut and some 
nut allergy. A number of medications, including certain antidepressant 
classes, can have antihistamine properties and thereby interfere with skin 
testing. Patients should be advised to discontinue interacting medica-
tions in advance of testing.
 4.2. Which of the following are required for naïve T-cell activation?
 A. Antigen processing by antigen-presenting cells
 B. Antigenic peptide presentation by pattern recognition 
receptors
 C. HLA class 1 for CD4 T cells
 D. Co-stimulatory molecules
 E. Intracellular T-cell signalling
Answer: A, D and E.
Unlike B cells, which recognise native antigen, T cells require antigen 
processing through professional antigen-presenting cells, with presenta-
tion of antigenic peptide by self-HLA molecules expressed at the APC 
surface. The Ag–HLA complex then interacts with the T-cell receptor. 
Pattern recognition receptors are expressed by phagocytic cells and 
recognise pathogen-associated molecular patterns on invading micro-
org anisms. They do not present antigen to T cells. CD4 T cells recognise 
antigenic peptide presented by HLA class II molecules; CD8 T cells rec-
ognise antigenic peptide presented by HLA class I molecules. A second 
signal, known as co-stimulation, is required for naïve T-cell activation. 
Downstream intracellular T cells signalling then drives T-cell proliferation.
 4.3. Which of the following statements are correct regarding T-cell 
populations?
 A. CD4 T cells kill virally infected cells through production of pore-
forming molecules such as perforin and release of enzymes 
triggering apoptosis of the target cell
 B. CD8 T cells are important in defence against viral infection
 C. Th1 (T-helper) cells typically produce IL-2, IFN γ and TNF-α
 D. T regs are regulatory CD4 T cells that promote activation of 
other cells and augment autoimmune disease
 E. Th-17 cells are pro-inammatory cells that produce IL-17 and 
have a key role in defence against extracellular bacteria and 
fungi
Answer: B, C and E.
CD8 T cells, not CD4 T cells, kill infected cells directly through the 
production of pore-forming molecules such as perforin and release of 
enzymes triggering apoptosis of the target cell. CD8 T cells are particu-
larly important in defence against viral infection. Th1 (T-helper) cells typ-
ically produce IL-2, IFN-γ and TNF-α, and support the development of 
delayed-type hypersensitivity responses. T-regulatory cells (T regs) are a 
subset of specialised CD4+ lymphocytes important in actively suppress-
ing activation of other cells and preventing autoimmune disease. They 
produce cytokines such as TGF-beta and IL-10. Th17 cells are pro-in-
ammatory cells dened by their production of IL-17. They have a key 
role in defence against extracellular bacteria and fungi. They also have a 
role in the development of autoimmune disease.
 4.4. In tumour immunology, which of the following statements are 
correct?
 A. NK cells have an important role in immune surveillance
 B. Tumour cells reliably express HLA molecules to allow immune 
recognition by T cells
 C. Immune checkpoint blockade includes anti-CTLA and 
anti-PD1 pathways
 D. Autoimmune disease is a recognised complication of immune 
checkpoint blockade in tumour therapy
 E. Tumour progression occurs rapidly if immune checkpoint 
blockade is withdrawn
Answer: A, C and D.
NK cells have an important role in tumour surveillance especially as 
tumour cells lose their HLA expression, thereby allowing NK cell activa-
tion. Loss of HLA expression is one of the mechanisms by which tumours 
can evade T-cell immunity. Immune checkpoint blockade includes anti-
bodies directed at the normally downregulatory pathways, thereby allow-
ing immune cells to be active against the tumour. Some patients maintain 
the anti-tumour effect of immune checkpoint blockade despite treatment 
withdrawal in the event of drug toxicity.
 4.5. In the context of organ transplantation, which of the following 
statements are correct?
 A. The major complications are graft rejection, drug toxicity and 
infection
 B. HLA incompatibility does not have a bearing on transplant 
outcome
 C. Acute cellular rejection is predominantly mediated by activated 
B cells
 D. Post-transplantation, failure to control viral infections 
associated with malignant transformation leads to an increased 
risk of malignancy
 E. Co-stimulatory blockade has no role in post-transplant immune 
suppression
Answer: A and D.
The major complications of transplantation are graft rejection, drug 
toxicity and infection consequent to immunosuppression. Solid organ 
transplantation stimulates an aggressive immune response by the recip-
ient, unless the transplant is between monozygotic twins. The most 
important genetic determinant is the difference between donor and 
recipient HLA proteins. The polymorphism of these proteins means that 
donor HLA antigens are almost invariably recognised as foreign by the 
recipient immune system, unless an active attempt has been made to 
minimise incompatibility. Acute cellular rejection is mediated by activated 
T lymphocytes and results in deterioration in graft function. The risk of 

[[p112]]
post-transplant malignancy arises because T-cell suppression results in 
failure to control viral infections associated with malignant transforma-
tion, e.g. lymphoma associated with Epstein–Barr virus, Kaposi's sar-
coma associated with human herpesvirus 8 and skin tumours associated 
with human papillomavirus. Co-stimulatory blockade, using the CTLA-4 
fusion protein belatacept, with high afnity for CD80/86 on T cells, selec-
tively inhibits T-cell activation and has a role in post-transplant immune 
suppression.

[[p113]]
Population health and 
epidemiology
5
H Campbell
DA McAllister
Global burden of disease and underlying risk factors 88
Life expectancy 88
Global causes of death and disability 88
Risk factors underlying disease 88
Social determinants of health 89
The hierarchy of systems – from molecules to ecologies 89
The life course 89
Preventive medicine 89
Principles of screening and immunisation 90
Screening 90
Immunisation 91
Epidemiology 91
Understanding causes and effect 91
Mendelian randomisation 91
Health data/informatics 94
Management of epidemics 95

[[p114]]
88    POPULATION HEALTH AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
The UK Faculty of Public Heath denes public health as ‘The science 
and art of promoting and protecting health and well-being, preventing 
ill-health and prolonging life through the organised efforts of society’. 
This recognises that there is a collective responsibility for the health of 
the population which requires partnerships between government, health 
services and other partners to promote and protect health and prevent 
disease. Population health has been dened as ‘the health outcomes of 
a group of individuals, including the distribution of such outcomes within 
the group’. Medical doctors can play a role in all these efforts to improve 
health both as part of their clinical work but also through supporting 
broader actions to improve public health.
Global burden of disease and underlying risk 
factors
The Global Burden of Disease (GBD) exercise was initiated by the World 
Bank in 1992, with rst estimates appearing in the World Development 
Report in 1993. Regular updated estimates have been published since 
that time together with projections of future disease burden. The aim of 
the exercise was to produce reliable and internally consistent estimates 
of disease burden for all diseases and injuries and to assess their physi-
ological, behavioural and social risk factors so that this information could 
be made available to health workers, researchers and policy-makers.
The GBD exercise adopted the metric ‘disability life year’ or DALY to 
describe population health. This combines information about prema-
ture mortality in a population (measured as Years of Life Lost from an 
‘expected’ life expectancy) and years of life lived with disability (Years 
of Life lived with Disability (YLD), which is weighted by a severity factor). 
The International Classication of Disease (ICD) rules, which assign one 
cause to each death, are followed. All estimates are presented by age 
and sex groups and by regions of the world. Many countries now also 
report their own national burden of disease data.
Life expectancy
Global life expectancy at birth increased from 61.7 years in 1980 to 73.0 
years in 2017, an increase of about 0.3 years per calendar year. This 
change is due to a substantial fall in child mortality (mainly due to com-
mon infections) partly offset by rises in mortality from adult conditions 
such as diabetes and chronic kidney disease. Some areas have not 
shown these increases in life expectancy in men, often due to war and 
interpersonal violence.
Global causes of death and disability
Box 5.1 shows a ranked list of the major causes of global deaths in 2019. 
Communicable, maternal, neonatal and nutritional causes accounted for 
about one-quarter of deaths worldwide – down from about one-third in 
1990. In contrast, deaths from non-communicable diseases are increas-
ing in importance and now account for about two-thirds of all deaths 
globally,: including about 18.5 million from cardiovascular disease (ischae-
mic heart disease and stroke), 10 million from cancer and about 4 million 
from chronic respiratory diseases. The age standardised death rates for 
most diseases globally are falling. However, despite this, the numbers of 
deaths from many diseases are rising due to global population growth 
and the change in age structure of the population to older ages and 
this is placing an increasing burden on health systems. For a few con-
ditions (e.g. HIV/AIDS, diabetes mellitus and chronic kidney disease) 
age-standardised death rates continue to rise. Within this overall pattern, 
signicant regional variations exist – for example, communicable, mater-
nal, neonatal and nutritional causes still account for about two-thirds of 
premature mortality in sub-Saharan Africa.
GBD also provides estimates of disability from disease (Box 5.2). This 
has raised awareness of the importance of conditions like depression 
and other common mental health conditions, low back and neck pain 
and other musculo-skeletal conditions, and asthma, which account for a 
relatively large disease burden but relatively few deaths. This in turn has 
resulted in greater health policy priority given to these conditions. Since 
the policy focus in national health systems is increasingly on keeping 
people healthy rather than only on reducing premature deaths it is impor-
tant to have measures of these health outcomes.
It is important to recognise that although these estimates represent 
the best overall picture of burden of disease globally, they are based on 
limited and imperfect data. Nevertheless, the quality of data underlying 
the estimates and the modelling processes are improving steadily over 
time and provide an increasingly robust basis for evidence-based health 
planning and priority setting.
Risk factors underlying disease
Box 5.3 shows a ranked list of the main risk factors underlying GBD 
in 2019 and how this ranking has changed over the past 29 years. A 
number of key insights have been identied in this, the most recent, GBD 
exercise:
 Socio-demographic development has been progressing steadily 
since 1990 but it has increased faster in countries with the highest 
socio-demographic development index and thus gaps have been 
widening.
5.1  Global causes of death – top 15 ranked causes 2019 
[rank in 1990]
1. Cardiovascular disease [1]
2. Neoplasms [2]
 3. Chronic respiratory [6]
 4. Respiratory infections and TB [3]
 5. Diabetes and CKD [10]
6. Digestive diseases [8]
 7. Neurological disorders [15]
 8. Maternal and neonatal [15]
 9. Unintentional injuries [9]
10. Enteric infections [5]
11. Transport injuries [13]
12. Self harm and violence [12]
13. Other non-communicable diseases [11]
14. HIV/AIDS and STIs [17]
15. NTDs and malaria [14]
(CKD = chronic kidney disease; TB = tuberculosis; STIs = sexually transmitted infections; 
NTDs = neglected tropical diseases)
From GBD 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare/.
5.2 Global disability – top 15 ranked causes 2019 [rank in 1990]*
 1. Musculoskeletal disorders [1]
 2. Mental disorders [2]
 3. Other non-communicable diseases [3]
 4. Sense organ diseases [5]
 5. Neurological disorders [4]
 6. Diabetes and CKD [12]
 7. Skin diseases [7]
 8. Unintentional injuries [8]
 9. Nutritional deciencies [6]
10. Cardiovascular diseases [11]
11. Chronic respiratory diseases [9]
12. Substance use [13]
13. Maternal and neonatal conditions [17]
14. Transport injuries [16]
15. Digestive diseases [15]
*By years of life lived with disability (YLD).
(CKD = chronic kidney disease)
From GBD 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare/.

[[p115]]
Social determinants of health    89
5
5.4 ‘Hierarchy of systems’ applied to ischaemic heart disease
Level in the hierarchy
Example of effect
Molecular
ApoB mutation causing hypercholesterolaemia
Cellular
Foam cells accumulate in vessel wall
Tissue
Atheroma and thrombosis of coronary artery
Organ
Ischaemia and infarction of myocardium
System
Cardiac failure
Person
Limited exercise capacity, impact on employment
Family
Passive smoking, diet
Community
Shops and leisure opportunities
Population
Prevalence of obesity
Society
Policies on smoking, screening for risk factors
Ecology
Agriculture inuencing fat content in diet
 Health systems need to transform to be better able to respond to 
the changing pattern of NCDs and disabilities.
 The Millennium Development Goal (MDG) programme from 2000 to 
2015 has led to faster progress in reducing deaths from maternal, 
child and neonatal conditions/TB/HIV/malaria but this level of atten-
tion now needs to be directed at NCDs.
 Public health is not giving sufcient priority to important global risk 
factors which are increasing over time, such as high blood pressure, 
high fasting glucose, high BMI, ambient particulate matter pollution 
and drug and alcohol use.
 There are many challenges resulting from the change in global 
population pyramid structures, which have become inverted over 
recent decades and now pose many health, nancial and political 
challenges.
Social determinants of health
Health emerges from a highly complex interaction between a person’s 
genetic background and environmental factors (aspects of the physical, 
biological (microbes), built and social environments and also distant inu-
ences such as the global ecosystem) (Fig. 5.1).
The hierarchy of systems – from molecules to 
ecologies
Inuences on health exist at many levels and extend beyond the individual 
to include the family, community, population and ecology. Box 5.4 shows 
an example of this for determinants of coronary heart disease and demon-
strates the importance of considering not only the disease process in a 
patient but also its context. Health care is not the only determinant – and is 
usually not the major determinant – of health status in the population. The 
concept of ‘global health’ recognises the global dimension of health prob-
lems, whether these be, for example, emerging or pandemic infections or 
global economic inuences on health internationally.
The life course
The determinants of health operate over the whole lifespan. Values and 
behaviours acquired during childhood and adolescence have a pro-
found inuence on educational outcomes, job prospects and risk of 
disease. These can have a strong inuence, for example, on whether 
a young person takes up a damaging behaviour like smoking, risky 
sexual activity and drug misuse. Inuences on health can even operate 
before birth. Low birth weight can lead to higher risk hypertension and 
type 2 diabetes in young adults and of cardiovascular disease in mid-
dle age. It has been suggested that under-nutrition during middle to 
late gestation permanently ‘programmes’ cardiovascular and metabolic 
responses.
This ‘life course’ perspective highlights the cumulative effect (through 
each stage of life) on health of exposures to illness, adverse environmen-
tal conditions and behaviours that damage health.
Preventive medicine
The complexity of the interactions between physical, social and eco-
nomic determinants of health means that successful prevention is often 
difcult. Moreover, the life course perspective illustrates that it may be 
necessary to intervene early in life or even before birth, to prevent impor-
tant disease in later life. Successful prevention is likely to require many 
interventions across the life course and at several levels in the hierarchy 
of systems. The examples below illustrate this principle.
5.3 Global risk factors – top 10 ranked causes 2019 [rank in 
1990]*
 1. High blood pressure [7]
 2. Smoking/second hand smoke exposure [5]
 3. High fasting blood glucose [11]
 4. Low birth weight [2]
 5. High BMI [16]
 6. Short gestation [3]
 7. Ambient particulate matter pollution [13]
 8. High LDL cholesterol [14]
 9. Alcohol use [15]
10. Household air pollution [4]
From GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators. Global burden of 369 diseases and 
injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2020; 396:1204–1222.
Macro-economy,
politics, culture,
global forces
Other
neighbourhoods,
other regions
People
Age, sex and
hereditary
factors
L
f
e
s
t
y
l
e
W
o
r
k
p
l
a
y
D
i
e
t
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
a
c
ti
v
i
t
y
S
o
c
a
l
c
a
p
it
a
l
C
o
m
m
u
n
it
y
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
W
e
a
t
h
c
r
e
a
ti
o
n
L
o
c
a
e
c
o
n
o
m
y
M
a
r
k
e
t
s
B
u
d
n
g
s
pl
a
c
e
s
E
n
vi
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
Ai
r
w
a
t
er
la
n
d
C
m
at
e
c
ha
n
ge
Gl
o
b
a
e
c
o
s
ys
te
m
B
o
d
v
er
si
ty
Fig. 5.1 Hierarchy of systems that inuence population health. Adapted from 
an original model by Whitehead M, Dahlgren G. What can be done about inequalities 
in health? Lancet 1991; 338:1059–1063
*Risk factors ranked by % of burden of disease they cause.
(BMI = body mass index; LDL = low density lipoprotein)

[[p116]]
90    POPULATION HEALTH AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Alcohol
Alcohol use is an increasingly important risk factor underlying global bur-
den of disease (see Box 5.3). Reasons for increasing rates of alcohol-
related harm vary by place and time but include the falling price of alcohol 
(in real terms), increased availability and cultural change fostering higher 
levels of consumption. Public, professional and governmental concern 
has now led to a minimum price being charged for a unit of alcohol, 
tightening of licensing regulations and curtailment of some promotional 
activity in many countries. However, even more aggressive public health 
measures will be needed to reverse the levels of harm in the population. 
The approach for individual patients suffering adverse effects of alcohol 
is described on pages 892 and 1240.
Smoking
Smoking is also one of the top three risk factors underlying global bur-
den of disease (see Box 5.3). It is responsible for a substantial major-
ity of cases of lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), and most smokers die either from these respiratory diseases or 
from ischaemic heart disease. Smoking also causes cancers of the upper 
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, pancreas, bladder and kidney, and 
increases risks of peripheral vascular disease, stroke and peptic ulcer-
ation. Maternal smoking is an important cause of fetal growth retarda-
tion. Moreover, there is increasing evidence that passive (‘second hand’) 
smoking has adverse effects on cardiovascular and respiratory health.
The decline in smoking rates in many high-income countries has been 
achieved not only by warning people of the health risks but also increased 
taxation of tobacco, banning of advertising, banning of smoking in public 
places and support for smoking cessation to maintain a decline in smok-
ing rates. However, smoking rates remain high in many poorer areas and 
are increasing amongst young women. In many low-income countries, 
tobacco companies have found new markets and rates are rising.
There is a complex hierarchy of systems that interact to cause smokers 
to initiate and maintain their habit. At the molecular and cellular levels, nic-
otine acts on the nervous system to create dependence and acts to main-
tain the smoking habit. There are also strong inuences at the personal and 
social level, such as young female smokers being motivated to ‘stay thin’ 
or ‘look cool’ and peer pressure. Other important inuences in the wider 
environment include cigarette advertising, with the advertising budget of 
the tobacco industry being much greater than that of health services. 
Strategies to help individuals quit smoking (such as nicotine replacement 
therapy, anti-smoking advice and behavioural support) are cost-effective 
and form an important part of the overall anti-tobacco strategy.
Obesity
Obesity is an increasingly important risk factor underlying global burden 
of disease (see Box 5.3). The weight distribution of almost the whole 
population is shifting upwards – the slim are becoming less slim while the 
overweight and obese are becoming more so. In the UK, this translates 
into a 1-kilogram increase in weight per adult per year (on average over 
the adult population). The current obesity epidemic cannot be explained 
simply by individual behaviour and poor choice but also requires an 
understanding of the obesogenic environment that encourages people 
to eat more and exercise less. This includes the availability of cheap 
and heavily marketed energy-rich foods, the increase in labour-saving 
devices (e.g. elevators and remote controls) and the increase in passive 
transport (cars as opposed to walking, cycling, or walking to public trans-
port hubs). To combat the health impact of obesity, therefore, we need to 
help those who are already obese but also develop strategies that impact 
on the whole population and reverse the obesogenic environment.
Poverty and afuence
The adverse health and social consequences of poverty are well doc-
umented: high birth rates, high death rates and short life expectancy. 
Typically, with industrialisation, the pattern changes: low birth rates, low 
death rates and longer life expectancy. Instead of infections, chronic 
conditions such as heart disease dominate in an older population. 
Adverse health consequences of excessive afuence are also becoming 
apparent. Despite experiencing sustained economic growth for the last 
50 years, people in many high-income countries are not growing any 
happier and the litany of socioeconomic problems – crime, congestion, 
inequality, mental health problems – persists.
Many countries are now experiencing a ‘double burden’. They have 
large populations still living in poverty who are suffering from problems 
such as diarrhoea and malnutrition, alongside afuent populations (often 
in cities) who suffer from chronic illness such as diabetes and heart 
disease.
Atmospheric pollution
Emissions from industry, power plants and motor vehicles of sulphur 
oxides, nitrogen oxides, respirable particles and metals are severely pol-
luting cities and towns in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Eastern Europe. 
Increased death rates from respiratory and cardiovascular disease occur 
in vulnerable adults, such as those with established respiratory disease 
and older people, while children experience an increase in bronchitic 
symptoms. Low-income countries also suffer high rates of respiratory 
disease as a result of indoor pollution caused mainly by heating and 
cooking combustion.
Carbon dioxide and global warming
Climate change is arguably the world’s most important environmental 
health issue. A combination of increased production of carbon dioxide 
and habitat destruction, both caused primarily by human activity, seems 
to be the main cause. The temperature of the globe is rising, climate is 
being affected, and if the trend continues, sea levels will rise and rainfall 
patterns will be altered so that both droughts and oods will become 
more common. These have already claimed millions of lives during the 
past 20 years and have adversely affected the lives of many more. The 
economic costs of property damage and the impact on agriculture, food 
supplies and prosperity have also been substantial. The health impacts 
of global warming will also include changes in the geographical range 
of some vector-borne infectious diseases. Currently, politicians can-
not agree on an effective framework of actions to tackle the problem. 
Meanwhile, the industrialised world continues with lifestyles and levels of 
waste that are beyond the planet’s ability to sustain.
Principles of screening and immunisation
Screening
Screening is the application of a screening test to a large number of 
asymptomatic people with the aim of reducing morbidity or mortality 
from a disease. WHO have identied a set of (Wilson and Jungner) cri-
teria to guide health systems in deciding when it is appropriate to imple-
ment screening programmes. The essential criteria are:
 Is the disease an important public health problem?
 Is there a suitable screening test available?
 Is there a recognisable latent or early stage?
 Is there effective treatment for the disease at this stage which 
improves prognosis?
A suitable screening test is one that is cheap, acceptable, easy to 
perform, safe and gives a valid result in terms of sensitivity and specic-
ity. Screening programmes should always be evaluated in trials so that 
robust evidence is provided in favour of their adoption. These evaluations 
are prone to several biases – self-selection bias, lead-time bias and length 

[[p117]]
Epidemiology    91
5
bias – and these need to be accounted for in the analysis. Examples of 
large-scale screening programmes in the UK include breast, colorectal 
and cervical cancer national screening programmes (https://www.gov.
uk/topic/population-screening-programmes) and a number of screening 
tests carried out in pregnancy and in the newborn, such as the:
 diabetic eye screening programme
 fetal anomaly screening programme
 infectious diseases in pregnancy screening programme
 newborn and infant physical examination screening programme
 newborn blood spot screening programme
 newborn hearing screening programme
 sickle-cell anaemia and thalassaemia screening programme.
These are illustrated in Figure 5.2
Problems with screening include:
 over-diagnosis (of a disease that would not have come to clinical 
attention on its own or would not have led to death)
 false reassurance
 diversion of resources from investments that could control the dis-
ease more cost-effectively.
Immunisation
Immunisation can confer immunity to specic infectious diseases and 
be either passive (through injected antibodies, such as the monoclo-
nal palivizimab against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection given 
to premature infants) or active (through administration of a vaccine). 
Immunisation invokes antibody and/or cell-mediated immunity and 
can lead to both short- and longer-term protection in the person who 
is vaccinated. Immunisation has also been used to eradicate a dis-
ease such as occurred in the smallpox eradication programme and 
is currently being targeted in the polio eradication programme. As 
well as direct effects of vaccination a number of indirect effects can 
occur – such as protection of individuals who are vaccinated through 
altering disease transmission leading to ‘herd immunity’; or reduction 
of antibiotic resistance through selective reduction of pneumococcal 
serogroups that are associated with antibiotic resistance. The UK 
immunisation schedule is described in detail and regularly updated in 
the UK government publication ‘Immunisation against infectious dis-
ease’ (Green Book).
Epidemiology
Epidemiologists study disease in free-living humans, seeking to describe 
patterns of health and disease and to understand how different expo-
sures cause or prevent disease (Box 5.5). Chronic diseases and risk 
factors (e.g. smoking, obesity etc.) are often described in terms of their 
prevalence. A prevalence is simply a proportion, for example the preva-
lence of diabetes among people aged 80 and older in developed coun-
tries is around 10%.
Events such as deaths, hospitalisations and rst occurrences of a dis-
ease are described using incidence rates, so, for example, if there are 
100 new cases of a disease in a single year in a population of 1000, 
the incidence rate is 105 per 1000 person-years. The rate is 105 rather 
than 100 because the denominator is person-time, the sum of the total 
‘exposed’ time for the population, which in this example is 950 per-
son-years. Person-time is the sum of the total ‘exposed’ time for the 
population and in this example is 950 person-years. The reason the per-
son-time is less than 1000 is that 100 people experienced the event. 
These 100 people are assumed to have had an event, on average, half-
way through the time-period, removing 100 ×0.5 person-years from the 
exposure-time (as it is not possible to have a rst occurrence of a disease 
twice).
A similar measure to the incidence rate is the cumulative incidence 
or risk, which is the number of new cases as a proportion of the total 
people at risk at the beginning of the exposure time. If in the example 
above the same 1000 people were observed for a year (i.e. with no one 
joining or leaving the group) then the one-year risk is 10% (100/1000). 
The time-period should always be specied for risks.
These rates and proportions are used to describe how diseases (and 
risk factors) vary according to time, person and place. Temporal varia-
tion may occur seasonally; for example, malaria occurs in the wet sea-
son but not the dry, or as longer-term ‘secular’ trends, e.g. malaria may 
re-emerge due to drug resistance. Person comparisons include age, sex, 
socio-economic status, employment, and lifestyle characteristics. Place 
comparisons include the local environment (e.g. urban versus rural) and 
international comparisons.
Understanding causes and effect
Epidemiological research complements that based on animal, cell and 
tissue models, the ndings of which do not always translate to humans. 
For example, only a minority of drug discoveries from laboratory research 
are found to be effective when tested in people.
However, differentiating causes from mere non-causal associations is 
a considerable challenge for epidemiology. This is because while labora-
tory researchers can directly manipulate conditions to isolate and under-
stand causes, such approaches are impossible in free-living populations. 
Epidemiologists have developed a different approach, based around a 
number of study designs (Box 5.6). Of these, the clinical trial is closest to 
the laboratory experiment. An early example of a clinical trial is shown in 
Figure 5.3, along with ‘effect measures’ which are used to quantify the 
difference in rates and risks.
In clinical trials, patients are usually randomly allocated to treatments 
so that, on average, groups are similar apart from the intervention of 
interest. Nevertheless, for any particular trial, especially a small trial, the 
laws of probability mean that differences can and do occur by chance. 
Poorly designed or executed trials can also limit comparability between 
groups. Allocation may not truly be random (e.g. because of inadequate 
concealment of the randomisation sequence), and there may be system-
atic differences (biases) in the way people allocated to different groups 
are treated or studied.
Such biases also occur in observational epidemiological study 
designs, such as cohort, case–control and cross-sectional studies (see 
Box 5.6). These designs are also much more subject to the problem of 
confounding than are randomised trials.
Confounding is where the relationship between an exposure and out-
come of interest is confused by the presence of some other causal factor. 
For example, coffee consumption may be associated with lung cancer 
because smoking is commoner among coffee-drinkers. Here, smoking is 
said to confound the association between coffee and lung cancer.
Despite these limitations, for most causes of diseases, randomised 
controlled trials are not feasible because of ethical, or more often prac-
tical, considerations. Epidemiologists therefore seek to minimise bias 
and confounding by good study design and analysis. Epidemiologists 
subsequently make causal inferences by balancing the probability that 
an observed association has been caused by chance, bias and/or con-
founding against the alternative probability that the relationship is causal. 
This weighing-up requires an understanding of the frequency and impor-
tance of different sources of bias and confounding as well as the scien-
tic rationale of the putative causal relationship. It was this approach, 
collectively and over a number of years, that settled the fact that smoking 
causes lung cancer, and, subsequently, heart disease.
Mendelian randomisation
Mendelian randomisation (MR) is a method to study whether the rela-
tionship between a (modiable) risk factor and a disease may be causal. 
It uses genetic variation in a gene that inuences the level of the risk 
factor under consideration and studies the impact of this variation on 

[[p118]]
92    POPULATION HEALTH AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Blood for sickle cell
and thalassaemia
Commence
folic acid
Pre-conception
Antenatal
Newborn
Blood for haemoglobin,
group, rhesus and
antibodies as early as
possible, or as soon
as a woman arrives for
care, including labour
Blood for syphilis, hepatitis B, HIV and
rubella susceptibility as early as possible,
or at any stage of the pregnancy,
including labour
Re-offer screening for
infectious diseases if
initially declined
For babies of hepatitis B-positive
mothers, give hepatitis B vaccination
± immunoglobulin within 24 hrs*
Repeat
haemoglobin
and antibodies
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
Birth
Key
Week
Blood for T21,
T18 and T13
(combined test)
Blood for T21
(quadruple test)
Newborn
physical
examination
by 72 hrs
Newborn blood spot screens
(ideally on day 5) for:
 sickle cell disease (SCD),
cystic fibrosis (CF), congenital
hypothyroidism (CHT) and inherited
metabolic diseases (PKU, MCADD,
MSUD, IVA, GA1 and HCU)
Note that babies who missed
the screen can be tested up to
1 year (except CF offered up
to 8 weeks)
Early pregnancy scan to
support T21, T18 and
T13 screening
Women with type 1 or type 2
diabetes are offered diabetic
eye (DE) screening annually.
In pregnancy women with
type 1 or type 2 diabetes are
offered a DE screen when
they first present for care
Give screening
information as
soon as possible
Give and discuss
newborn screening
information
Follow-up DE screen for
women with type 1 or 2
diabetes found to have
diabetic retinopathy
Further DE screen for
women with type 1 or 2
diabetes
Detailed ultrasound
scan for structural
abnormalities, including
T18 and T13
Newborn
hearing
screen
Infant physical
examination
at 6–8 weeks
Fetal anomaly (Down syndrome/T21,
Edwards syndrome/T18, Patau
syndrome/T13, and fetal anomaly
ultrasound)
Sickle cell and thalassaemia
Newborn and infant
physical examination
Newborn blood spot
Infectious diseases
in pregnancy
Diabetic eye
Newborn hearing
Fig. 5.2 UK NHS pregnancy and newborn screening programmes. Antenatal and newborn screening timeline. *To stop mother-to-baby transmission of infection follow 
up all infection screens in pregnancy that are positive: carry out paediatric assessment and follow-up of mothers who are found to be HIV-positive or had syphilis treatment in 
pregnancy; and if mothers are found to be susceptible to rubella then offer the mother MMR vaccination postnatally and refer to GP for second dose. (GA1 = glutaric aciduria 
type 1; HCU = homocystinuria; IVA = isovaleric acidaemia; MCADD = medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deciency; MSUD = maple syrup urine deciency; 
PKU = phenylketonuria) Based on Version 8.4, January 2019. Gateway Ref: 20144696. www.gov.uk/phe/screening.

[[p119]]
Epidemiology    93
5
disease risk (see Fig. 5.4 for an example). The genetic variant (or mul-
tiple variants or genetic risk score) is used as an instrumental variable 
under certain assumptions. MR investigates the effect of differences 
in the risk factor level through the life course which have been deter-
mined by the genetic variants. This approach uses observational data 
to test a proposed causal relationship and to estimate the size of effect. 
Guidelines such as STROBE-MR have been published for the proper 
conduct of these studies and analytic software packages are now avail-
able which contain a range of methods and tools. The selection of the 
most appropriate method depends on the research question and the 
data structure.
The MR approach requires very large sample sizes to have sufcient 
power and very large databases of genetic and health data such as UK 
Biobank are often used. MR can be conducted using either individual 
level data or summary data from genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS); and data from one study (one sample) or two studies with the 
variant–risk factor association measure from one and the risk factor–
outcome association from the other (two sample).
Correct interpretation of MR results is challenging and multiple ana-
lytic methods are often employed. This includes methods to detect and 
adjust for pleiotropy (having more than one effect) which is a common 
problem in data interpretation. The strength of the conclusions depends 
on the degree to which instrumental variable assumptions are met and 
the level of consistency of ndings across different methods. MR has 
proven useful in both identifying new causal relationships or conrming 
trial results but also in redirecting research interest away from relation-
ships that have been shown not to be causal. MR can be considered 
5.5 Calculation of risk using descriptive epidemiology
Prevalence
 The ratio of the number of people with a longer-term disease or condition at a 
specied time, to the number of people in the population who are at risk
Incidence
 The number of events (new cases or episodes) occurring in the population at 
risk during a dened period of time
Attributable risk
 The difference between the risk (or incidence) of disease in exposed and non-
exposed populations
Attributable fraction
 The ratio of the attributable risk to the incidence
Relative risk
 The ratio of the risk (or incidence) in the exposed population to the risk (or 
incidence) in the non-exposed population
5.6 Epidemiological study designs
Design
Description
Example
Clinical trial
Enrols a sample from 
a population and 
compares outcomes 
after randomly 
allocating patients to an 
intervention
The Medical Research 
Council (MRC) streptomycin 
trial – demonstrated 
effectiveness of streptomycin 
in tuberculosis
Cohort
Enrols a sample from 
a population and 
compares outcomes 
according to exposures
The Framingham Study – 
identied risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease
Case–control
Enrols cases with an 
outcome of interest and 
controls without that 
outcome, and compares 
exposures between the 
groups
Doll and Hill’s study on 
smoking and carcinoma 
of the lung (BMJ 1950, 2) 
demonstrated that smoking 
caused lung cancer
Cross-sectional
Enrols a cross-section 
(sample) of people 
from the population of 
interest. Obtains data on 
exposures and outcomes
World Health Organization 
Demographic and Health 
Survey. Captures risk factor 
data in a uniform way across 
many countries
Enrolled 107 patients
with tuberculosis
Effect measures
Risk ratio (relative risk, RR)
Odds ratio (OR)
Absolute risk reduction (ARR)
Relative risk reduction (RRR)
Number needed to treat to prevent
one death (NNT= 1/ARR)
Random allocation
Streptomycin
55 patients
Bed rest
52 patients
Follow-up and count deaths
Events 
4
Risk  
7.3%
Odds  
0.068
Events 
15
Risk  
28.8%
Odds  
0.224
0.25
0.30
21.6%
74.8%
4.6
Fig. 5.3 An example of a clinical trial: streptomycin versus bed rest in 
tuberculosis. Both prevalences and risks are, in fact, proportions and are therefore 
frequently expressed as odds. The reasons for doing so are beyond the scope of 
this text.
Genotype group B
Population
LDL-C lower
LDL-C unchanged
CV event rate lower
CV event rate unchanged
Random allocation of alleles
Genotype group A
Fig. 5.4 Mendelian randomisation. An example showing comparison of a 
conventional trial with a Mendelian randomisation study. (CV = cardiovascular; 
LDL-C = low-density lipoprotein cholesterol) Adapted with permission from 
Bennett DA, Holmes MV. Heart 2017; 103:1400–1407.

[[p120]]
94    POPULATION HEALTH AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
to provide further evidence for or against a causal relationship but care 
should be taken in interpretation of the size of the expected impact from 
an intervention.
Health data/informatics
As patients pass through health and social care systems, data are 
recorded concerning their family background, lifestyle and disease 
states, which is of potential interest to health-care organisations seek-
ing to deliver services, policy-makers concerned with improving health, 
scientic researchers seeking to understand health, and also to phar-
maceutical and other commercial organisations seeking to identify 
markets.
There is a long tradition of maintaining health information systems. 
In most countries, the registration of births and deaths is required by 
law, and in the majority, the cause of death is also recorded (Fig. 5.5). 
There are numerous challenges in ensuring such data are useful, espe-
cially for making comparisons across time and place. First, a system of 
standard terminologies is needed, such as the World Health Organization 
International Classication of diseases, which provides a list of diagnos-
tic codes attempting to cover every diagnostic entity. Secondly, these 
terms must be understood to refer to the same, or at least similar dis-
eases in different places. Thirdly, access to diagnostic skill and facilities 
is required, fourthly standard protocols for assigning clinical diagnoses 
to ICD-10 codes are needed and fthly, robust quality control processes 
are needed to maintain some level of data completeness and accuracy.
Many countries employ similar systems for hospitalisations, either to 
allow recovery of healthcare utilisation costs, or to manage and plan ser-
vices. Similar data are, however, rarely collected for community-based 
healthcare. Nor are detailed data on health-care process generally 
included in national data systems.
Consequently, there has been considerable interest in using data from 
information technology systems used to deliver care – such as electronic 
patient records, drug-dispensing databases, radiological software, and 
clinical laboratory information systems.
Data from such systems are, of course, much less structured than 
those obtained from vital registrations. Moreover, the completeness of 
such data depends greatly on local patterns of healthcare utilisation as 
well as how clinicians and others use IT systems within different settings. 
As such, deriving useful unbiased information from such data is a con-
siderable challenge.
Much of the discipline of health informatics is concerned with address-
ing this challenge. One approach has been to develop comprehensive 
standard classication systems such as SNOMED-CT ‘a standardised, 
multilingual vocabulary of terms relating to the care of the individual’ 
which has been designed for electronic health-care records. An alterna-
tive has been to use statistical methods such as natural language pro-
cessing to automatically derive information from free text (such as culling 
diagnoses from radiological reports), or to employ ‘machine learning’, in 
which software algorithms are applied to data in order to derive useful 
insights. Such approaches are suited to large, messy data where the 
costs of systematisation would be prohibitive. It is likely that such inno-
vations will over the coming years provide useful information to com-
plement that obtained from more traditional health information systems.
Cause of death
Approximate
interval between
onset and death
I
Disease or condition directly
leading to death*
INTERNATIONAL FORM OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATE OF CAUSE OF DEATH
due to (or as a consequence of)
due to (or as a consequence of)
due to (or as a consequence of)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
I21.9
E78.0
J47
*This does not mean the mode of dying, e.g. heart failure, respiratory failure.
It means the disease, injury, or complication that caused death.
Antecedent causes
Morbid conditions, if any,
giving rise to the above cause,
stating the underlying
condition last
II
Other significant conditions
contributing to the death, but
not related to the disease or
condition causing it
Fig. 5.5 Completed death certicate. International Classication of Diseases 10 (ICD-10) codes are appended in red. Based on World Health Organization, ICD-10, vol. 2. 
Geneva: WHO; 1990. Form retrieved from https://commons.m.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:International_form_of_medical_certicate_of_cause_of_death.png.

[[p121]]
Further information    95
5
Management of epidemics
An epidemic, as dened by the World Health Organization, occurs when 
‘in a community or region [the] cases of an illness, specic health-related 
behaviour, or other health-related events [are] clearly in excess of normal 
expectancy’. Epidemics that are small-scale or conned to a small geo-
graphic area are informally referred to as ‘outbreaks’.
Epidemics are regularly caused where preventative measures break 
down; examples include breaches of food safety procedures in restau-
rants resulting in outbreaks of enteropathogenic E. coli infection, failure 
to adequately maintain cooling towers causing Legionella infections and 
falls in vaccination coverage resulting in measles epidemics.
Epidemics can also arise from novel infectious agents such as the 
SARS-CoV-1, MERS, SARS-CoV-2 and H1N1 viruses, for which new 
preventative measures require to be developed. Where epidemics from 
novel agents are not controlled locally, but instead spread beyond inter-
national borders, these are termed pandemics, of which SARS-CoV-2 
and H1N1 are examples.
To detect epidemics early, public health agencies undertake surveil-
lance. Surveillance involves the collection and review of cases that have 
been identied via statutory notications, or health information systems 
(such as microbiology reporting systems). For some infections such as 
E. coli and Legionella, one challenge for public health agencies is to 
distinguish epidemics from ‘sporadic’ cases at an early stage. This is 
done using human judgement, for example, if a large number of cases of 
E. coli occur in individuals who ate a specic food, although this task is 
sometimes supported using computer algorithms.
Epidemics require an incident management team, some of whose 
members have legal powers to impose measures to control infection. 
The team establish a formal case denition for conrmed, probable and 
possible cases (based on epidemiological features as well as clinical and/
or microbiological ndings), interview individuals with whom cases have 
had signicant contact (termed contact tracing), test potential sources 
of infections (e.g. foodstuffs or industrial cooling towers), and implement 
control measures. The latter might include requiring infected individuals 
to isolate for a time period (e.g. until they are asymptomatic or until they 
test negative depending on the infectious agent), and/or ordering tem-
porary closure of businesses thought to be sources of infection (e.g. a 
restaurant with poor food hygiene practices).
Epidemic curves are crucial to the monitoring and management of 
epidemics. Figure 5.6 shows a notional epidemic curve for an epidemic 
caused by a single source, which is eliminated after 31 days. However, 
they are also used in more complex epidemics where there is per-
son-to-person spread. In the latter, epidemic curves are used to esti-
mate key statistics such as the basic reproduction number (R0) in the 
population, as well as to make projections about future infections. Where 
the source of an epidemic is not apparent, comparative epidemiological 
methods can be used to identify the likely source, for example, a case–
control design may identify a higher than expected consumption of a 
given food – for example uncooked legumes – among cases compared 
to controls prompting testing of foods, an education campaign and/or 
product recalls.
The principles for managing pandemics are similar to those for man-
aging epidemics but operate on a national or international scale. The 
universality of pandemics, however, means that they pose special prob-
lems. First, they pose risks to the society-wide infrastructure needed 
to deal with diseases, including, but not limited to health-care facilities. 
Secondly, pandemics, unlike local and regional epidemics are rare, so 
agencies have little direct experience with their management. For this 
reason, most settings develop pandemic plans and undertake regu-
lar table-top simulations to test and improve their preparedness. The 
COVID-19 pandemic, caused by SARS-CoV-2, is a key example and is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 13
Further information
Kindig D, Stoddart G. What is population health? Am J Publ Health 2003;93:
380–383.
UK Faculty of Public Health. What is public health? http://www.fph.org.uk/what_
is_public_health
Burden of disease
GBD  Diseases and Injuries Collaborators. Global burden of 369 diseases and 
injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2019; 2020(396): 
1204–1222.
GBD  Risk Factors Collaborators. Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 
countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2019; 2020(396):1223–1249.
GBD  Viewpoint Collaborators. Five insights from the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2019. Lancet 2019; 2020(396):1135–1159.
Screening
Gov.UK. Population screening programmes. https://www.gov.uk/topic/population-
screening-programmes Detailed information on 11 NHS population screening 
programmes.
Immunisation
Gov.UK. Immunisation against infectious disease. https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/immunisation-against-infectious-disease-the-green-
book The Green Book has the latest information on vaccines and vaccination 
procedures, for vaccine-preventable infectious diseases in the UK.
Epidemiology
Burgess S, Davey Smith G, Davies NM, et al. Guidelines for performing Mendelian 
randomization investigations. Wellcome Open Res 2020;4:186.
STROBE-MR Steering Group: STROBE-MR: Guidelines for strengthening the 
reporting of Mendelian randomization studies. PeerJ https://peerj.com/
preprints/27857/
Days
New cases
1
0
5
10
15
6
11
16
21
26
31
26
41
Fig. 5.6 Epidemic curve for a notional outbreak within a single ongoing 
source. Red line indicates time point where source of infection was removed (e.g. 
closure of a restaurant).

[[p122]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p123]]
Multiple Choice Questions 
 5.1. Which of the following are examples of large-scale screening 
programmes across all of the UK in 2021?
A. Cervical cancer national screening programme in women
B. Prostate cancer national screening programme in men
C. Diabetic eye screening programme in both men and women
D. Newborn hearing screening programme
 E. Abdominal aortic aneurysm screening programme in both men 
and women
Answer: A, C and D.
Prostate cancer screening has not proven to be cost-effective and 
thus is not approved by the UK National Screening Committee. An 
abdominal aortic aneurysm screening programme operates only in men 
65 years of age or over but not in women.
 5.2. Which of the following statements describe the current newborn 
blood spot screening programme in the UK?
A. Ideally, blood spots should be collected on day 14
B.  Babies who missed the screen can be tested up to 1 month  
of age
C. Blood spots are screened for sickle-cell disease
D. Blood spots are screened for cystic brosis
 E. Blood spots are screened for congenital hypothyroidism
Answer: C, D and E.
Ideally, blood spots should be collected on day 5. Babies who missed 
the screen can be tested up to 1 year of age. Newborn blood spot 
screens for: sickle-cell disease, cystic brosis, congenital hypothyroid-
ism and inherited metabolic diseases (PKU, MCADD, MSUD, IVA, GA1 
and HCU – see Fig. 5.2).

[[p124]]
Principles of infectious disease
6
JAT Sandoe
DH Dockrell
Agents causing infection 98
Normal microbial ora 100
Host–pathogen interactions 101
Investigation of infection 102
Direct detection of pathogens 103
Culture 104
Indirect detection of pathogens 105
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing 106
Epidemiology of infection 106
Infection prevention and control 108
Health care-associated infection 109
Outbreaks of infection 109
Immunisation 111
Antimicrobial stewardship 112
Treatment of infectious diseases 113
Principles of antimicrobial therapy 113
Antibacterial agents 116
Antimycobacterial agents 121
Antifungal agents 121
Antiviral agents 122
Antiparasitic agents 124

[[p125]]
98    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
‘Infection’ in its strict sense describes the situation where microorganisms 
or other infectious agents become established in the host organism’s 
cells or tissues, replicate, induce a host response, and result in pathologic 
changes in tissues. If a microorganism survives and replicates on an epithe-
lial surface without causing pathological change the host is said to be ‘colo-
nised’ by that organism. If a microorganism survives and lies dormant after 
invading host cells or tissues, infection is said to be ‘latent’. When a micro-
organism, or the host response to it, is sufcient to cause illness or harm, 
then the process is said to have caused infection, which may manifest by 
symptoms or signs. In milder cases there can be asymptomatic infection 
that may be identied by detection of a pathogen or the host response 
to the pathogen. Most pathogens (agents that can cause infection) are 
microorganisms but some are multicellular organisms. The manifestations 
of disease may aid pathogen dissemination (e.g. diarrhoea or coughing).
The term ‘infection’ is often used interchangeably with ‘infectious dis-
ease’ but not all infections are ‘infectious’, i.e. transmissible from person 
to person, and not all infections result in symptomatic disease. Infectious 
diseases caused by pathogens that are transmitted between hosts can 
also be called ‘communicable diseases’, whereas infection caused by 
organisms that are already colonising the host are described as ‘endog-
enous’. The distinction is blurred in some situations, including health 
care-associated infections such as meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA) or Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium) difcile infection 
(CDI), in which colonisation precedes infection but the colonising bac-
teria may have been recently transmitted between patients. The chain 
of infection (Fig. 6.1) describes elements for communicable disease 
transmission.
Despite dramatic advances in hygiene, immunisation and antimicrobial 
therapy, infections still cause a massive burden of disease worldwide. 
Key challenges remain in tackling infection in resource-poor countries. 
Microorganisms are continually mutating and evolving; the emergence 
of new infectious agents (e.g. SARS-CoV-2, see Ch. 13) and antimi-
crobial-resistant microorganisms is therefore inevitable. This chapter 
describes the biological and epidemiological principles of infectious dis-
eases and the general approach to their prevention, diagnosis and treat-
ment. Specic infectious diseases are described in Chapters 13–15 and 
many of the organ-based chapters.
Agents causing infection 
The concept of an infectious agent was established by Robert Koch in 
the 19th century (Box 6.1). Although fullment of ‘Koch’s postulates’ 
became the standard for conrming the cause of an infection, many 
infectious agents do not full Koch’s postulates (e.g. uncultivable organ-
isms and the causes of endogenous infections), and the postulates are 
now of mainly historical interest. The groups of infectious agents that are 
now recognised are described in the following sections.
A
B
C
Fig. 6.1 The chain of infection can be linear (A) and cyclical (B and C). 
Campylobacter enteritis) require a portal of exit from 
respiratory virus infection) require a mode of exit from the infected person, a mode of transmission (e.g. contaminated respiratory droplets or transmission via the surface of an 
susceptible human host and a mode of transmission back to the insect vector. Many infections involve a combination of these modes of transmission (e.g. Lyme disease, which 
has both an animal host and an insect vector) or several different modes of transmission.
6.1 Denition of an infectious agent – Koch’s postulates
1. The same organism must be present in every case of the disease.
2. The organism must be isolated from the diseased host and grown in pure 
culture.
3. The isolate must cause the disease, when inoculated into a healthy, susceptible 
animal.
4. The organism must be re-isolated from the inoculated, diseased animal.

[[p126]]
Agents causing infection     99
6
Viruses 
Viruses are incapable of independent replication. Instead, they subvert 
host cellular processes to ensure synthesis of their nucleic acids and 
proteins. Viruses’ genetic material (the genome) consists of single- or 
double-stranded DNA or RNA. Retroviruses transcribe their RNA into 
DNA in the host cell by reverse transcription. An antigenically unique pro-
tein coat (capsid) encloses the genome, and together these form the 
nucleocapsid. In many viruses, the nucleocapsid is packaged within a 
lipid envelope. Enveloped viruses are less able to survive in the envi-
ronment and are spread by respiratory, sexual or blood-borne routes, 
including arthropod-based transmission. Non-enveloped viruses survive 
better in the environment and are predominantly transmitted by faecal–
oral or, less often, respiratory routes. A generic virus life cycle is shown 
in Figure 6.2. A virus that infects a bacterium is a bacteriophage (phage).
Prokaryotes: bacteria (including mycobacteria and 
actinomycetes) 
Prokaryotic cells can synthesise their own proteins and nucleic acids, and 
are able to reproduce autonomously, although they lack a nucleus. The 
bacterial cell membrane is bounded by a peptidoglycan cell wall, which is 
thick (20–80 nm) in Gram-positive organisms and thin (5–10 nm) in Gram-
negative ones. The Gram-negative cell wall is surrounded by an outer mem-
brane containing lipopolysaccharide. Genetic information is contained within 
a chromosome but bacteria may also contain rings of extra-chromosomal 
DNA, known as plasmids, which can be transferred between organisms, 
without cells having to divide. Bacteria may be embedded in a polysaccha-
ride capsule, and motile bacteria are equipped with agella. Although many 
prokaryotes are capable of independent existence, some (e.g. Chlamydia tra-
chomatis, Coxiella burnetii) are obligate intracellular organisms. Bacteria that 
can grow in articial culture media are classied and identied using a range 
of characteristics (Box 6.2); examples are shown in Figures 6.3 and 6.4
Eukaryotes: fungi, protozoa and helminths 
Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound organelles, including nuclei, 
mitochondria and Golgi apparatus. Pathogenic eukaryotes are unicellular 
(e.g. yeasts, protozoa) or complex multicellular organisms (e.g. nema-
todes, trematodes and cestodes).
Host cell
2  Penetration
    Receptor-mediated endocytosis
    or, in some enveloped viruses,
    membrane fusion (shown here)
3
Uncoating
Nucleic acid is liberated from the
phagosome (if endocytosed)
and/or capsid by complex
enzymatic and/or receptor-mediated
processes
Interaction between host receptor   
molecule and virus ligand   
(determines host-specificity of the virus)   
Adsorption   
1   
Lipid envelope
Capsid
Nucleic acid
Virus
Assembly 5
Assembly of virus components   
is mediated by host and/or   
viral enzymes   
Release 6
Complete virus particles are   
released by budding of host cell   
membrane (shown here) or   
disintegration of host cell   
4   
Synthesis   
Nucleic acid and protein synthesis is mediated by   
host and/or viral enzymes. This takes place in nucleus  
or cytoplasm, depending on the specific virus   
Fig. 6.2 A generic virus life cycle. Life cycle components common to most viruses are host cell attachment and penetration, virus uncoating, nucleic acid and protein 
synthesis, virus assembly and release. Virus release is achieved either by budding, as illustrated, or by lysis of the cell membrane. Life cycles vary between viruses.
6.2 How bacteria are identied
Gram stain reaction (see Fig. 6.3)
 Gram-positive (thick peptidoglycan layer), Gram-negative (thin peptidoglycan) or 
unstainable
Microscopic morphology
 Cocci (round cells) or bacilli (elongated cells)
 Presence or absence of capsule
Cell association
 Association in clusters, chains or pairs
Colonial characteristics
 Colony size, shape or colour
 Effect on culture media (e.g. β-haemolysis of blood agar in haemolytic 
streptococci; see Fig. 6.4)
Atmospheric requirements
 Strictly aerobic (requires O2), strictly anaerobic (requires absence of O2), facultatively 
aerobic (grows with or without O2) or micro-aerophilic (requires reduced O2)
Biochemical reactions
 Expression of enzymes (oxidase, catalase, coagulase)
 Ability to ferment or hydrolyse various biochemical substrates
Motility
 Motile or non-motile
Antibiotic susceptibility
 Identies organisms with invariable susceptibility (e.g. to optochin in 
Streptococcus pneumoniae or metronidazole in obligate anaerobes)
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-ight mass spectrometry 
(MALDI-TOF-MS)
 A rapid technique that identies bacteria and some fungi from their specic 
molecular composition
Sequencing bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA gene
 A highly specic test for identication of organisms in pure culture and in 
samples from normally sterile sites
Whole-genome sequencing
 Although not yet in routine use, whole-genome sequencing (WGS) offers the potential 
to provide rapid and simultaneous identication, sensitivity testing and typing of 
organisms from pure culture and/or directly from clinical samples. As such, WGS is 
likely to replace many of the technologies described above over the next few years

[[p127]]
100    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Gram-positive
bacilli
Colony morphology, growth
characteristics (e.g. growth
in anaerobic atmosphere),
Gram stain appearance,
MALDI-TOF-MS identification
Colony morphology, growth
characteristics, oxidase
reaction, sugar
fermentation/MALDI-TOF-MS
identification
Colony morphology, growth
characteristics, lactose
fermentation, oxidase
reaction, MALDI-TOF-MS
identification
Colony morphology (e.g.
haemolysis), Gram stain
appearance, agglutination
reactions, coagulase test,
catalase
Examples
Actinomycetes
Arcanobacterium haemo-
lyticum
Bacillus spp.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Lactobacillus spp.
Listeria monocytogenes
Nocardia spp.
Clostridium spp.
or
Examples
Neisseria meningitidis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Examples
Escherichia coli
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Proteus spp.
Enterobacter spp.
Serratia spp.
Salmonella spp.
Shigella spp.
Yersinia spp.
Vibrio spp.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Gram-positive cocci–clusters
Examples
Staphylococcus
aureus
Coagulase-negative
staphylococci
Gram-negative
cocci
Gram stain
Gram-negative
bacilli
Gram-positive
cocci
Gram-positive cocci–chains
Examples
Oral streptococci
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae (often
pairs)
-haemolytic strepto-
cocci
Enterococci (short chains) 
Fig. 6.3 Flow chart for bacterial identication, including Gram lm appearances on light microscopy (×100). (MALDI-TOF-MS = matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionisation time-of-ight mass spectroscopy).
B
A
Fig. 6.4 β-haemolytic streptococci (A) and α-haemolytic streptococci (B) 
spread on each half of a blood agar plate (backlit). This image is half life-size. 
× 0.5. ß-haemolysis renders the agar transparent around the colonies (A) and 
α-haemolysis imparts a green tinge to the agar (B).
Fungi exist as either moulds (lamentous fungi) or yeasts. Dimorphic 
fungi exist in either form, depending on environmental conditions (see 
Fig. 13.62). The fungal plasma membrane differs from the human cell 
membrane in that it contains the sterol, ergosterol. Fungi have a cell 
wall made up of polysaccharides, chitin and mannoproteins. In most 
fungi, the main structural component of the cell wall is β-1,3-D-glucan, a 
polysaccharide. These differences from mammalian cells are important 
because they offer useful therapeutic targets.
Protozoa and helminths are often referred to as parasites. Many par-
asites have complex multistage life cycles, which involve animal and/or 
plant hosts in addition to humans.
Prions 
Although prions are transmissible and have some of the characteristics 
of infectious agents, they are not microorganisms, and are discussed on 
page 1181.
Normal microbial ora 
The human body is colonised by large numbers of microorganisms (collec-
tively termed the human microbiota). Colonising bacteria, also referred to 
as the ‘normal bacterial ora’, are able to survive and replicate on epithelial 

[[p128]]
Host–pathogen interactions     101
6
surfaces, e.g. skin and mucosal surfaces. The gastrointestinal tract and 
the mouth are the two most heavily colonised sites in the body and they 
have distinct microbiota, in both composition and function. Knowledge of 
non-sterile body sites and their normal bacterial ora is required to inform 
microbiological sampling strategies and interpret culture results (Fig. 6.5).
The microbiota is the total burden of microorganisms, their genes and 
their environmental interactions, and is now recognised to have a profound 
inuence on human health and disease. Maintenance of the normal ora is 
benecial to normal immune function. Other functions include: lower gas-
trointestinal tract bacteria synthesise and excrete vitamins (e.g. vitamins K 
and B12); colonisation with normal ora confers ‘colonisation resistance’ to 
infection with pathogenic organisms by altering the local environment (e.g. 
lowering pH), producing antibacterial agents (e.g. bacteriocins (small anti-
microbial peptides/proteins), fatty acids and metabolic waste products), 
and inducing host antibodies that cross-react with pathogenic organisms.
Conversely, some body sites are either sterile or contain very low num-
bers of colonising bacteria. For example, the submucosal tissues, blood 
stream, peritoneal and pleural cavities are maintained as sterile by physi-
cal separation from the external environment; and the lower airways and 
bladder, sites that were formerly believed to be sterile but are now known 
to support limited microbiota, are protected from excessive contamina-
tion by the mucociliary escalator and urethral sphincter respectively, as 
well as local immune responses.
Members of the normal ora can cause (endogenous) infection by 
‘translocation’ from their normal habitat to other body sites or by exces-
sive growth at the ‘normal’ site (overgrowth). Overgrowth is exemplied 
by dental caries and ‘blind loop’ syndrome (p. 821). Translocation results 
from spread along a surface or penetration through a colonised surface, 
e.g. urinary tract infection caused by perineal/enteric ora, and surgical 
site infections, particularly of prosthetic materials, caused by skin ora 
such as staphylococci. Normal ora also contribute to disease by 
cross-infection; organisms colonising one individual can cause disease 
when transferred to another, more susceptible, individual.
The importance of limiting antimicrobial-induced perturbations of 
microbiota is increasingly recognised. ‘Probiotics’ are proprietary 
microbes or mixtures of microbes administered with the aim of restor-
ing a benecial prole of gastrointestinal normal ora. Faecal microora 
transplantation (FMT) has the same aim, by giving gastrointestinal micro-
biota from healthy people (ltered extract of faeces) to a patient. Although 
the clinical effectiveness of probiotics remains a subject of debate, FMT 
has proven benet in recurrent C. difcile infection.
Host–pathogen interactions 
A ‘pathogen’ is a microorganism that can cause infection. The manifes-
tations of infection, including a pathogen’s ability to cause severe disease 
in a previously healthy host, are affected by its ‘virulence’. Virulence is 
determined by the number and type of disease-causing proteins and 
other factors that it can produce (‘virulence factors’).
 Primary pathogens cause disease in a proportion of individuals to 
whom they are exposed, regardless of the host’s immunological 
status.
 Opportunistic pathogens cause disease only in individuals whose 
host defences are compromised, e.g. by an intravascular catheter, 
or when the immune system is compromised, by genetic suscepti-
bility or immunosuppressive therapy.
Pharynx
Haemophilus spp.
Moraxella catarrhalis
Neisseria spp. (including N. meningitidis)
Staph. aureus
Strep. pneumoniae
Strep. pyogenes (group A)
Oral streptococci (α-haemolytic)
Oral cavity
Oral streptococci (α-haemolytic)
Anaerobic Gram-positive bacilli
(including Actinomyces spp.)
Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
     Prevotella spp.
     Fusobacterium spp.
Candida spp.
Small bowel
Distally, progressively increasing
numbers of large bowel bacteria
Candida spp.
Large bowel
Enterobacterales
   Escherichia coli
   Klebsiella spp.
   Enterobacter spp.
   Proteus spp.
Enterococci
   E. faecalis
   E. faecium
Streptococcus anginosus group
   Strep. anginosus
   Strep. intermedius
   Strep. constellatus
Anaerobic Gram-positive bacilli
   Clostridium spp.
Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
   Bacteroides spp.
   Prevotella spp.
Candida spp.
Scalp
As for skin
Nares
Staph. aureus
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Skin
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Staph. aureus
Corynebacterium spp.
Propionibacterium spp.
Malassezia spp.
Hands
Resident: as for skin
Transient: skin flora (including
meticillin-resistant and other
Staph. aureus), bowel flora
(including Clostridioides difficile,
Candida spp. and Enterobacterales)
Vagina
Lactobacillus spp.
Staph. aureus
Candida spp.
Enterobacterales
Strep. agalactiae (group B)
Perineum
As for skin
As for large bowel
Fig. 6.5 Human non-sterile sites and normal ora in health.

[[p129]]
102    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Determinants of virulence 
For a primary pathogen to cause infection in a healthy host it must 
compete with colonising ora to reach target host cells. It can do this 
in various ways, including sequestration of nutrients, adapting metab-
olism to exploit metabolites not used by commensal ora, production 
of bacteriocins, and using motility to ‘swim’ to the site of infection. 
Many microorganisms, including viruses, use ‘adhesins’ to initiate their 
attachment to host cells. Some pathogens can invade through tis-
sues. Many bacteria and fungi multiply after initial adhesion to a host 
surface to form ‘biolms’. These are complex three-dimensional struc-
tures surrounded by a matrix of host and bacterial products, which 
afford protection to the colony and limit the effectiveness of antimicro-
bials. Biolm-related infections on man-made medical devices such as 
vascular catheters or grafts can be particularly difcult to treat.
Pathogens may produce toxins, microbial molecules that cause 
adverse effects on host cells, either at the site of infection, or remotely 
following carriage through the blood stream. Endotoxin is the lipid 
component of Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane lipopoly-
saccharide. It is released when bacterial cells are damaged and has 
generalised inflammatory effects. Exotoxins are proteins released by 
living bacteria, which often have specific effects on target organs 
(Box 6.3).
Intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria (e.g. Salmonella
spp., Listeria monocytogenes and Mycobacterium tuberculosis), para-
sites (e.g. Leishmania spp.) and fungi (e.g. Histoplasma capsulatum), are 
able to survive in intracellular environments, including after phagocytosis 
by macrophages. Pathogenic bacteria express different genes, depend-
ing on environmental stress (pH, iron starvation, O2 starvation etc.) and 
anatomical location.
Genetic diversity enhances the pathogenic capacity of bacteria. Some 
virulence factor genes are found on plasmids or in phages and are 
exchanged between different strains or species. The ability to acquire 
genes from the gene pool of all strains of the species increases diver-
sity and the potential for pathogenicity. Viruses exploit their rapid repro-
duction and potential to exchange nucleic acid with other strains of the 
virus to enhance diversity. Once a new strain acquires sufcient virulence 
genes, including those enhancing infectivity, it may become an epidemic 
or pandemic strain, resulting in regional or global transmission, respec-
tively. This phenomenon accounts for inuenza and COVID-19 pandem-
ics (see Box 6.10 and Ch. 13).
The host response 
Innate and adaptive immune and inammatory responses, which humans 
use to control the normal ora and respond to pathogens, are reviewed 
in Chapter 4
Pathogenesis of infectious disease 
The severity of an infection is determined by the virulence of the pathogen 
and the host response. Whilst an intact host response protects against 
infection or reduces its severity, an excessive response can be damaging. 
Both the host immune response and pathogen-produced factors can 
contribute to tissue injury and systemic manifestations of infection (see 
‘Sepsis’, p. 198). The contribution of the immune response to disease 
manifestations is exemplied by the immune reconstitution inammatory 
syndrome (IRIS), which can be seen in human immunodeciency virus 
(HIV) infection, post-transplantation neutropenia or tuberculosis (which 
causes suppression of T-cell function): there is a paradoxical worsening 
of the clinical condition as the immune dysfunction is corrected, caused 
by an exuberant but dysregulated inammatory response.
Clinical manifestations of infection 
The clinical manifestations of infection can be localised to the site of 
infection or generalised. Examples of local manifestations include the 
inammation of cellulitis, facial pain of sinusitis or neck stiffness of men-
ingitis (Ch. 13). Generalised manifestations include sweats, chills (feeling 
very cold, even with extra clothes/blankets), rigors, fevers, anorexia, leth-
argy and generalised aches, and many of these result from the immune 
response to infection. While the presence of infection may be clinically 
clear in some settings, often it is not. Identifying the responsible patho-
gen in patients with infection is usually not possible on clinical grounds, 
neither is prediction of pathogen susceptibility and resistance to antimi-
crobial agents. Hence there is a need to carefully investigate suspected 
infections to optimise, or avoid unnecessary, antimicrobial therapy. 
Rigors are a clinical symptom (or sign if they are witnessed) characterised 
by feeling very cold (‘chills’) and uncontrollable shivering, usually followed 
by fever and sweating. Rigors occur when the thermoregulatory centre 
attempts to correct a core temperature to a higher level by stimulating 
skeletal muscle activity and shaking.
Thermoregulation can be altered during infection, causing both hyper-
thermia (fever) and hypothermia. Fever is mediated mainly by ‘pyrogenic 
cytokines’ (e.g. interleukins IL-1 and IL-6, and tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF)), which are released in response to various stimuli. including acti-
vation of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) by microbial products (e.g. 
lipopolysaccharide) and factors released by injured cells (Ch. 4). This 
induces prostaglandin E2 production, which binds to specic receptors 
in the preoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus (thermoregulatory centre), 
causing the core temperature to rise.
Investigation of infection 
The aims of investigating a patient with suspected infection are: to con-
rm the presence of infection; identify the specic pathogen(s); and, where 
appropriate, identify its susceptibility to specic antimicrobial agents in order 
to optimise therapy. Pathogens may be detected directly (e.g. by culturing a 
normally sterile body site) or their presence may be inferred by identifying the 
host response to the organism (‘indirect detection’, Box 6.4), e.g. C-reactive 
protein or procalcitonin as part of the acute phase response (p. 68), although 
these are activated to varying extents by other inammatory stimuli. Careful 
sampling increases the likelihood of diagnosis (Box 6.5). Culture results must 
be interpreted in the context of the normal ora at the sampled site (see Fig. 
6.5). The extent to which a microbiological test result supports or excludes 
a particular diagnosis depends on its statistical performance (e.g. sensitivity, 
specicity, positive and negative predictive value). Sensitivity and specicity 
vary according to the type of test, sampling and processing techniques, and 
time between infection and testing. Positive and negative predictive values 
depend on the prevalence of the condition in the test population. The com-
plexity of test interpretation is illustrated in Figure 6.8 below, which shows 
the ‘windows of opportunity’ afforded by various testing methods. Given 
this complexity, coordinated thought and action ensures appropriate test 
application and timing; effective communication between clinicians and the 
microbiologists facilitates optimal results and interpretation.
6.3 Exotoxin-mediated bacterial diseases
Disease
Organism
Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea/
pseudomembranous colitis
Clostridioides difcile
Botulism
Clostridium botulinum
Cholera
Vibrio cholerae
Diphtheria
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli
(E. coli O157 and other strains)
Necrotising pneumonia
Staphylococcus aureus
Tetanus
Clostridium tetani
Toxic shock syndrome
Staph. aureus
Streptococcus pyogenes

[[p130]]
Investigation of infection     103
6
Detection of whole organisms 
Whole organisms are detected by examination of biological uids or tis-
sue using a microscope.
 Bright eld microscopy (in which the test sample is interposed 
between the light source and the objective lens) uses stains to 
enhance visual contrast between the organism and its background. 
Examples include Gram staining of bacteria and Ziehl–Neelsen or 
auramine staining of acid- and alcohol-fast bacilli (AAFB) in tubercu-
losis (the latter requires an ultraviolet light source). In histopatholog-
ical examination of tissue samples, stains are used to demonstrate 
not only the presence of microorganisms but also features of dis-
ease pathology.
 Dark eld microscopy (in which light is scattered to make organisms 
appear bright on a dark background) is used, for example, to exam-
ine genital chancre uid in suspected syphilis.
 Electron microscopy may be used to examine stool and vesicle uid 
to detect enteric and herpesviruses, respectively, but its use has 
largely been supplanted by nucleic acid detection (see below).
 Flow cytometry can be used to analyse liquid samples (e.g. urine) for 
the presence of particles based on properties such as size, imped-
ance and light scatter. This technique can detect bacteria but may 
misidentify other particles as bacteria too.
Detection of components of organisms 
Components of microorganisms detected for diagnostic purposes include 
nucleic acids, cell wall molecules, toxins and other antigens. Commonly 
used examples include SARS-CoV-2 antigen in respiratory secretions,
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 antigen in urine and cryptococcal 
polysaccharide antigen in cerebrospinal uid (CSF). Most antigen detec-
tion methods are based on in vitro binding of specic antigen/antibody 
and are therefore described with serological tests below. Other methods 
may be used, such as tissue culture cytotoxicity assay for C. difcile toxin. 
In toxin-mediated disease, detection of toxin may be of greater relevance 
than identication of the organism itself (e.g. stool C. difcile toxin).
Nucleic acid amplication tests 
In a nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT), specic sequences of micro-
bial DNA or RNA are identied using a nucleic acid primer that is ampli-
ed exponentially by enzymes to generate multiple copies of a target 
nucleotide sequence. The most commonly used NAAT is the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR; see Fig. 3.11). Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) 
is used to detect RNA from RNA viruses. The use of uorescent labels 
in the reaction enables ‘real-time’ detection of amplied DNA; quanti-
cation is based on the principle that the time taken to reach the detec-
tion threshold is proportional to the initial number of copies of the target 
nucleic acid sequence. In ‘broad range’ (bacterial) PCR the primers are 
targeted to parts of the gene that encode 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
that have shared DNA sequences across most bacteria. Between these 
shared DNA sequences, the 16S rRNA gene varies between species; 
so, using PCR, nucleotide sequencing of the product and comparison of 
the DNA sequence information with large databases, bacterial detection 
and species identication can be achieved. In multiplex PCR, multiple 
primer pairs are used to enable detection of several different organisms 
in a single reaction.
Determination of nucleotide sequences in a target gene(s) can be used 
to assign microorganisms to specic strains, which may be relevant to 
treatment and/or prognosis (e.g. in hepatitis C infection). Genes that are 
relevant to virulence (such as toxin genes) or antimicrobial resistance can 
also be detected; for example, the mecA gene can be used to screen 
for MRSA.
NAATs are the most sensitive direct detection methods and are also 
relatively rapid. They are used widely in virology, where the possibility 
of false-positive results from colonising or contaminating organisms is 
6.4 Tests used to diagnose infection
Non-specic markers of inammation/infection
 e.g. White cell count in blood sample (WCC), plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), 
procalcitonin (PCT)*, serum lactate, cell counts in urine or cerebrospinal uid 
(CSF), CSF protein and glucose
Direct detection of organisms or organism components
 Microscopy
 Detection of organism components (e.g. antigen, toxin)
 Nucleic acid amplication tests (e.g. polymerase chain reaction)
Culture of organisms
 ± Antimicrobial susceptibility testing
Tests of the host’s specic immune response
 Antibody detection
 Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRA)
*Although PCT is used increasingly in clinical practice, further evidence is required to establish 
its precise role in distinguishing bacterial infections from other causes of inammation.
6.5 How to provide samples for microbiological sampling
Communicate with the laboratory
 Discuss samples that require processing urgently or that may contain hazardous 
or unusual pathogens with laboratory staff before collection
 Communication is key to optimising microbiological diagnosis. If there is doubt about 
any aspect of sampling, it is far better to discuss it with laboratory staff beforehand 
than to risk diagnostic delay by inappropriate sampling or sample handling
Take samples based on a clinical diagnosis
 Sampling in the absence of clinical evidence of infection is rarely appropriate 
(e.g. collecting urine, or sputum for culture)
Use the correct container
 Certain tests (e.g. nucleic acid and antigen detection tests) require proprietary 
sample collection equipment
Follow sample collection procedures
 Failure to follow sample collection instructions precisely can result in false-
positive (e.g. contamination of blood culture samples) or false-negative (e.g. 
collection of insufcient blood for culture) results
Label sample and request form correctly
 Label sample containers and request forms according to local policies, with 
demographic identiers, specimen type and time/date collected
 Include clinical details on request forms
 Identify samples carrying a high risk of infection (e.g. blood liable to contain a 
blood-borne virus) with a hazard label
Use appropriate packaging
 Close sample containers tightly and package securely (usually in sealed plastic 
bags)
 Attach request forms to samples but not in the same compartment (to avoid 
contamination, should leakage occur)
Manage storage and transport
 Transport samples to the microbiology laboratory quickly
 Consider pre-transport storage, conditions (e.g. refrigeration, incubation, 
storage at room temperature) vary with sample type
 Notify the receiving laboratory prior to arrival of unusual or urgent samples, to 
ensure timely processing
Direct detection of pathogens 
Some direct detection methods provide rapid results and enable detec-
tion of organisms that cannot be grown easily on articial culture media, 
such as Chlamydia spp.; they can also provide information on antimicro-
bial susceptibility, e.g. M. tuberculosis.

[[p131]]
104    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
remote, and are applied to blood, respiratory samples, stool and urine. 
In bacteriology, PCR is used to examine CSF, blood, tissue and genital 
samples, and multiplex PCR is being developed for use in faeces. PCR 
is particularly helpful for microorganisms that cannot be readily cultured, 
e.g. Tropheryma whipplei, and is being used increasingly in mycology 
and parasitology.
Culture 
Microorganisms may be both detected and further characterised by cul-
ture from clinical samples (e.g. tissue, swabs and body uids).
 Ex vivo culture (tissue or cell culture) was widely used in the isolation 
of viruses but has been largely supplanted by NAATs.
 In vitro culture (in articial culture media) of bacteria and fungi is 
used to conrm the presence of pathogens, allow identication, test 
antimicrobial susceptibility and subtype the organism for epidemio-
logical purposes.
Culture has its limitations: results are not immediate, even for organ-
isms that are easy to grow, and negative cultures rarely exclude infection. 
Organisms such as M. tuberculosis are slow-growing, typically taking at 
least 2 weeks, even in rapid-culture systems. Certain organisms, such 
as Mycobacterium leprae and Tropheryma whipplei, cannot be cultivated 
on articial media, and others (e.g. Chlamydia spp. and viruses) grow 
only in culture systems, which are slow and labour-intensive.
Blood culture 
The terms ‘bacteraemia’ and ‘fungaemia’ describe the presence of bac-
teria and fungi in the blood without implication of clinical signicance, 
while the term ‘blood stream infection’ means bacteraemia or fungae-
mia are present together with symptoms or signs infection; this is dis-
cussed on p. 270. Bacteraemia/fungaemia is identied by inoculating a 
liquid culture medium with freshly drawn blood, which is then incubated 
in a system that monitors it constantly for growth of microorganisms 
(e.g. by detecting products of microbial respiration using uorescence; 
Fig. 6.6). If growth is detected, organisms are identied and sensitivity 
testing is performed. Traditionally, identication has been achieved by 
Gram stain appearance and biochemical reactions. However, matrix- 
assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-ight mass spectroscopy 
(MALDI-TOF-MS; see Box 6.2) is being used increasingly to identify 
organisms. MALDI-TOF-MS produces a prole of proteins of different 
sizes from the target microorganism and uses databases of such 
Department of
Microbiology
1  Patient sampling
Contamination minimised by
aseptic technique. Maximise
sensitivity by sampling correct
volume
2  Sample handling
Follow local instructions for safety,
labelling, and numbers of samples and
bottles required
3  Specimen transport
Transport samples to laboratory as quickly
as possible. Follow manufacturer’s
instructions for the blood culture system
used if temporary storage is required
4  Incubation
Incubate at 35–37°C for 5–7 days.
Microbial growth is usually detected
by constant automatic monitoring of
CO2. If no growth, specimen is
negative and discarded
5  Growth detection
Time to positivity (TTP) is usually
12–24 hrs in significant bacteraemia,
but may be shorter in overwhelming
sepsis or longer with fastidious
organisms (e.g. Brucella spp.) 
6  Preliminary results*
A Gram film of the blood culture medium is examined and
results are communicated immediately to the clinician
to guide antibiotic therapy
7  Incubation
A small amount of the medium
is incubated on a range of
culture media. Preliminary
susceptibility testing may be
carried out
8  Culture results*
Preliminary
susceptibility results
are communicated to
the clinician
9 Definitive results
Further overnight incubation
is often required for definitive
identification of organisms (by
biochemical testing) and additional
susceptibility testing; identification
by MALDI-TOF-MS (Fig. 6.7) is
more rapid
Overnight incubation required
Urgent communication required
10  Reporting
A final summary is released when all testing is complete. For
clinical care, communication of interim results (Gram film,
preliminary identification and susceptibility) is usually more
important than the final report. Effective clinical–laboratory
communication is vital
Fig. 6.6 An overview of the processing of blood cultures. *In laboratories equipped with MALDI-TOF-MS (see Fig. 6.7), rapid denitive organism identication may be 
achieved at stage 6 and/or stage 8.

[[p132]]
Investigation of infection     105
6
proles to identify the organism (Fig. 6.7). It is rapid and accurate. 
Taking multiple blood samples for culture at different times allows differ-
entiation of transient (one positive sample) and persistent (majority are 
positive) bacteraemia. This can be clinically important in identifying the 
source of infection.
Indirect detection of pathogens 
Tests may be used to detect the host’s immune (antibody) response 
to a specic microorganism, and can enable the diagnosis of infection 
with organisms that are difcult to detect by other methods or are no 
longer present in the host. The term ‘serology’ describes tests carried 
out on serum and includes both antigen (direct) and antibody (indirect) 
detection. Antigen detection tests used on other uids (e.g. CSF and 
respiratory secretions) are also described in this section, as they largely 
share the same methodology as serological tests.
Antibody detection 
Organism-specic antibody detection is applied mainly to blood 
(Fig. 6.8). Results are typically expressed as titres: that is, the reciprocal 
of the highest dilution of the serum at which antibody is detectable (e.g. 
detection at serum dilution of 1:64 gives a titre of 64). ‘Seroconversion’ 
is dened as either a change from negative to positive detection or a 
fourfold rise in titre between acute and convalescent serum samples. 
An acute sample is usually taken during the rst week of disease and 
the convalescent sample 2–4 weeks later. Earlier diagnosis can be 
achieved by detection of immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies, which are 
produced early in infection. A limitation of these tests is that antibody 
production requires a fully functional host immune system, so there may 
be false-negative results in immunocompromised patients. Also, other 
than in chronic infections and with IgM detection, antibody tests usually 
provide a retrospective diagnosis. False-positive results can occur when 
there is cross-reactivity of the test reagents with other molecules or when 
patients have been given blood products containing other people’s anti-
bodies. Serological testing methods are described below.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
The principles of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, EIA) 
are illustrated in Figure 6.9. These assays rely on linking an antibody with 
an enzyme that generates a colour change on exposure to a chromoge-
nic substrate. Various congurations allow detection of antigens or spe-
cic subclasses of immunoglobulin (e.g. IgG, IgM, IgA). ELISA may also 
be adapted to detect PCR products, using immobilised oligonucleotide 
hybridisation probes and various detection systems.
Immunoblot (Western blot) 
Microbial proteins are separated according to molecular weight by poly-
acrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and transferred (blotted) on to a 
nitrocellulose membrane, which is incubated with patient serum. Binding 
of specic antibody is detected with an enzyme–anti-immunoglobulin 
conjugate similar to that used in ELISA, and specicity is conrmed by 
its location on the membrane. Immunoblotting is a highly specic test, 
which may be used to conrm the results of less specic tests such as 
ELISA (e.g. in Lyme disease).
Immunouorescence assays 
Indirect immunouorescence assays (IFAs) detect antibodies by incubat-
ing a serum sample with immobilised antigen (e.g. virus-infected cells 
on a glass slide); any virus-specic antibody present in the serum binds 
to antigen and is then detected by uorescence microscopy using a u-
orescent-labelled anti-human immunoglobulin (‘secondary’ antibody). 
This method can also detect organisms in clinical samples (usually tissue 
or centrifuged cells) using a specic antibody in place of immobilised 
antigen to achieve capture.
Complement xation test (CFT) 
In a CFT, patient serum is heat-treated to inactivate complement and 
mixed with test antigen. Any specic antibody in the serum will com-
plex with the antigen. Complement is then added to the reaction. If 
antigen–antibody complexes are present, the complement will be ‘xed’ 
(consumed). Sheep erythrocytes, coated with an anti-erythrocyte anti-
body, are added. The degree of erythrocyte lysis reects the remaining 
complement and is inversely proportional to the quantity of the specic 
antigen–antibody complex present.
Agglutination tests 
When antigens are present on the surface of particles (e.g. cells, latex 
particles or microorganisms) and cross-linked with antibodies, visible 
clumping (or ‘agglutination’) occurs.
Lighter
m/z
Mass spectrum
Detector
Flight tube
Laser
Sample plate
Voltage grid
Intensity
Heavier
Separation region
(electric field-free)
Fig. 6.7 The workings of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-
of-ight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Adapted from Sobin K, Hameer D, 
Ruparel T. Digital genotyping using molecular afnity and mass spectrometry. Nature 
Rev Genet 2003; 4:1001–1008.
Acute sample
Nucleic acid (NA)
detection
Antigen (Ag)
detection
IgM
NA
Ag
IgG
Limit
of detection
Antibody detection: IgM
Antibody detection: IgG (seroconversion)
Antibody detection: IgG
(fourfold rise in titre)
Convalescent sample
Windows of diagnostic
opportunity
Serum levels
Fig. 6.8 Detection of antigen, nucleic acid and antibody in infectious 
disease. The acute sample is usually taken during the rst week of illness, and the 
convalescent sample 2–4 weeks later. Detection limits and duration of detectability 
vary between tests and diseases, although in most diseases immunoglobulin M (IgM) 
is detectable within the rst 1–2 weeks.

[[p133]]
106    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
 In direct agglutination, patient serum is added to a suspension of 
organisms that express the test antigen. The Widal agglutination test 
uses a suspension of Salmonella typhi and S. paratyphi ‘A’ and ‘B’, 
treated to retain only ‘O’ and ‘H’ antigens. These antigens are kept 
to detect corresponding antibodies in serum from a patient sus-
pected of having typhoid fever.
 In indirect (passive) agglutination, specic antigen is attached to the 
surface of carrier particles, which agglutinate when incubated with 
patient samples that contain specic antibodies.
 In reverse passive agglutination (an antigen detection test), the car-
rier particle is coated with antibody rather than antigen.
Immunodiffusion 
Immunodiffusion involves antibodies and antigen migrating through gels 
and forming insoluble complexes where they meet. The complexes are 
seen on staining as ‘precipitin bands’. Immunodiffusion is used in the 
diagnosis of dimorphic fungi and some forms of aspergillosis.
Lateral ow immunochromatography 
Lateral ow (LF) immunochromatography is mainly used to detect anti-
gens, and often in uids other then blood (e.g. respiratory secretions, 
urine). The system consists of a porous test strip (e.g. a nitrocellulose mem-
brane), at one end of which there is target-specic antibody, complexed 
with coloured microparticles. Further specic antibody is immobilised in 
a transverse narrow line some distance along the strip. Test material is 
added to the antibody–particle complexes, which then migrate along the 
strip by capillary action. If these are complexed with antigen, they will be 
immobilised by the specic antibody and visualised as a transverse line 
across the strip. If the test is negative, the antibody–particle complexes will 
bind to a line of immobilised anti-immunoglobulin antibody placed further 
along the strip, which acts as a negative control. Immunochromatographic 
tests are rapid and relatively cheap to perform, and are appropriate for 
point-of-care testing, e.g. in HIV-1, COVID-19 and malaria.
Antibody-independent specic immunological tests 
Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRA) are used to diagnose latent 
tuberculosis infection. The principle behind IGRA is illustrated in 
Fig. 17.42. IGRA cannot distinguish between latent and active tubercu-
losis infection and is therefore appropriate for use only in regions where 
the background incidence of tuberculosis is low.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing 
If growth of microorganisms in culture is inhibited by the addition of an 
antimicrobial agent, the organism is considered to be susceptible to 
that antimicrobial. Bacteriostatic agents cause reversible inhibition of 
replication and bactericidal agents cause cell death; the terms fungi static/
fungicidal are equivalent for antifungal agents, and virustatic/virucidal for 
antiviral agents. The lowest concentration of the antimicrobial agent at 
which growth is inhibited is the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), 
and the lowest concentration that causes cell death is the minimum bac-
tericidal concentration (MBC). If the MIC is less than or equal to a prede-
termined breakpoint threshold, the organism is considered susceptible, 
and if the MIC is greater than the breakpoint, it is resistant. Breakpoints 
are determined for antimicrobial agents using a combination of pharma-
cokinetic and clinical data. The relationship between in vitro antimicrobial 
susceptibility and clinical response is complex, as response also depends 
on severity of illness, site of infection, pharmacokinetics, immune status, 
comorbidities and antibiotic dosing. Thus, although treating a patient 
according to the results of susceptibility testing increases the likelihood of 
recovery, it does not guarantee therapeutic success.
Susceptibility testing is often carried out by disc diffusion (Fig. 6.10). 
Antibiotic-impregnated lter paper discs are placed on agar plates con-
taining bacteria; antibiotic diffuses into the agar, resulting in a concen-
tration gradient centred on the disc. Bacteria are unable to grow where 
the antibiotic concentration exceeds the MIC, which may therefore be 
inferred from the size of the zone of inhibition. The MIC is commonly 
measured in diagnostic laboratories using ‘diffusion strips’.
Epidemiology of infection 
The communicability of many infections means that, once a clini-
cian has diagnosed an infectious disease, potential exposure of other 
patients must also be considered. Measures to control spread may be 
required at a patient level (e.g. separation from other patients (‘isola-
tion’)), at an organisation or institutional levels (e.g. in a nursing home 
(Ch. 5) or hospital) at a national level, or, in the case of a pandemic, at 
an international level. The approach will be specic to the microorganism 
involved (Chs. 11–13) but the principles are outlined below.
Geographical and temporal patterns of infection 
Endemic disease 
Endemic disease has a constant presence within a given geographical 
area or population. The infectious agent may have a reservoir, vector 
or intermediate host that is geographically restricted, or may itself have 
restrictive environmental requirements (e.g. temperature range, humid-
ity). The population affected may be geographically isolated or the dis-
ease may be limited to unvaccinated populations. Factors that alter 
geographical restriction include:
 expansion of an animal reservoir (e.g. Lyme disease from reforestation)
 vector escape (e.g. airport malaria)
Antibody capture
ELISA
Patient Ab
Ig subclass-specific Ab
Ab specific to Ag from
the disease-causing
organism
Specific Ag
Chromogenic substrate
Antibody–enzyme
conjugate
Competitive antibody
detection ELISA
Double antibody sandwich
ELISA (for antigen detection)
Antibody detection
ELISA
A
B
C
D
Fig. 6.9 Antibody (Ab) and antigen (Ag) detection by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
antibody–enzyme conjugate and chromogenic substrate. In A, the conjugate Ab is specic for human immunoglobulin. In B–D, it is specic for Ag from the disease-causing organism.

[[p134]]
Epidemiology of infection     107
6
 extension of host range (e.g. schistosomiasis from dam 
construction)
 importation of foods
 human migration (e.g. carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella 
pneumoniae)
 public health service breakdown (e.g. diphtheria in unvaccinated 
areas)
 climate change (e.g. dengue virus and Rift Valley fever).
Emerging and re-emerging disease 
An emerging infectious disease is one that has newly appeared in a pop-
ulation, or has been known for some time but is increasing in incidence 
or geographical range. If the disease was previously known and thought 
to have been controlled or eradicated, it is considered to be re-emerging. 
Many emerging diseases are caused by organisms that infect animals 
and have undergone adaptations that enable them to infect humans. 
This is exemplied by HIV-1, which originated in higher primates in Africa, 
and SARS-CoV-2, from bats potentially via intermediate hosts. The geo-
graphical pattern of some recent emerging and re-emerging infections is 
shown in Figure 6.11
Reservoirs of infection 
The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) dene a reservoir of infec-
tion as any person, other living organism, environment or combination 
of these in which the infectious agent lives and replicates and on which 
the infectious agent is dependent for its survival. The infectious agent is 
transmitted from this reservoir to a susceptible host.
Human reservoirs 
Both colonised and infected individuals can act as human reservoirs, and 
infected human reservoirs may be asymptomatic. The organism must be 
long-lasting in at least a proportion of those affected, to facilitate onward 
transmission. Infections in which humans act as reservoirs include tuber-
culosis, MRSA, HIV and COVID-19. For some infections (e.g. measles) 
humans are the only known reservoir.
Animal reservoirs 
The World Health Organization (WHO) denes a zoonosis as ‘a disease 
or infection that is naturally transmissible from vertebrate animals to 
Zone of
inhibition
Zone of
inhibition
1
2
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
3
4
5
Fig. 6.10 Antimicrobial susceptibility testing by disc diffusion (panels 
1–4) and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC, panel 5). 1 The test 
organism is spread over the surface of an agar plate. 2 Antimicrobial-
impregnated discs (A–F) are placed on the surface and the plate is incubated 
(e.g. overnight). 3–4 After incubation, zones of growth inhibition may be seen. 
The organism is considered susceptible if the diameter of the zone of inhibition 
exceeds a predetermined threshold. 5 In a ‘diffusion strip’ test, the strip is 
impregnated with antimicrobial at a concentration gradient that decreases 
steadily from top to bottom.The system is designed so that the MIC value is the 
point at which the ellipse cuts a scale on the strip (arrow). (4) Kindly supplied by 
Charlotte Symes.
CPE
Ebola virus
disease
Cholera
Cholera
Cholera
Cryptococcus
gattii
Cryptococcus
gattii
Zika virus
Zika virus
Cyclospora
Chikungunya
virus
Chikungunya
virus
XDR-TB
MERS-Co-V
Anthrax
MDR-TB
Fig. 6.11 Geographical locations of some infectious disease outbreaks, with examples of emerging and re-emerging diseases. (CPE = carbapenemase-producing 
Enterobacterales; MDR-TB = multidrug-resistant tuberculosis; MERS-Co-V = Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus; XDR-TB = extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis)

[[p135]]
108    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
humans’. Infected animals may be asymptomatic. Zoonotic agents may 
be transmitted via any of the routes described below. Primary infection 
with zoonoses may be transmitted onward between humans, causing 
secondary disease (e.g. Q fever, brucellosis, Ebola virus disease).
Environmental reservoirs 
Some pathogens are acquired from an environmental source (e.g. 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa from hospital water supplies). However, some 
of these are maintained in human or animal reservoirs, with the environ-
ment acting only as a conduit for infection.
Transmission of infection 
Communicable diseases may be transmitted by one or more of the fol-
lowing routes:
 Respiratory route: airborne/droplet spread (see p. 293).
 Faecal–oral route: ingestion of material originating from faeces.
 Sexually transmitted infections: direct contact between mucous 
membranes.
 Blood-borne infections: direct inoculation of blood.
 Direct contact: very few organisms are capable of causing infec-
tion by direct contact with intact skin. Most infection by this route 
requires contact with damaged skin (e.g. surgical wound).
 Via a vector or fomite: the vector/fomite bridges the gap between 
the infected host or reservoir and the uninfected host. Vectors are 
animate, and include mosquitoes in malaria and dengue virus infec-
tion and humans in MRSA. Fomites are inanimate objects such as 
door handles, water taps and ultrasound probes, which are particu-
larly associated with health care-associated infection (HCAI).
The basic reproduction number (R0) is a measure of the propensity 
for a communicable disease to spread between people; it is the aver-
age number of people one person with an infection is likely to pass 
on infection to. R0 is calculated by mathematical models that take 
into account infection rates, the period of infectivity (known or esti-
mated), opportunities for transmission and susceptibility to infection. R0
assumes everyone is susceptible, whereas ‘effective R’ (Re) takes into 
account the development of herd immunity within the population (e.g. 
from infection or vaccination) and therefore varies with time. R0 and 
Re are calculated for whole populations, so will hide local variations in 
transmission.
The likelihood of infection following transmission of a pathogen 
depends on the virulence of the organism and the susceptibility of the 
host. The incubation period is the time between exposure and devel-
opment of symptoms, and the period of infectivity is the period after 
exposure during which the patient is infectious to others. Knowledge of 
incubation periods and periods of infectivity is important in controlling 
the spread of disease, although for many diseases these estimates are 
imprecise (Boxes 6.6 and 6.7).
Deliberate release 
Deliberate release of pathogens with the intention of causing disease 
is known as biological warfare or bioterrorism. Deliberate release inci-
dents have included a 750-person outbreak of Salmonella typhimurium
caused by contamination of salads in 1984 (Oregon, USA) and 22 cases 
of anthrax (ve fatal) from the mailing of nely powdered (weaponised) 
anthrax spores in 2001 (New Jersey, USA). Diseases with high potential 
for deliberate release include anthrax, plague, tularaemia, smallpox and 
botulism (through toxin release).
Infection prevention and control 
Infection prevention and control (IPC) describes the measures applied to 
populations with the aim of breaking the chain of infection (see Fig. 6.1).
6.6 Incubation periods of important infections1
Infection
Incubation period
Short incubation periods
Anthrax, cutaneous2
Anthrax, inhalational2
Bacillary dysentery4
Cholera2
Dengue haemorrhagic fever5
Diphtheria5
Gonorrhoea6
Inuenza4
Meningococcaemia2
Norovirus
SARS2
Scarlet fever4
9 hrs to 2 weeks
2 days3
1–6 days
2 hrs to 5 days
3–14 days
1–10 days
2–10 days
1–3 days
2–10 days
1–3 days
2–7 days3
2–4 days
Intermediate incubation periods
Amoebiasis5
Brucellosis6
Chickenpox4
COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2)
Lassa fever2
Malaria²
Measles4
Mumps4
Poliomyelitis5
Psittacosis6
Rubella4
Typhoid4
Whooping cough4
1–4 weeks
5–30 days
11–20 days
5–6 days2
3–21 days
10–15 days
6–19 days
15–24 days
3–35 days
1–4 weeks
15–20 days
5–31 days
5–21 days
Long incubation periods
Hepatitis A4
Hepatitis B6
Leishmaniasis, cutaneous5
Leishmaniasis, visceral5
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)2
Rabies6
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
infection5
Tuberculosis4
3–7 weeks
6 weeks to 6 months
Weeks to months
Months to years
5–20 years
3–12 weeks3
Months to years
1–12 months
1Incubation periods are approximate and may differ from local or national guidance. 2World Health 
Organization. 3Longer incubation periods have been reported. 4Richardson M, et al. Paediatr Infect 
Dis J 2001; 20:380–88. 5Centers for Disease Control, USA. 6Public Health England.
(SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome)
6.7 Periods of infectivity in common childhood infectious 
diseases
Disease
Infectious period
Chickenpox1
From 4 days before until 5 days after appearance of 
the rash (transmission before 48 hrs prior to the onset 
of rash is rare)4
Measles2
From 4 days before onset to 4 days after onset of the rash
Mumps3
From 2–3 days before to 5 days after disease onset5
Rubella3
From 10 days before until 15 days after the onset of 
the rash, but most infectious during prodromal illness4
Scarlet fever1
Unknown6
Whooping cough1
Unknown6,7
1From Richardson M, Elliman D, Maguire H, et al. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2001; 20:380–388. 2Centers 
for Disease Control, USA; cdc.gov/measles/hcp/. 3Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas 
and Bennett’s Principles and practice of infectious diseases, 8th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015. 
4–6Exclude from contact with non-immune and immunocompromised people for 5 days from 
4onset of rash 5onset of parotitis, or 6start of antibiotic treatment. 7Exclude for 3 weeks if untreated. 
Durations are approximate and vary between information sources, and these recommendations 
may differ from local or national guidance.

[[p136]]
Infection prevention and control     109
6
Health care-associated infection 
The risk of developing infection following admission to a health-care 
facility (health care-associated infection, HCAI) in the developed world 
is about 10%. Many nosocomial bacterial infections are caused by 
organisms that are resistant to numerous antibiotics (multi-resistant 
bacteria), including MRSA, extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) 
and carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales (CPE), and glycopep-
tide-resistant enterococci (GRE). Other infections of particular concern in 
hospitals include C. difcile and norovirus. Some examples are shown in 
Figure 6.12
IPC measures are described in Box 6.8. The most important is 
maintenance of good hand hygiene (Fig. 6.13). Hand decontamination 
(e.g. using alcohol gel or washing) is mandatory before and after every 
patient contact. Decontamination with alcohol gel is usually adequate 
but hand-washing (with hot water, liquid soap and complete drying) is 
required after any procedure that involves more than casual physical 
contact, or if hands are visibly soiled. In situations where the prevalence 
of C. difcile is high (e.g. a local outbreak), alcohol gel decontamina-
tion between patient contacts is inadequate as it does not kill C. difcile
spores, and hands must be washed.
Some infections necessitate additional measures to prevent cross-in-
fection (Box 6.9) and sometimes these are combined, e.g. both droplet 
and contact precautions in the case of SARS-CoV-2. To minimise risk 
of infection, invasive procedures must be performed using strict aseptic 
technique.
Outbreaks of infection 
Descriptive terms for infectious disease outbreaks are dened in 
Box6.10. Conrmation of an infectious disease outbreak usually 
requires evidence from ‘typing’ that the causal organisms have identical 
Temporary central venous
catheter infection
Staphylococcus aureus (incl. MRSA)
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
  Coliforms
Candida
Prosthetic joint infection
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Staphylococcus aureus
  Streptococci
  Coliforms
  Cutibacterium (formerly Propionibacterium)
acnes
Staphylococcus aureus
-haemolytic streptococci
  Coliforms
  Anaerobes
Cuffed/tunnelled central venous
catheter infection
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Staphylococcus aureus (incl. MRSA)
  Coliforms
Candida
  Pseudomonas spp.
Enterococcus spp.
External ventricular drain and
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Staphylococcus aureus
  Diphtheroids
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Peritoneal dialysis-related peritoniti
Staphylococcus aureus
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
  Coliforms
Pseudomonas spp.
Breast implant infection
Staphylococcus aureus
  Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Fig. 6.12 Commonly encountered health care-associated infections (HCAIs) and the factors that predispose to them.
6.8 Measures used in infection prevention and control (IPC)
Organisational measures
 Handling, storage and disposal of clinical waste
 Containment and safe removal of spilled blood and body uids
 Cleanliness of environment and medical equipment
 Specialised ventilation (e.g. laminar ow, air ltration, controlled pressure gradients)
 Sterilisation and disinfection of instruments and equipment
 Food hygiene
 Laundry management
Health-care staff interventions
 Education
 Hand hygiene, including hand-washing (see Fig. 6.13)
 Sharps management and disposal
 Use of personal protective equipment (PPE, e.g. masks, sterile and non-sterile 
gloves, gowns and aprons)
 Screening health workers for disease (e.g. tuberculosis, hepatitis B virus, MRSA)
 Immunisation and post-exposure prophylaxis
Clinical practice
 Antibiotic stewardship
 Aseptic technique
 Perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis
 Screening patients for colonisation or infection (e.g. MRSA, GRE, CPE)
Response to infections
 Surveillance to detect alert organism (see text) outbreaks and antimicrobial resistance
 Antibiotic chemoprophylaxis in infectious disease contacts, if indicated (see Box 6.19)
 Isolation (see Box 6.9)
 Reservoir control
 Vector control
Population measures
 See Box 6.12 and p. 293
(CPE = carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales; GRE = glycopeptide-resistant 
enterococci; MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus)

[[p137]]
110    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Wash hands when visibly soiled! Decontaminate hands
before and after each patient contact!
Duration of the entire procedure: 40–60 sec.
1
2
3
Wet hands with water using
elbow-operated or non-
touch taps (if available)
Apply enough soap to cover
all hand surfaces
Rub hands palm to palm
4
5
6
Right palm over left dorsum
with interlaced fingers
and vice versa
Palm to palm with fingers
interlaced
Backs of fingers to
opposing palms with
fingers interlaced
7
8
9
Rotational rubbing of left
thumb clasped in right
palm and vice versa
Rotational rubbing,
backwards and forwards
with clasped fingers of
right hand in left palm
and vice versa
Rinse hands with water
10
11
12
Dry thoroughly with a
single-use towel
If hand-operated taps have
been used, use towel to
turn off tap
...and your hands are clean
Fig. 6.13 Hand-washing. Good hand hygiene, whether with soap/water or alcohol handrub, includes areas that are often missed, such as ngertips, web spaces, palmar creases 
and the backs of hands. Adapted from the ‘How to Handwash’ URL: who.int/gpsc/5may/How_To_Handwash_Poster.pdf © World Health Organization 2009. All rights reserved.
6.9 Types of isolation precaution1
Airborne transmission
Contact transmission
Droplet transmission
Precautions
Negative pressure room with air exhausted 
externally or ltered
N95 masks or personal respirators for staff
Avoid using non-immune staff
Private room preferred (otherwise, inter-patient 
spacing ≥1 m)
Gloves and gown for staff in contact with patient or 
contaminated areas
Private room preferred (otherwise, inter-patient 
spacing ≥1 m)
Surgical masks for staff in close contact with patient
Examples of infections managed with these precautions
Measles
Tuberculosis, pulmonary or laryngeal, suspected
Enteroviral infections in young children (diapered or 
incontinent)
Norovirus
Clostridioides difcile infection
Multidrug-resistant organisms (e.g. MRSA, ESBL, GRE, 
VRSA, penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae)2
Parainuenza in infants and young children
Rotavirus
RSV in infants, children and immunocompromised
Viral conjunctivitis, acute
Diphtheria, pharyngeal
Haemophilus inuenzae type b infection
Herpes simplex infection, disseminated or severe
Inuenza
Meningococcal infection
Mumps
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Parvovirus (erythrovirus) B19 (erythema infectiosum, 
fth disease)
Pertussis
Plague, pneumonic
Rubella
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A), pharyngeal
Infections managed with multiple precautions
3
➤
                                         SARS-CoV-2,4 adenovirus pneumonia
➤
SARS, viral haemorrhagic fever
➤
1Recommendations based on 2007 CDC guideline for isolation precautions, revised in July 2019. May differ from local or national recommendations. 2Subject to local risk assessment. 3Or in any 
immunocompromised patient until possibility of disseminated infection excluded. 4SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses are managed with airborne precautions in certain circumstances (see p. 293).
(ESBL = extended-spectrum β-lactamase; GRE = glycopeptide-resistant enterococci; MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus; SARS = severe acute 
respiratory syndrome; VRSA = vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; VZV = varicella zoster virus)
phenotypic and/or genotypic characteristics. When an outbreak of 
infection is suspected, a case denition is agreed. The number of cases 
that meet the case denition is then assessed by case-nding, using 
methods ranging from administration of questionnaires to national 
reporting systems. Case-nding usually includes microbiological test-
ing, at least in the early stages of an outbreak. Temporal changes in 
cases are noted in order to plot an outbreak curve, and demographic 
details are collected to identify possible sources of infection. A case–
control study, in which recent activities (potential exposures) of affected 
‘cases’ are compared to those of unaffected ‘controls’, may be under-
taken to establish the outbreak source, and measures are taken to 
manage the outbreak and control its spread. Good communication 
between relevant personnel during and after the outbreak is important 
to inform practice in future outbreaks.
Surveillance ensures that disease outbreaks are either prevented or 
identied early. In hospitals, staff are made aware of the isolation of ‘alert 
organisms’, which have the propensity to cause outbreaks, and ‘alert 
conditions’, which are likely to be caused by such organisms. Analogous 
➤
➤
➤

[[p138]]
Infection prevention and control     111
6
6.10 Terminology in outbreaks of infection
Term
Denition
Classication of related cases of infectious disease*
Cluster
An aggregation of cases of a disease that are closely 
grouped in time and place, and may or may not exceed 
the expected number
Epidemic
The occurrence of more cases of disease than expected 
in a given area or among a specic group of people over 
a particular period of time
Outbreak
Synonymous with epidemic. Alternatively, a localised, as 
opposed to generalised, epidemic
Pandemic
An epidemic occurring over a very wide area (several 
countries or continents) and usually affecting a large 
proportion of the population
Classication of affected patients (cases)
Index case
The rst case identied in an outbreak
Primary cases
Cases acquired from a specic source of infection
Secondary 
cases
Cases acquired from primary cases
Types of outbreak
Common source 
outbreak
Exposure to a common source of infection (e.g. water-
cooling tower, medical staff member shedding MRSA). 
New primary cases will arise until the source is no longer 
present
Point source 
outbreak
Exposure to a single source of infection at a specic 
point in time (e.g. contaminated food at a party). Primary 
cases will develop disease synchronously
Person-to-
person spread
Outbreak with both primary and secondary cases. May 
complicate point source or common source outbreak
*Adapted from cdc.gov. (MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus)
systems are used nationally; many countries publish lists of organisms 
and diseases, which, if detected (or suspected), must be reported to 
public health authorities. Reasons why a disease might be reportable are 
shown in Box 6.11
A pandemic is the most extensive form of outbreak, in which the dis-
ease spreads over a wide area and may affect a large proportion of the 
population. The most recent pandemic was the COVID-19 pandemic of 
2019 onwards. The measures that may be put in place in an attempt to 
control a pandemic are shown in Box 6.12
Immunisation 
Immunisation may be passive or active. Passive immunisation is achieved 
by administering antibodies targeting a specic pathogen. Antibodies are 
obtained from blood, so confer some of the infection risks associated 
with blood products. The protection afforded by passive immunisation 
is immediate but of short duration (a few weeks or months); it is used to 
prevent or attenuate infection before or after exposure (Box 6.13).
Vaccination 
Active immunisation is achieved by vaccination with whole organisms, 
organism components or nucleic acids (DNA/RNA) (Box 6.14).
Types of vaccine 
Whole-cell vaccines consist of live or inactivated (killed) microorganisms. 
Component vaccines contain only extracted or synthesised components 
of microorganisms (e.g. polysaccharides or proteins). Live vaccines con-
tain organisms with attenuated (reduced) virulence, which cause only 
6.11 Reasons for including an infectious disease on a regional/
national list of reportable diseases*
Reason for inclusion
Examples
Endemic/local disease with the 
potential to spread and/or cause 
outbreaks
Inuenza, Salmonella, 
tuberculosis
Imported disease with the propensity 
to spread and/or cause outbreaks
Typhoid, cholera (depending on 
local epidemiology)
Evidence of a possible breakdown 
in health protection/public health 
functions
Legionella, Cryptosporidium
Evidence of a possible breakdown in 
food safety practices
Botulism, verotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli
Evidence of a possible failure of a 
vaccination programme
Measles, poliomyelitis, pertussis
Disease with the potential to be a novel 
or increasing threat to human health
COVID-19, MERS-CoV, multi-
resistant bacteria
Evidence of expansion of the range of 
a reservoir/vector
Lyme disease, rabies, West Nile 
encephalitis
Evidence of possible deliberate 
release
Anthrax, tularaemia, plague, 
smallpox, botulism
*Given the different geographical ranges of individual diseases and wide national variations 
in public health services, vaccination programmes and availability of resources, reporting 
regulations vary between regions, states and countries. Many diseases are reportable for more 
than one reason.
(MERS-CoV = Middle East respiratory syndrome)
6.12 Pandemic response*
 International travel restrictions
 National entry screening (e.g. testing for fever or pathogen) and quarantining 
new arrivals from areas with high infection rates
 Isolation of disease contacts
 Social isolation
 Shielding (strict separation of the vulnerable)
 Social distancing (maintaining physical separation between people and 
restricting public gatherings)
 Encouraging home working
 Restricting commuting and work-related travel to ‘key workers’ (workers 
required to maintain a functioning society)
 Home education
 Curfews
 Closure or reduction in public transport
 Requirement for PPE use in public areas (e.g. face coverings, eye protection)
 Litigation and imposition of legal sanctions to enforce the above responses
*Pandemic control measures vary widely by jurisdiction and depend on the stage and extent 
of the outbreak and political considerations such as the acceptability of restriction of personal 
freedoms and the economic consequences of the interventions. See also p. 293.
mild symptoms but induce T-lymphocyte and humoral responses and 
are therefore more immunogenic than inactivated whole-cell vaccines. 
The use of live vaccines in immunocompromised individuals is not gener-
ally recommended, but they may be used by specialists following a risk/
benet assessment.
Component vaccines consisting only of polysaccharides, such as 
the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV), are poor activators 
of T lymphocytes and produce a short-lived antibody response without 
long-lasting memory. Conjugation of polysaccharide to a protein, as in 
the Haemophilus inuenzae type B (Hib) vaccine and the protein con-
jugate pneumococcal vaccine (PCV), activates T lymphocytes, which 
results in a sustained response and immunological memory. Toxoids are 
bacterial toxins that have been modied to reduce toxicity but maintain 
antigenicity. Vaccine response can be improved by co-administration 
with mildly pro-inammatory adjuvants, such as aluminium hydroxide.

[[p139]]
112    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Another approach is to use viral vectors in which an unrelated and mod-
ied virus expresses the antigen of interest. These vectors include pox 
viruses (e.g. modied vaccinia virus Ankara or canary pox virus), adenovi-
rus or adeno-associated viruses. The vector may replicate or be non-repli-
cating. These vaccines work on the same basis as DNA vaccines and are 
safe and stable. Pre-existing immunity can inuence efcacy but use of 
rare human or related animal strains or a strategy of priming with a non-vi-
ral DNA vaccine can help overcome this (‘prime-boost’ strategy). Nucleic 
acid vaccines are administered intramuscularly or intradermally while viral 
vector vaccines can be given by these routes but also intranasally or orally. 
The rst viral vector vaccine to receive clinical approval was for dengue 
virus, while to date DNA vaccines have only been used in veterinary set-
tings. However, both strategies are employed in studies investigating a 
range of approaches against Ebola virus and pandemic infections. For 
COVID-19, vaccines in use or development include viral vectored, RNA, 
DNA, live attenuated, inactivated (killed) virus, subunit and virus-like particle 
(lacking genetic material) vaccines. The rst types to be used widely were 
mRNA and adenovirus vector RNA vaccines (see Box 13.38).
Use of vaccines 
Vaccination may be applied to entire populations or to subpopulations 
at specic risk through travel, occupation or other activities. In ring vac-
cination, the population immediately surrounding a case or outbreak of 
infectious disease is vaccinated to curtail further spread. This strategy 
has been used for Ebola in West Africa. Vaccination is aimed mainly at 
preventing infectious disease. However, vaccination against human pap-
illomavirus (HPV) was introduced to prevent cervical and other cancers 
that complicate HPV infection. Vaccination guidelines for individuals are 
shown in Box 6.15
Vaccination becomes successful for a population once the number 
of susceptible hosts falls below the level required to sustain continued 
transmission of the target organism, i.e. when Re is less than 1 ( herd 
immunity’). Naturally acquired smallpox was declared to have been erad-
icated worldwide in 1980 through mass vaccination. In 1988, the WHO 
resolved to eradicate poliomyelitis by vaccination; the number of cases 
of wild polio virus infection worldwide has since fallen from approximately 
350 000 per annum to 176 in 2019. Recommended vaccination sched-
ules, including catch-up schedules for people who join vaccination pro-
grammes late, vary between countries.
Antimicrobial stewardship 
Antimicrobial stewardship (AMS) refers to the systems and processes 
applied to a population to optimise the use of antimicrobial agents. 
The populations referred to here may be a nation, region, hospital, or a 
unit within a health-care organisation (e.g. ward or clinic). AMS aims to 
improve patient outcomes and reduce antimicrobial resistance (AMR). 
IPC and AMS complement each other (Fig. 6.14). Elements of AMS 
include treatment guidelines, antimicrobial formularies and ward rounds 
by infection specialists.
6.13 Indications for post-exposure prophylaxis with 
immunoglobulins
Human normal immunoglobulin (pooled immunoglobulin)
 Hepatitis A (unvaccinated contacts*)
 Measles (exposed child with heart or lung disease)
Human specic immunoglobulin
 Hepatitis B (sexual partners, inoculation injuries, infants born to infected 
mothers)
 Tetanus (high-risk wounds or incomplete or unknown immunisation status)
 Rabies
 Chickenpox (immunosuppressed children and adults, pregnant women)
*Active immunisation is preferred if contact is with a patient who is within 1 week of onset of 
jaundice.
6.14 Vaccines in current clinical use
Live attenuated vaccines
 Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)
 Oral poliomyelitis (OPV, not used in UK)
 Rotavirus
 Tuberculosis (bacille Calmette–Guérin, BCG)
 Typhoid (oral typhoid vaccine)
 Varicella zoster virus
Inactivated (killed) whole-cell vaccines
 Cholera
 Hepatitis A
 Inuenza
 Poliomyelitis (inactivated polio virus, IPV)
 Rabies
Component vaccines
 Anthrax (adsorbed extracted antigens)
 COVID-19
 Diphtheria (adsorbed toxoid)
 Hepatitis B (adsorbed recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen, HBsAg)
 Haemophilus inuenzae type B (conjugated capsular polysaccharide)
 Human papillomavirus (recombinant capsid proteins)
 Meningococcal, quadrivalent A, C, Y, W135 (conjugated capsular polysaccharide)
 Meningococcal, serogroup C (conjugated capsular polysaccharide)
 Pertussis (adsorbed extracted antigens)
 Pneumococcal conjugate (PCV; conjugated capsular polysaccharide, 13 serotypes)
 Pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPV; puried capsular polysaccharide, 23 serotypes)
 Tetanus (adsorbed toxoid)
 Typhoid (puried Vi capsular polysaccharide)
Viral vector vaccines
 Dengue virus (containing Yellow fever 17D vaccine strain with dengue virus genes)
 Ebola virus (vesicular stomatitis virus expressing Ebola virus glycoproteins)
 COVID-19
Nucleic acid vaccines
 COVID-19 (RNA vaccines)
 Ebola virus (DNA in clinical trials)
Recent and emerging vaccine approaches include nucleic acid (DNA or 
RNA)-based vaccines, in which the vaccine nucleic acid encodes the micro-
bial component of interest; when the vaccine enters the  vaccinee’s cells 
they are induced to express viral antigens. They have several advantages 
over component vaccines: antigen is expressed for a period of time and 
with the modications that the host cell would normally produce; antigen is 
presented by both major histocompatibility class I and II and induces broad 
B- and T-lymphocyte responses; vaccines are stable and cost-effective; 
production can be at large scale. DNA and RNA vaccines can be admin-
istered directly or may be added with other components to aid cell entry, 
e.g. liposomses for DNA vaccines or lipid nanoparticles for RNA vaccines. 
Long-term persistence and chromosomal integration with the potential for 
mutagenesis remain theoretical concerns for DNA vaccines.
6.15 Guidelines for vaccination against infectious disease
 The principal contraindication to inactivated vaccines is an anaphylactic reaction 
to a previous dose or a vaccine component
 Live vaccines should not be given during an acute infection, to pregnant women 
or to the immunosuppressed, unless the immunosuppression is mild and the 
benets outweigh the risks
 If two live vaccines are required, they should be given either simultaneously in 
opposite arms or 4 weeks apart
 Live vaccines should not be given for 3 months after an injection of human 
normal immunoglobulin (HNI)
 HNI should not be given for 2 weeks after a live vaccine
 Hay fever, asthma, eczema, sickle-cell disease, topical glucocorticoid therapy, 
antibiotic therapy, prematurity and chronic heart and lung diseases, including 
tuberculosis, are not contraindications to vaccination

[[p140]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     113
6
Treatment of infectious diseases 
Key components of treating infection are:
 prompt initiation of antimicrobial therapy in severe infections, e.g. 
sepsis, meningitis
 optimising antimicrobial therapy while minimising selection for anti-
microbial resistance and the impact on the normal microbial ora
 addressing predisposing factors, e.g. glycaemic control in diabetes 
mellitus; viral load control in HIV-1 infection
 achieving source control, e.g. removal of an infected medical device, 
pus or necrotic tissue
 managing complications, e.g. sepsis and acute kidney injury.
For communicable disease, treatment must also take into account 
contacts of the infected patient, and may include IPC interventions such 
as isolation, antimicrobial prophylaxis, vaccination and contact tracing.
Principles of antimicrobial therapy 
In some situations (e.g. pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis) it is important to 
start appropriate antimicrobial therapy promptly, whereas in others prior 
conrmation of the diagnosis and pathogen is preferred. The principles 
underlying the choice of antimicrobial agent(s) are discussed below. The 
WHO ‘World Antibiotic Awareness Week’ campaign is a yearly event 
aimed at highlighting the importance of prudent antimicrobial prescribing 
(see ‘Further information’).
Antimicrobial action and spectrum 
Antimicrobial agents may kill or inhibit microorganisms by targeting 
essential and non-essential cellular processes, respectively. The range, 
or spectrum, of microorganisms that is killed or inhibited by a particu-
lar antimicrobial agent needs consideration when selecting therapy. 
Mechanisms of action of the major classes of antibacterial agent are 
listed in Box 6.16 and appropriate agents for some common infecting 
organisms are shown in Box 6.17. In severe infections and/or immu-
nocompromised patients, it is customary to use bactericidal agents in 
preference to bacteriostatic agents.
Empiric versus targeted therapy 
Empiric antimicrobial therapy is selected to treat a suspected infection 
(e.g. meningitis) before the microbiological cause is known. Targeted or 
‘directed’ therapy can be prescribed when the pathogen(s) is known. 
Empirical antimicrobial regimens need to have activity against the range 
of pathogens potentially causing the infection; because broad-spec-
trum agents affect a wide range of bacteria they select for antimicrobial 
resistance. ‘Start Smart – Then Focus’ (Fig. 6.15) describes the prin-
ciple of converting from empiric therapy to narrow-spectrum targeted 
therapy. Optimum empiric therapy depends on the site of infection, 
patient characteristics and local antimicrobial resistance patterns. 
National or local guidelines should inform antimicrobial prescribing 
decisions.
Combination therapy 
It is sometimes appropriate to combine antimicrobial agents:
 when there is a need to increase clinical effectiveness (e.g. biolm 
infections)
 when no single agent’s spectrum covers all potential pathogens (e.g. 
polymicrobial infection)
 when there is a need to reduce development of antimicrobial resist-
ance in the target pathogen, as the organism would need to develop 
resistance to multiple agents simultaneously (e.g. antituberculous 
chemotherapy and antiretroviral therapy (ART) for HIV.
Antimicrobial resistance 
Microorganisms have evolved in the presence of naturally occur-
ring antibiotics and have therefore developed resistance mechanisms 
to all classes of antimicrobial agent (antibiotics and their derivatives) 
(Fig. 6.16). Intrinsic resistance is an innate property of a microorganism, 
whereas acquired resistance arises by spontaneous mutation or hori-
zontal transfer of genetic material from another organism, usually via a 
plasmid. Plasmids can be easily transferred between bacteria (especially 
Enterobacterales) and often encode resistance to multiple antibiotics.
Penicillin-binding proteins (PBP) are enzymes involved in bacterial cell 
wall synthesis. The mecA gene encodes a PBP, which has a low afn-
ity for penicillins and therefore confers resistance to β-lactam antibiotics 
in staphylococci. Extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) are bacte-
rial-produced enzymes that break down β-lactam antibiotics, and are 
frequently encoded on plasmids in Enterobacterales. Plasmid-encoded 
carbapenemases have been detected in strains of Klebsiella pneumo-
niae (e.g. New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1, NDM-1). Strains of MRSA 
have been described that also have reduced susceptibility to glycopep-
tides through the development of a relatively impermeable cell wall.
Antimicrobial
stewardship
Infection
prevention
and control
Effective antimicrobial
stewardship reduces
health care-associated
infections
Effective infection
 prevention and control 
reduces the need for
antimicrobials
Fig. 6.14 The relationship between infection prevention and control (IPC) and 
antimicrobial stewardship (AMS).
6.16 Target and mechanism of action of common 
antibacterial agents
Aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, macrolides, lincosamides, oxazolidinones
 Inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis by binding to subunits of bacterial ribosomes
Tetracyclines
 Inhibition of protein synthesis by preventing transfer RNA binding to ribosomes
ß-lactams
 Inhibition of cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis by competitive inhibition of 
transpeptidases (‘penicillin-binding proteins’)
Cyclic lipopeptide (daptomycin)
 Insertion of lipophilic tail into plasma membrane causing depolarisation  
and cell death
Fluoroquinolones
 Inhibition of DNA replication by binding to DNA topoisomerases (DNA gyrase 
and topoisomerase IV), preventing supercoiling and uncoiling of DNA
Glycopeptides
 Inhibition of cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis by forming complexes with 
D-alanine residues on peptidoglycan precursors
Nitroimidazoles
 The reduced form of the drug causes strand breaks in DNA
Rifamycins
 Inhibition of RNA synthesis by inhibiting DNA-dependent RNA polymerase
Sulphonamides and trimethoprim
 Inhibition of folate synthesis by dihydropteroate synthase (sulphonamides) and 
dihydrofolate reductase (trimethoprim) inhibition

[[p141]]
114    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
6.17 Antimicrobial options for common infecting bacteria
Organism
Antimicrobial options*
Gram-positive organisms
Enterococcus faecalis
Ampicillin, vancomycin/teicoplanin
Enterococcus faecium
Vancomycin/teicoplanin, linezolid
Glycopeptide-resistant enterococci
Linezolid, tigecycline, daptomycin
MRSA
Clindamycin, vancomycin, rifampicin (never used as monotherapy), linezolid, daptomycin, 
tetracyclines, tigecycline, co-trimoxazole
Staphylococus aureus
Flucloxacillin, clindamycin
Streptococcus pyogenes
Penicillin, clindamycin, vancomycin
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Penicillin, cephalosporins, levooxacin, vancomycin
Gram-negative organisms
E. coli, ‘coliforms’ (enteric Gram-negative bacilli)
Amoxicillin, trimethoprim, cefuroxime, ciprooxacin, co-amoxiclav
Enterobacter spp., Citrobacter spp.
Ciprooxacin, meropenem, ertapenem, aminoglycosides
ESBL-producing Enterobacterales
Ciprooxacin, meropenem, ertapenem (if sensitive), temocillin, aminoglycosides
Carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales
Ciprooxacin, aminoglycosides, tigecycline, colistin
Haemophilus inuenzae
Amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, macrolides, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ciprooxacin
Legionella pneumophila
Azithromycin, levooxacin, doxycycline
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone/cexime, spectinomycin
Neisseria meningitidis
Penicillin, cefotaxime/ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Ciprooxacin, piperacillin–tazobactam, aztreonam, meropenem, aminoglycosides, ceftazidime/
cefepime
Salmonella typhi
Ceftriaxone, azithromycin (uncomplicated typhoid), chloramphenicol (resistance common)
Strict anaerobes
Bacteroides spp.
Metronidazole, clindamycin, co-amoxiclav, piperacillin–tazobactam, meropenem
Clostridioides difcile
Metronidazole, vancomycin (oral), daxomicin
Clostridium spp.
Penicillin, metronidazole, clindamycin
Fusobacterium spp.
Penicillin, metronidazole, clindamycin
Other organisms
Chlamydia trachomatis
Azithromycin, doxycycline
Treponema pallidum
Penicillin, doxycycline
*Antibiotic selection depends on multiple factors, including local susceptibility patterns, which vary enormously between geographical areas. There are many appropriate alternatives to those listed.
(ESBL= extended-spectrum β-lactamase; MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus)
1  Empiric therapy
    Based on:
     Predicted susceptibility
      of likely pathogens
     Local antimicrobial
      policies
2  Targeted therapy
    Based on:
     Predicted susceptibility
      of infecting organism(s)
     Local antimicrobial policies
3  Susceptibility-guided therapy
    Based on:
     Susceptibility testing results
Antimicrobial
susceptibility results
Clinical diagnosis
Information available:
 Organ system involved
 Endogenous or
  exogenous infection
 Likely pathogens
 Infecting organism(s)
 Likely antimicrobial
  susceptibility
Level of
knowledge
of infecting
organism(s)
Antimicrobial
spectrum of
agent(s)
used
 Antimicrobial
  susceptibility
  of infecting
  organism(s)
Laboratory investigations:
microbiological diagnosis
Fig. 6.15 Stages in the selection and renement of antimicrobial therapy: ‘Start Smart – Then Focus’.

[[p142]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     115
6
Factors promoting antimicrobial resistance include the inappropriate 
use of antibiotics (e.g. to treat viral infections), inadequate dosage or 
unnecessarily prolonged treatment, and use of antimicrobials as growth 
promoters in agriculture. However, any antimicrobial use exerts a selec-
tion pressure that favours the development of resistance. Combination 
antimicrobial therapy may reduce the emergence of resistance in the 
target pathogen but not in the normal ora that it also affects. Despite 
use of combination therapy for M. tuberculosis, multi-resistant tubercu-
losis (MDR-TB) and extremely drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) have 
been reported worldwide and are increasing in incidence (see p. 524).
The term ‘post-antibiotic era’ was coined to describe a future in which 
widespread antimicrobial resistance will render antimicrobials useless. 
At present there is a gradual but inexorable progression of resistance 
globally, necessitating the use of more expensive antimicrobials or older 
antimicrobials with signicant toxicity.
Duration of therapy 
Treatment duration reects the severity of infection and accessibility of 
the infected site to antimicrobial agents. For most infections, there is 
limited evidence available to support a specic duration of treatment 
(Box 6.18). Depending on the indication, initial intravenous therapy can 
often be switched to oral as soon as the patient is apyrexial and improv-
ing. In the absence of specic guidance, antimicrobial therapy should 
be stopped when there is no longer any clinical evidence of infection.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
Pharmacokinetics of antimicrobial agents is the study of how antibiotics 
are absorbed, distributed and excreted from the body. Septic patients 
often have poor gastrointestinal absorption, so the preferred initial route 
of therapy is intravenous. Knowledge of anticipated antimicrobial drug 
concentrations at sites of infection is critical. For example, achieving a 
‘therapeutic’ blood level of gentamicin is of little practical use in treating 
meningitis, as CSF penetration of the drug is poor. Knowledge of routes 
of antimicrobial elimination is also critical; for instance, urinary tract infec-
tion is ideally treated with a drug that is excreted unchanged in the urine.
Pharmacodynamics describes the complex relationship between anti-
microbial concentrations and microbial killing in the body. For many agents, 
antimicrobial effect can be categorised as ‘concentration-dependent’ 
or ‘time-dependent’. The concentration of antimicrobial achieved after 
a single dose is illustrated in Figure 6.17. The maximum concentration 
achieved is Cmax and the measure of overall exposure is the area under 
the curve (AUC). The efcacy of antimicrobial agents whose killing is con-
centration-dependent (e.g. aminoglycosides) increases with the amount 
by which Cmax exceeds the minimum inhibitory concentration (Cmax:MIC 
ratio). For this reason, it has become customary to administer amino-
glycosides (e.g. gentamicin) infrequently at high doses (e.g. 7 mg/kg) 
rather than frequently at low doses. This has the added advantage of 
minimising toxicity by reducing the likelihood of drug accumulation. 
Conversely, the β-lactam antibiotics and vancomycin exhibit time-de-
pendent killing, and their efcacy depends on Cmax exceeding the MIC for 
a certain time (which is different for each class of agent). This is reected 
in the dosing interval of benzylpenicillin, which is usually given every 
4 hours in severe infection (e.g. meningococcal meningitis), and may be 
administered by continuous infusion. For other antimicrobial agents, the 
pharmacodynamic relationships are more complex and often less well 
understood. With some agents, bacterial inhibition persists after anti-
microbial exposure (post-antibiotic and post-antibiotic sub-MIC effects).
Therapeutic drug monitoring 
Therapeutic drug monitoring is used to conrm that levels of antimicro-
bial agents with a low therapeutic index (e.g. aminoglycosides) are not 
Impermeability/reduced permeability
Carbapenem resistance in Pseudomonas spp.
Aminoglycoside resistance in anaerobes
(uptake requires O2-dependent transport
mechanism)
Antimicrobial target
Antimicrobial agent
Active efflux of antimicrobial agent
Tetracycline resistance in Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria
Fluconazole resistance in Candida spp.
Target modification
β-lactam resistance in MRSA – altered
penicillin-binding protein
Glycopeptide resistance in enterococci – altered
peptidoglycan amino acid sequence
Rifampicin resistance in M. tuberculosis – RNA
polymerase mutation
Ciprofloxacin resistance in Enterobacterales – DNA
gyrase mutation
Linezolid resistance in staphylococci and
enterococci – 23S rRNA methylation
Enzymatic degradation of agent
β-lactam resistance in many organisms
(penicillinase in Staph. aureus; ESBLs, ampC and
NDM-1 in Enterobacteriales)
Chloramphenicol resistance in staphylococci (CAT)
Fig. 6.16 Examples of mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance. (CAT = chloramphenicol acetyltransferase; ESBLs = extended-spectrum β-lactamases; MRSA = 
meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus; NDM-1 = New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1).

[[p143]]
116    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
6.18 Duration of antimicrobial therapy for some 
common infections*
Infection
Duration of therapy
Viral infections
Herpes simplex encephalitis
2–3 weeks
Bacterial infections
Gonorrhoea
Single dose
Infective endocarditis 
(streptococcal, native valve)
4 weeks ± gentamicin for rst 2 
weeks
Infective endocarditis  
(prosthetic valve)
6 weeks
Osteomyelitis
6 weeks
Pneumonia (community-acquired, 
severe)
7–10 days (no organism identied), 
14–21 days (Staphylococcus aureus
or Legionella spp.)
Septic arthritis
2–4 weeks
Urinary tract infection (male)
1–2 weeks depending on severity
Urinary tract infection, upper tract, 
uncomplicated (female)
7 days
Urinary tract infection, lower 
(female)
3 days
Mycobacterial infections
Tuberculosis (meningeal)
12 months
Tuberculosis (pulmonary)
6 months
Fungal infections
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Until clinical/radiological resolution and 
reversal of predisposition
Candidaemia (acute disseminated)
2 weeks after last positive blood 
culture and resolution of signs and 
symptoms
*All recommendations are indicative. Actual duration takes into account predisposing factors, 
specic organisms and antimicrobial susceptibility, source control, current guidelines and clinical 
response.
Time after dose
Time above MIC
Peak
concentration
(Cmax)
Minimum
inhibitory
concentration
(MIC)
Area under the
curve (AUC)
Concentration
Fig. 6.17 Antimicrobial pharmacodynamics. The curve represents drug 
concentrations after a single dose of an antimicrobial agent. Factors that determine 
microbial killing are Cmax : MIC ratio (concentration-dependent killing), time above MIC 
(time-dependent killing) and AUC : MIC ratio. 
excessive, and that levels of agents with marked pharmacokinetic var-
iability (e.g. vancomycin) are adequate. Specic recommendations for 
monitoring depend on individual clinical circumstances; for instance, 
different pre- and post-dose levels of gentamicin are recommended, 
6.19 Recommendations for antimicrobial prophylaxis 
in adults*
Infection risk
Recommended antimicrobial
Bacterial
Diphtheria (prevention of secondary 
cases)
Erythromycin
Gas gangrene (after high 
amputation or major trauma)
Penicillin or metronidazole
Lower gastrointestinal tract surgery
Cefuroxime + metronidazole, 
gentamicin + metronidazole, or co-
amoxiclav (single dose only)
Meningococcal disease (prevention 
of secondary cases)
Rifampicin or ciprooxacin
Rheumatic fever (prevention of 
recurrence)
Phenoxymethylpenicillin or sulfadiazine
Tuberculosis (prevention of 
secondary cases)
Isoniazid ± rifampicin
Whooping cough (prevention of 
secondary cases)
Erythromycin
Viral
HIV, occupational exposure  
(sharps injury)
Combination tenofovir/emtricitabine 
and raltegravir. Modied if index case’s 
virus known to be resistant
Inuenza A (prevention of secondary 
cases in adults with chronic 
respiratory, cardiovascular or renal 
disease, immunosuppression or 
diabetes mellitus)
Oseltamivir
Fungal
Aspergillosis (in high-risk 
haematology patients)
Posaconazole (voriconazole or 
itraconazole alternatives if intolerant)
Pneumocystis pneumonia 
(prevention in HIV and other 
immunosuppressed states)
Co-trimoxazole, pentamidine or 
dapsone
Protozoal
Malaria (prevention of travel-
associated disease)
Specic antimalarials depend on travel 
itinerary. Specialist guidance should be 
consulted
*These are based on current UK practice. Recommendations may vary locally or nationally. 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for infective endocarditis during dental procedures is not currently 
recommended in the UK.
depending on whether it is being used in traditional divided doses, once 
daily or for synergy in infective endocarditis (p. 462).
Antimicrobial prophylaxis 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is the use of antimicrobial agents to prevent infec-
tion. Primary prophylaxis is used to reduce the risk of infection following 
certain medical procedures (e.g. colonic resection or prosthetic hip inser-
tion), following exposure to a specic pathogen (e.g. Bordetella pertussis) 
or in specic situations such as post-splenectomy (Box 6.19). Antimicrobial 
prophylaxis should be chosen to have minimal adverse effects and based 
on robust evidence. In the case of exposure, it may be combined with pas-
sive immunisation (see Box 6.13). Secondary prophylaxis is used in patients 
who have been treated successfully for an infection but remain predisposed 
to it. It is used in haemato-oncology patients in the context of fungal infec-
tion and in HIV-positive individuals with an opportunistic infection until a 
dened level of immune reconstitution is achieved.
Antibacterial agents 
For details of antibacterial usage in pregnancy and old age, see 
Boxes 6.20 and 6.21.

[[p144]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     117
6
infectious mononucleosis may develop a rash if given aminopenicillins; 
this does not imply lasting allergy. The relationship between allergy to 
penicillin and allergy to cephalosporins depends on the specic cephalo-
sporin used. Avoidance of cephalosporins, however, is recommended in 
patients who have IgE-mediated penicillin allergy (p. 80). Cross-reactivity 
between penicillin and carbapenems is rare (approximately 1% by skin 
testing) and carbapenems may be administered if there are no suitable 
alternatives and appropriate resuscitation facilities are available.
Gastrointestinal upset and diarrhoea are common, and a mild reversible 
hepatitis is recognised with many β-lactams. More severe forms of hep-
atitis can be observed with ucloxacillin and co-amoxiclav. Leucopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, coagulation deciencies, interstitial nephritis and 
potentiation of aminoglycoside-mediated kidney damage are also rec-
ognised. Seizures and encephalopathy have been reported, particularly 
with high doses in the presence of renal insufciency. Thrombophlebitis 
occurs in up to 5% of patients receiving parenteral β-lactams.
Drug interactions 
Synergism occurs in combination with aminoglycosides in vitro. Ampicillin 
decreases the biological effect of oral contraceptives and the whole class 
is signicantly affected by concurrent administration of probenecid, pro-
ducing a 2–4-fold increase in the peak serum concentration.
Penicillins 
Natural penicillins are primarily effective against Gram-positive organ-
isms (except staphylococci, most of which produce a penicillinase) and 
anaerobic organisms. Streptococcus pyogenes has remained sensitive 
to natural penicillins worldwide. According to the European Antimicrobial 
Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net), the prevalence of non-sus-
ceptibility to penicillin in Streptococcus pneumoniae in Europe in 2018 
varied widely from 0.1% (Belgium) to 40% (Romania).
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins are the mainstay of treatment for 
infections with Staph. aureus, other than MRSA. However, EARS-Net 
data from 2018 indicate that MRSA rates in Europe vary widely from 0% 
(Iceland) to 43% (Romania).
Aminopenicillins have the same spectrum of activity as the natural pen-
icillins, with additional Gram-negative cover against Enterobacterales. 
Amoxicillin has better oral absorption than ampicillin. Unfortunately, 
resistance to these agents is widespread (Escherichia coli Europe-wide 
in 2018, range 35.3%–67.6%), so they are no longer appropriate for 
empiric use in Gram-negative infections. In many organisms, resistance 
is due to β-lactamase production, which can be overcome by the addi-
tion of β-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid or sulbactam).
Carboxypenicillins (e.g. ticarcillin) and ureidopenicillins (e.g. piperacil-
lin) are particularly active against Gram-negative organisms, especially 
Pseudomonas spp., which are resistant to the aminopenicillins. ß-lactamase 
inhibitors may be added to extend their spectrum of activity (e.g. piperacillin–
tazobactam). Temocillin is derived from ticarcillin; it has good activity against 
Enterobacterales, including those that produce ESBL enzymes, but poor 
activity against P. aeruginosa and Gram-positive bacteria.
6.21 Problems with antimicrobial therapy in old age
 Clostridioides difcile infection: all antibiotics predispose to some extent, but 
second- and third-generation cephalosporins, co-amoxiclav and clindamycin 
especially so.
 Hypersensitivity reactions: rise in incidence due to increased previous exposure.
 Renal impairment: may be signicant in old age, despite creatinine levels 
being within the reference range.
 Nephrotoxicity: more likely, e.g. aminoglycosides.
 Accumulation of β-lactam antibiotics: may result in myoclonus, seizures or coma.
 Reduced gastric acid production: gastric pH is higher, which causes 
increased penicillin absorption.
 Reduced hepatic metabolism: results in a higher risk of isoniazid-related 
hepatotoxicity.
 Quinolones: associated with delirium and may increase the risk of seizures.
ß-lactam antibiotics 
These antibiotics have a β-lactam ring structure and exert a bactericidal action 
by inhibiting PBPs and cell wall synthesis. They are classied in Box 6.22
Pharmacokinetics 
 Good drug levels are achieved in lung, kidney, bone, muscle and 
liver, and in pleural, synovial, pericardial and peritoneal uids.
 CSF levels are low, except when meninges are inamed.
 ‘Inoculum effect’: the activity of ß-lactams is reduced in the pres-
ence of a high organism burden, although the clinical relevance of 
this effect is a subject of debate.
 Generally safe in pregnancy (except imipenem/cilastatin).
Adverse effects 
Immediate (IgE-mediated) allergic reactions are rare but life-threaten-
ing. Approximately 90% of patients who report a penicillin allergy do not 
have a true IgE-mediated allergy, highlighting the importance of careful 
allergy histories and documentation of reactions. Other reactions, such 
as rashes, fever and haematological effects (e.g. low white cell count), 
usually follow more prolonged therapy (more than 2 weeks). Patients with 
6.22 ß-lactam antibiotics
Penicillins
 Natural penicillins: benzylpenicillin, phenoxymethylpenicillin
 Penicillinase-resistant penicillins: methicillin*, ucloxacillin, nafcillin, oxacillin
 Aminopenicillins: ampicillin, amoxicillin
 Carboxy- and ureido-penicillins: ticarcillin, piperacillin, temocillin
Cephalosporins
 See Box 6.23
Monobactams
 Aztreonam
Carbapenems
 Imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem
*Not used for treatment.
6.20 Antimicrobial agents in pregnancy1
Contraindicated
 Chloramphenicol: neonatal ‘grey baby’ syndrome – collapse, hypotension and cyanosis
 Fluconazole: teratogenic in high doses
 Quinolones: arthropathy in animal studies
 Sulphonamides: neonatal haemolysis and methaemoglobinaemia
 Tetracyclines, glycylcyclines: skeletal abnormalities in animals in rst trimester; 
fetal dental discoloration and maternal hepatotoxicity with large parenteral 
doses in second or third trimesters
 Trimethoprim: teratogenic in rst trimester
 Macrolides2: major malformations in rst trimester and genital malformations 
any trimester
Relatively contraindicated
 Aminoglycosides: potential damage to fetal auditory and vestibular nerves in 
second and third trimesters
 Metronidazole: avoidance of high dosages is recommended3
Not known to be harmful; use only when necessary
 Aciclovir
 Penicillins and cephalosporins
 Clindamycin
 Glycopeptides
 Linezolid
 Meropenem
1Data extracted from Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary (online). London: 
BMJ Group and Pharmaceutical Press; (medicinescomplete.com) [accessed 16 March 2013]. 
2Fan H, Gilbert R, O’Callaghan F, Li L. Associations between macrolide antibiotics prescribing 
during pregnancy and adverse child outcomes in the UK: population based cohort study. BMJ 
2020; 368:m331. 3Theoretical risk of teratogenicity, not supported by available clinical evidence.

[[p145]]
118    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Cephalosporins and cephamycins 
Cephalosporins are broad-spectrum agents. Unfortunately, their use is 
associated with C. difcile infection. With the exception of ceftobiprole, 
the group has no activity against enterococci. Only the cephamycins 
have anti-anaerobic activity. All cephalosporins are inactivated by ESBL. 
Cephalosporins are arranged in ‘generations’ (Box 6.23).
 First-generation compounds have excellent activity against Gram-
positive organisms and some activity against Gram-negatives.
 Second-generation drugs retain Gram-positive activity but have 
extended Gram-negative activity. Cephamycins (e.g. cefoxitin), 
included in this group, are active against anaerobic Gram-
negative bacilli.
 Third-generation agents have improved anti-Gram-negative cover-
age. For some (e.g. ceftazidime), this is extended to include 
Pseudomonas spp. Cefotaxime and ceftriaxone have excellent 
Gram-negative activity and retain good activity against Strep. pneu-
moniae and β-haemolytic streptococci. Ceftriaxone is administered 
once daily and is therefore a suitable agent for outpatient intraven-
ous (parenteral) antimicrobial therapy (OPAT).
 Fourth-generation agents, e.g. cefepime, have a broad spectrum of 
activity, including streptococci and some Gram-negatives, including 
P. aeruginosa
 Fifth-generation agents, such as ceftobiprole and ceftaroline, have 
an enhanced spectrum of Gram-positive activity that includes 
MRSA, and also have activity against Gram-negative bacteria; 
some, such as ceftobiprole, are active against P. aeruginosa
 Cederocol is a novel siderophore cephalosporin, which is also 
active in the presence of ESBLs and carbapenamases.
The spectrum of cephalosporins has also been enhanced by add-
ing β-lactamase inhibitors, e.g. ceftazidime/avibactam and ceftolazone/
tazobactam.
Monobactams 
Aztreonam is the only available monobactam. It is active against Gram-
negative bacteria, except ESBL-producing organisms, but inactive 
against Gram-positive organisms or anaerobes. It is a parenteral-only 
agent and may be used safely in most penicillin-allergic patients other 
than those with an allergy to ceftazidime, which shares a common side 
chain.
Carbapenems 
These intravenous agents have the broadest antibiotic activity of the 
β-lactam antibiotics, covering most clinically signicant bacteria, includ-
ing anaerobes (e.g. imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem). Carbapenems 
are also being combined with β-lactamase inhibitors in response to 
emergence of carbapenemase enzymes that inactivate this class (e.g. 
meropenem-vaborbactam).
Macrolide and lincosamide antibiotics 
Macrolides (e.g. erythromycin, clarithromycin and azithromycin) and lin-
cosamides (e.g. clindamycin) are bacteriostatic agents. Both classes 
bind to the same component of the ribosome, so they are not admin-
istered together. Macrolides are used for Legionella, Mycoplasma, 
Chlamydia and Bordetella infections. Azithromycin is employed for sin-
gle-dose/short-course therapy for genitourinary Chlamydia/Mycoplasma
spp. infections. Clindamycin is used primarily for skin, soft tissue, bone 
and joint infections.
Pharmacokinetics 
Macrolides 
 Variable bioavailability (intravenous and oral preparations available).
 Frequency of administration: erythromycin is administered 4 times 
daily, clarithromycin twice daily, azithromycin once daily.
 High protein binding.
 Excellent intracellular accumulation.
Lincosamides (e.g. clindamycin) 
 Good oral bioavailability.
 Food has no effect on absorption.
 Good bone/joint penetration; limited CSF penetration.
Adverse effects 
 Gastrointestinal upset, especially in young adults (erythromycin 30%).
 Cholestatic jaundice with erythromycin estolate.
 Prolongation of QT interval can cause torsades de pointes (p. 418).
 Clindamycin predisposes to CDI.
Aminoglycosides and spectinomycin 
Aminoglycosides are effective mainly in Gram-negative infections and 
are therefore commonly used in regimens for intra-abdominal infection. 
Some aminoglycosides, e.g. amikacin, are important components of 
therapy for MDR-TB. Because they act synergistically with β-lactam anti-
biotics they are used in combinations to treat biolm infections, including 
infective endocarditis and orthopaedic implant infections. They cause 
very little local irritation at injection sites and negligible allergic responses. 
Oto- and nephrotoxicity must be avoided by monitoring of renal function 
and drug levels and by use of short treatment regimens. Aminoglycosides 
are not subject to an inoculum effect and they all exhibit a post-antibiotic 
effect. Resistance is mediated mainly through inactivation by aminogly-
coside-modifying enzymes (AMEs). Plazomicin is a novel aminoglycoside 
that is not yet inactivated by AMEs.
Pharmacokinetics 
 Negligible oral absorption.
 Hydrophilic, so excellent penetration to extracellular uid in body 
cavities and serosal uids, but poor penetration into adipose tissue.
 Very poor intracellular penetration (except hair cells in cochlea and 
renal cortical cells).
 Negligible CSF and corneal penetration.
 Peak plasma levels 30 minutes after infusion.
 Exhibit a post-antibiotic effect.
 Monitoring of therapeutic levels required.
Gentamicin dosing 
 Gentamicin should be dosed according to actual body weight or 
ideal body weight if obese.
 Except in certain forms of endocarditis, pregnancy, severe burns, 
end-stage renal disease and paediatric patients, gentamicin can be 
administered at 7 mg/kg body weight. The appropriate dose interval 
6.23 Cephalosporins
First generation
 Cefalexin, cefradine (oral)
 Cefazolin (IV)
Second generation
 Cefuroxime (oral/IV)
 Cefaclor (oral)
 Cefoxitin (IV)
Third generation
 Cexime (oral)
 Cefotaxime (IV)
 Ceftriaxone (IV)
 Ceftazidime (IV)
Fourth generation
 Cefepime (IV)
Fifth generation (also referred to as ‘next generation’)
 Ceftobiprole (IV)
 Ceftaroline (IV)
(IV = intravenous)

[[p146]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     119
6
depends on drug clearance and is determined by reference to the 
Hartford nomogram (Fig. 6.18).
 In most other situations, gentamicin is usually administered twice or 
3 times daily at 3–5 mg/kg/day with target pre- and post-dose levels 
of <1 mg/L and 5–10 mg/L.
 In streptococcal and enterococcal endocarditis, gentamicin is used 
with a cell wall active agent (usually a β-lactam), to provide synergy. 
Lower doses and target levels are used in this situation.
 For all aminoglycoside dosing local guidance should be consulted.
Adverse effects 
 Renal toxicity (usually reversible) accentuated by other nephrotoxic 
agents.
 Cochlear toxicity (permanent) more likely in older people and those 
with a predisposing mitochondrial gene mutation.
 Neuromuscular blockade after rapid intravenous infusion (poten-
tiated by calcium channel blockers, myasthenia gravis and 
hypomagnesaemia).
Spectinomycin 
Chemically similar to the aminoglycosides and given intramuscularly, 
spectinomycin was developed to treat strains of Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae resistant to β-lactam antibiotics. Unfortunately, resistance to 
spectinomycin is very common. Its only indication is the treatment of 
gonococcal urethritis in pregnancy or in patients allergic to β-lactam 
antibiotics.
Quinolones and uoroquinolones 
These are effective and generally well-tolerated bactericidal agents. 
The quinolones have purely anti-Gram-negative activity, whereas the 
uoroquinolones are broad-spectrum agents (Box 6.24). Ciprooxacin 
has anti-pseudomonal activity but resistance emerges rapidly. In 2018, 
European surveillance showed that resistance to uoroquino lones in E. 
coli ranged between 8.4% (Finland) and 42.4% (Cyprus). Quinolones and 
uoroquinolones are used for a variety of infections, including pyelone-
phritis, osteomyelitis and less common problems like MDR-TB.
Pharmacokinetics 
 Well absorbed after oral administration but delayed by food, ant-
acids, ferrous sulphate and multivitamins.
 Wide volume of distribution; tissue concentrations twice those  
in serum.
 Good intracellular penetration, concentrating in phagocytes.
Adverse effects 
 Gastrointestinal side-effects in 1%–5%.
 Rare skin reactions (phototoxicity).
 Tendinitis and Achilles tendon rupture, especially in older people.
 Central nervous system effects (delirium, tremor, dizziness and 
occasional seizures in 5%–12%), especially in older people.
 Reduces clearance of xanthines and theophyllines, potentially  
inducing insomnia and increased seizure potential.
 Prolongation of QT interval on ECG, cardiac arrhythmias.
 Ciprooxacin use is associated with acquisition of MRSA and strains 
of C. difcile
Glycopeptides 
Glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin) are effective against Gram-
positive organisms only, and are used mainly against staphylococci 
(including MRSA) and enterococci. Some staphylococci and enterococci 
are resistant, and glycopeptide use should be restricted to limit the emer-
gence of resistance. Glycopeptides are not absorbed after oral adminis-
tration but vancomycin is used orally to treat CDI.
Dalbavancin and telavancin are semisynthetic derivatives of glyco-
peptide (lipoglycopeptides). Dalbavancin is used primarily for skin and 
skin structure infections. Telavancin has a dual mechanism of action, 
inhibiting both cell wall synthesis and membrane polarisation; it is 
reserved for hospital-acquired pneumonia when other agents cannot 
be used.
Pharmacokinetics 
 Vancomycin is administered by slow intravenous infusion. It has 
good tissue distribution and a short half-life, and enters the CSF only 
in the presence of inammation. Therapeutic drug monitoring is rec-
ommended, to maintain pre-dose levels of >10 mg/L (15–20 mg/L in 
serious staphylococcal infections).
 Teicoplanin is administered intravenously or intramuscularly. Its long 
half-life allows once-daily dosing
 Telavancin and dalbavancin are administered intravenously. 
Telavancin has a long half-life that allows once-daily dosing; dalba-
vancin has a very long half-life, allowing once-weekly dosing.
Dose every
48 hours
Dose every
36 hours
Dose every
24 hours
Hours since administration
Concentration in plasma (µg/mL)
2
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
4
6
8
10
12
14
Fig. 6.18 Dosing of aminoglycosides using the Hartford nomogram. The 
nomogram is used to determine the dose interval for 7 mg/kg doses of gentamicin 
or tobramycin, using measurements of drug levels in plasma 6–14 hours after a 
single dose.
6.24 Quinolones and uoroquinolones
Agent
Route of 
administration
Typical antimicrobial spectrum
Quinolones
Nalidixic acid
Oral
Enteric Gram-negative bacilli 
(not Pseudomonas aeruginosa)
Fluoroquinolones
Ciprooxacin
Noroxacin
Ooxacin
IV/oral
Oral
IV/oral/topical
Enteric Gram-negative bacilli,  
P. aeruginosa, Haemophilus
spp., ‘atypical’ respiratory 
pathogens*
Levooxacin 
(L-isomer of ooxacin)
IV/oral
Haemophilus spp., 
Streptococcus
pneumoniae, ‘atypical’ 
respiratory pathogens*
Moxioxacin
Oral
Strep pneumoniae. 
Staphylococcus aureus, 
‘atypical’ respiratory 
pathogens,* mycobacteria and 
anaerobes
*‘Atypical’ pathogens include Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Legionella spp. Fluoroquinolones 
have variable activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other mycobacteria.
}

[[p147]]
120    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Adverse effects 
 Rapid infusion of vancomycin can cause histamine release (‘red 
man’ syndrome), although this is rare with modern preparations.
 Vancomycin and teicoplanin are associated with nephrotoxicity and 
ototoxicity.
 Vancomycin and teicoplanin can cause DRESS (drug reaction with 
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, see Box 27.35).
Lipopeptides 
Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide with bactericidal activity against Gram-
positive organisms only, including MRSA and glycopeptide-resistant 
enterococci. It is not absorbed orally, and is used intravenously to treat 
Gram-positive infections, such as soft tissue infections and Staph. aureus
infective endocarditis. Daptomycin is  inactivated by pulmonary surfactant 
and is not effective for pneumonia. Treatment can be associated with 
increased levels of creatine kinase and eosinophilic pneumonitis.
Polymyxins 
Colistin is a polymyxin antibiotic that binds and disrupts the outer cell mem-
brane of Gram-negative bacteria, including P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter 
baumannii. Its use has increased with the emergence and spread of mul-
ti-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, including CPEs. It can be administered 
by oral, intravenous and nebulised routes. Signicant adverse effects include 
neurotoxicity, including encephalopathy, and nephrotoxicity.
Folate antagonists 
These are bacteriostatic antibacterials. A combination of a sulphona-
mide and either trimethoprim or pyrimethamine is most commonly used, 
which interferes with two consecutive steps in the folate metabolic path-
way. Available combinations include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (co- 
trimoxazole) and pyrimethamine with either sulfadoxine (used to treat 
malaria) or sulfadiazine (used in toxoplasmosis). Co-trimoxazole is the 
rst-line drug for Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, the second-line drug 
for treatment and prevention of B. pertussis infection, and is also used for 
a variety of other infections, including Staph. aureus. Dapsone is used to 
treat leprosy (Hansen’s disease) and to prevent toxoplasmosis and pneu-
mocystis when patients are intolerant of other medications. Folinic acid 
should be given to prevent myelosuppression if these drugs are used 
long-term or unavoidably in early pregnancy.
Pharmacokinetics 
 Well absorbed orally.
 Sulphonamides are hydrophilic, distributing well to the  
extracellular uid.
 Trimethoprim is lipophilic with high tissue concentrations.
Adverse effects 
 Trimethoprim is generally well tolerated, with few adverse effects.
 Sulphonamides and dapsone may cause haemolysis in 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deciency.
 Sulphonamides and dapsone cause skin and mucocutaneous 
reactions, including Stevens–Johnson syndrome and ‘dapsone 
syndrome’ (rash, fever and lymphadenopathy).
 Dapsone causes methaemoglobinaemia and peripheral neuropathy.
Tetracyclines and glycylcyclines 
Tetracyclines 
Of this mainly bacteriostatic class, the newer drugs doxycycline and 
minocycline show better absorption and distribution than older ones. 
Resistance is common in streptococci and Gram-negative bacteria. 
Tetracyclines are indicated for infections caused by Mycoplasma spp., 
Chlamydia spp., Rickettsia spp., Coxiella spp., Bartonella spp., Borrelia
spp., Helicobacter pylori, Treponema pallidum and atypical mycobac-
teria. Tetracyclines can also be used for malaria prevention.
Pharmacokinetics 
 Best oral absorption is in the fasting state (doxycycline is 100% 
absorbed unless gastric pH rises) and absorption is inhibited by cati-
ons, e.g. calcium or iron, which should not be administered at the 
same time.
Adverse effects 
 All tetracyclines except doxycycline are contraindicated in renal 
failure.
 Dizziness with minocycline.
 Binding to metallic ions in bones and teeth causes discoloration 
(avoid in children and pregnancy) and enamel hypoplasia.
 Oesophagitis/oesophageal ulcers with doxycycline.
 Phototoxic skin reactions.
Glycylcyclines (tigecycline) 
Chemical modication of tetracycline has produced tigecycline, a 
broad-spectrum, parenteral-only antibiotic with activity against resist-
ant Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogens, such as MRSA and 
ESBL (but excluding Pseudomonas spp.). Re-analysis of trial data has 
shown that there was excess mortality following tigecycline treatment as 
opposed to comparator antibiotics, so tigecycline should be used only 
when there has been adequate assessment of risk versus benet.
Nitroimidazoles 
Nitroimidazoles (e.g. metronidazole) are highly active against strictly 
anaerobic bacteria, especially Bacteroides fragilis, C. difcile and 
Clostridium spp. Both metronidazole and tinidazole have signicant anti-
protozoal activity against amoebae and Giardia lamblia. Nitroimidazoles 
are almost completely absorbed after oral administration (60% after rec-
tal administration) and well distributed, especially to brain and CSF. They 
can be used in pregnancy after a risk assessment.
Adverse effects include: metallic taste (dose-dependent), severe vom-
iting if taken with alcohol (‘Antabuse effect’) and peripheral neuropathy 
with prolonged use.
Phenicols (chloramphenicol) 
Chloramphenicol use is best reserved for severe and life-threatening 
infections when other antibiotics are either unavailable or impractical, 
due to toxicity. It is bacteriostatic to most organisms and has a very 
broad spectrum of activity against aerobic and anaerobic organisms. It 
competes with macrolides and lincosamides for ribosomal binding sites, 
so should not be used in combination with these agents. Signicant 
adverse effects are ‘grey baby’ syndrome in infants (cyanosis and circu-
latory collapse due to inability to conjugate drug and excrete the active 
form in urine); reversible dose-dependent bone marrow depression in 
adults receiving high cumulative doses; and severe aplastic anaemia in 
1 in 25 000–40 000 exposures (unrelated to dose, duration of therapy or 
route of administration).
Oxazolidinones 
Linezolid and tedizolid are examples and have good activity against 
Gram-positive organisms. They are primarily used in infection caused 
by resistant Gram-positive bacteria, including MRSA and GRE, but also 
for resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Administration can be intra-
venous or oral. Common linezolid adverse effects include mild gastroin-
testinal upset and tongue discoloration. Myelodysplasia and peripheral 
and optic neuropathy can occur with prolonged use. Linezolid has mon-
oamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) activity, and co-administration with other 
MAOIs or serotonin re-uptake inhibitors should be avoided, as this may 
precipitate a ‘serotonin syndrome’.

[[p148]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     121
6
Other antibacterial agents 
Fusidic acid 
This antibiotic, active against Gram-positive bacteria, is available in intra-
venous, oral or topical formulations. It is lipid-soluble and distributes well 
to tissues. Its antibacterial activity is, however, unpredictable. Fusidic 
acid is used in combination, typically with antistaphylococcal penicillins, 
or for MRSA with clindamycin or rifampicin. It interacts with coumarin 
derivatives and oral contraceptives.
Nitrofurantoin 
This drug has very rapid renal elimination and is active against aerobic 
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, including enterococci. It is 
used only for treatment of lower urinary tract infection, being generally 
safe in pregnancy and childhood. With prolonged treatment, however, it 
can cause eosinophilic lung inltrates, fever, pulmonary brosis, periph-
eral neuropathy, hepatitis and haemolytic anaemia so its use must be 
carefully balanced against risks.
Fidaxomicin 
Fidaxomicin is an RNA synthesis inhibitor, and was introduced for the 
treatment of CDI in 2012. The registration trial found daxomicin was 
non-inferior to oral vancomycin in non-severe CDI and was associated 
with a lower recurrence rate. Its effectiveness for severe CDI has not 
been assessed in trials.
Fosfomycin 
Fosfomycin acts by inhibiting cell wall synthesis. It has activity against 
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria and can demonstrate in vitro 
synergy against MRSA when combined with other antimicrobials. It is 
used for treatment of urinary tract infections but can be employed in 
other situations against multi-resistant bacteria.
Lefamulin 
Lefamulin is a pleuromutilin antibiotic that inhibits the 50S ribosome and 
inhibits protein synthesis. It has recently been licensed for use in com-
munity-acquired pneumonia and is available orally and intravenously. It 
should not be used in pregnancy and prolongs the QT interval.
Antimycobacterial agents 
Isoniazid 
Isoniazid is bactericidal for replicating bacteria and bacteriostatic for 
non-replicating bacteria. It is activated by mycobacterial catalase-perox-
idase (KatG) and inhibits the InhA gene product, a reductase involved in 
mycolic acid synthesis. Mutations in KatG or InhA result in isoniazid resist-
ance, which was reported in 15% of cases of M. tuberculosis infection glob-
ally in 2013. Isoniazid is well absorbed orally and metabolised by acetylation 
in the liver. The major side-effects are hepatitis, neuropathy (ameliorated by 
co-administration of pyridoxine) and hypersensitivity reactions.
Rifampicin 
Rifampicin inhibits DNA-dependent RNA polymerase and is bacteri-
cidal against replicating bacteria. It is also active in necrotic foci, where 
mycobacteria have low levels of replication, and is therefore important in 
sterilisation and sputum conversion. Resistance most often involves the 
β-subunit of RNA polymerase and most often occurs with isoniazid-re-
sistant MDR-TB. Rifampicin is well absorbed orally. It is metabolised 
by the liver via the microsomal cytochrome P450 system and is one of 
the most potent inducers of multiple P450 isoenzymes, so is subject to 
extensive drug–drug interactions. Common side-effects include hepati-
tis, inuenza-like symptoms and hypersensitivity reactions. Orange dis-
coloration of urine and body secretions is expected.
Pyrazinamide 
The mechanism of action of pyrazinamide is incompletely dened but 
includes inhibition of fatty acid synthase and ribosomal trans-translation, 
a quality control system for mRNA and protein synthesis. Pyrazinamide 
is often bacteriostatic but can be bactericidal and is active against semi-
dormant bacteria in a low-pH environment. Primary resistance is rare 
but MDR-TB strains are frequently pyrazinamide-resistant and intrinsic 
resistance is a feature of Mycobacterium bovis strains. Pyrazinamide is 
well absorbed orally and metabolised by the liver. Side-effects include 
nausea, hepatitis, asymptomatic elevation of uric acid and myalgia.
Ethambutol 
Ethambutol is a bacteriostatic agent. It inhibits arabinosyl transferase, 
which is involved in the synthesis of arabinogalactan, a component of 
the mycobacterial cell wall. Resistance is usually seen when resistance to 
other antimycobacterial agents is also present, e.g. in MDR-TB strains. 
It is orally absorbed but, in contrast to the rst-line agents described 
above, it achieves poor CSF penetration and is renally excreted. The 
major side-effect is optic neuritis with loss of red–green colour discrimi-
nation and impaired visual acuity. 
Streptomycin 
Streptomycin is an aminoglycoside whose mechanism of action and 
side-effects are similar to those of other aminoglycosides. It is adminis-
tered intramuscularly.
Other antituberculous agents 
Second-line agents used in MDR or XDR strains (p. 524) include amino-
glycosides (amikacin, capreomycin or kanamycin) and uoroquinolones 
(moxioxacin or levooxacin), discussed above. Other established sec-
ond-line agents administered orally are cycloserine (which causes neuro-
logical side-effects); ethionamide or prothionamide (which are not active 
with InhA-gene-mediated resistance but have reasonable CSF penetration; 
their side-effect prole includes gastrointestinal disturbance, hepatotoxicity 
and neurotoxicity); and paraminosalicylic acid (which causes rashes and 
gastrointestinal upset). Linezolid may also be used and has good CSF pen-
etration, while meropenem with co-amoxiclav is occasionally chosen. New 
drugs developed for XDR-TB include delamanid and bedaquiline (which 
targets the ATP synthase); their adverse effects include QT prolongation 
and cardiac arrhythmias. Their co-administration with other agents with a 
similar side-effect prole (e.g. uoroquinolones) therefore requires careful 
risk assessment. Pretomanid is used in combinations with bedaquiline for 
drug-resistant strains and improves the bactericidal activity of combination 
therapy which may enable shorter durations. Its side-effects include nerve 
damage, headaches, gastrointestinal upset, abnormal liver function tests, 
low glucose and skin rash.
Clofazimine 
Clofazimine is used against M. leprae and resistant strains of M. tubercu-
losis. Its mode of action may involve induction of oxidative stress and it 
is weakly bactericidal. Oral absorption is variable and it is excreted in the 
bile. Side-effects include gastrointestinal upset, dry eyes and skin, and 
skin pigmentation, especially in those with pigmented skin.
Antifungal agents 
See Box 6.25.
Azole antifungals 
The azoles (imidazoles and triazoles) inhibit synthesis of ergosterol, a 
constituent of the fungal cell membrane. Side-effects vary but include 
gastrointestinal upset, hepatitis and rash. Azoles are inhibitors of 
cytochrome P450 enzymes, so tend to increase exposure to cytochrome 
P450-metabolised drugs.
Imidazoles 
Miconazole, econazole, clotrimazole and ketoconazole are relatively 
toxic and therefore administered topically. Clotrimazole is used exten-
sively to treat supercial fungal infections. Triazoles are used for systemic 
treatment because they are less toxic.

[[p149]]
122    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Polyenes 
Amphotericin B (AmB) deoxycholate causes cell death by binding to 
ergosterol and damaging the fungal cytoplasmic membrane. Its use in 
resource-rich countries has been largely supplanted by less toxic agents. 
Its long half-life enables once-daily administration. CSF penetration is poor.
Adverse effects include immediate anaphylaxis, other infusion-related 
reactions and nephrotoxicity. Nephrotoxicity may be sufcient to require 
dialysis and occurs in most patients who are adequately dosed. It may 
be ameliorated by concomitant infusion of normal saline. Irreversible 
nephrotoxicity occurs with large cumulative doses of AmB.
Nystatin has a similar spectrum of antifungal activity to AmB. Its toxicity 
limits it to topical use, e.g. in oral and vaginal candidiasis.
Lipid formulations of amphotericin B 
Lipid formulations of AmB have been developed to reduce AmB toxicity 
and have replaced AmB deoxycholate in many regions. They consist of 
AmB encapsulated in liposomes (liposomal AmB, L-AmB) or complexed 
with phospholipids (AmB lipid complex, ABLC). The drug becomes active 
on dissociating from its lipid component. Adverse effects are similar to, 
but considerably less frequent than, those with AmB deoxycholate, and 
efcacy is similar. Lipid formulations of AmB are used in invasive fungal 
disease, as empirical therapy in patients with neutropenic fever and also 
in visceral leishmaniasis.
Other antifungal agents 
Flucytosine 
Flucytosine (5-uorocytosine) has particular activity against yeasts. When 
it is used as monotherapy, acquired resistance develops rapidly, so it 
should be given in combination with another antifungal agent. Adverse 
effects include myelosuppression, gastrointestinal upset and hepatitis.
Griseofulvin 
Griseofulvin has been largely superseded by terbinane and itraconazole 
for treatment of dermatophyte infections, except in children, for whom 
these agents remain largely unlicensed. It is deposited in keratin precur-
sor cells, which become resistant to fungal invasion.
Terbinane 
Terbinane distributes with high concentration to sebum and skin, with 
a half-life of more than 1 week. It is used topically for dermatophyte skin 
infections and orally for onychomycosis. The major adverse reaction is 
hepatic toxicity (approximately 1:50 000 cases). Terbinane is not recom-
mended for breastfeeding mothers.
Antiviral agents 
Most viral infections in immunocompetent individuals resolve without 
intervention. Antiviral therapy is available for a limited number of infec-
tions only (Box 6.26).
Antiretroviral agents 
These agents, used predominantly against HIV, are discussed on page 
366.
Anti-herpesvirus agents 
Aciclovir, valaciclovir, penciclovir and famciclovir 
These antivirals are acyclic analogues of guanosine, which inhibit viral 
DNA polymerase after being phosphorylated by virus-derived thymi-
dine kinase (TK). Aciclovir is poorly absorbed after oral dosing; better 
levels are achieved intravenously or by use of the prodrug valaciclovir. 
Famciclovir is the prodrug of penciclovir. Resistance is mediated by viral 
TK or polymerase mutations.
6.25 Antifungal agents
Agent
Usual 
route(s) of 
administration
Clinically relevant antifungal 
spectrum
Imidazoles
Miconazole
Econazole
Clotrimazole
Topical
Candida spp., dermatophytes
Ketoconazole
Topical, oral
Malassezia spp., dermatophytes, 
agents of eumycetoma
Triazoles
Fluconazole
Oral, IV
Yeasts (Candida and 
Cryptococcus spp.)
Itraconazole
Oral, IV
Yeasts, dermatophytes, dimorphic 
fungi (p. 342), Aspergillus spp.
Voriconazole
Oral, IV
Yeasts and most lamentous 
fungi (excluding mucoraceous 
moulds)
Posaconazole
Oral, IV
Yeasts and many lamentous 
fungi (including most 
mucoraceous moulds)
Isavuconazole
Oral, IV
Yeasts and many lamentous 
fungi (variable activity against 
mucoraceous moulds)
Echinocandins
Anidulafungin
Caspofungin
Micafungin
IV only
Candida spp., Aspergillus spp. 
(no activity against Cryptococcus
spp. or mucoraceous moulds)
Polyenes
Amphotericin B
IV
Yeasts and most dimorphic and 
lamentous fungi (including 
mucoraceous moulds)
Nystatin
Topical
Others
5-uorocytosine
Oral, IV
Yeasts
Griseofulvin
Oral
Dermatophytes
Terbinane
Topical, oral
Dermatophytes
(IV = intravenous)
}
}
Triazoles 
Fluconazole is effective against yeasts (Candida and Cryptococcus spp.) 
and has a long half-life (approximately 30 hours) and an excellent safety 
prole. The drug is highly water-soluble and distributes widely to all body 
sites and tissues, including CSF. Itraconazole is lipophilic and distributes 
extensively, including to toenails and ngernails. Its CSF penetration is 
poor. Because oral absorption of itraconazole is erratic, therapeutic drug 
monitoring is required. Voriconazole is well absorbed orally but varia-
bility in levels requires therapeutic drug monitoring. It is used mainly in 
aspergillosis. Side-effects include photosensitivity, hepatitis and transient 
retinal toxicity. Posaconazole and isavuconazole are broad-spectrum 
azoles, with activity against Candida spp., Aspergillus spp. and some 
mucoraceous moulds. Isavuconazole is non-inferior to voriconazole in 
the management of invasive aspergillosis and may be considered as an 
alternative when voriconazole cannot be used.
Echinocandins 
The echinocandins inhibit β-1,3-glucan synthesis in the fungal cell wall. 
They have few signicant adverse effects. Caspofungin, anidulafungin 
and micafungin are used to treat systemic candidosis, and caspofungin 
is also used in aspergillosis.

[[p150]]
Treatment of infectious diseases     123
6
6.26 Antiviral agents
Drug
Route(s) of 
administration
Indications
Signicant side-effects
Antiretroviral therapy
(ART, p. 366)
Oral
HIV infection (including AIDS)
CNS symptoms, anaemia, lipodystrophy
Anti-herpesvirus agents
Aciclovir
Topical/oral/IV
Herpes zoster
Chickenpox (esp. in immunosuppressed)
Herpes simplex infections: encephalitis (IV only), genital tract, oral, 
ophthalmic
Signicant side-effects rare
Hepatitis, renal impairment and neurotoxicity reported 
rarely
Valaciclovir
Oral
Herpes zoster, herpes simplex
As for aciclovir
Famciclovir
Oral
Herpes zoster, herpes simplex (genital)
As for aciclovir
Penciclovir
Topical
Labial herpes simplex
Local irritation
Ganciclovir
IV
Treatment and prevention of CMV infection in immunosuppressed
Gastrointestinal symptoms, liver dysfunction, 
neurotoxicity, myelosuppression, renal impairment, 
fever, rash, phlebitis at infusion sites
Potential teratogenicity
Valganciclovir
Oral
Treatment and prevention of CMV infection in immunosuppressed
As for ganciclovir but neutropenia is predominant
Cidofovir
IV/topical
HIV-associated CMV infections and occasionally other viruses (see text)
Renal impairment, neutropenia
Foscarnet
IV
CMV and aciclovir-resistant HSV and VZV infections in 
immunosuppressed
Gastrointestinal symptoms, renal impairment, 
electrolyte disturbances, genital ulceration, neurotoxicity
Anti-inuenza agents
Zanamivir
Inhalation
Inuenza A and B
Allergic reactions (very rare)
Oseltamivir
Oral
Inuenza A and B
Gastrointestinal side-effects, rash, hepatitis (very rare)
Peramivir
IV, IM
Amantadine, 
rimantadine
Oral
Inuenza A (but see text)
CNS symptoms, nausea
Agents used in other virus infections*
Ribavirin
Oral/IV/
inhalation
Lassa fever (IV)
RSV infection in infants (inhalation)
Haemolytic anaemia, cough, dyspnoea, bronchospasm 
and ocular irritation (when given by inhalation)
Remdesivir
IV
COVID-19 (experimental, not recommended for clinical use at the 
time of writing)
Signicant side-effects rare
*Antiviral agents used in viral hepatitis are discussed on pages 884–890.
(AIDS = acquired immunodeciency syndrome; CMV = cytomegalovirus; CNS = central nervous system; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; HSV = herpes simplex virus; IM = intramuscular;  
IV = intravenous; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus; VZV = varicella zoster virus)
}
Ganciclovir 
Chemical modication of the aciclovir molecule allows preferential phospho-
rylation by protein kinases of cytomegalovirus (CMV) and other β-herpes-
viruses (e.g. human herpesvirus (HHV) 6/7) and hence greater inhibition of 
the DNA polymerase, but at the expense of increased toxicity. Ganciclovir is 
administered intravenously or as a prodrug (valganciclovir) orally.
Cidofovir 
Cidofovir inhibits viral DNA polymerases with potent activity against CMV, 
including most ganciclovir-resistant CMV. It also has activity against aciclo-
vir-resistant herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella zoster virus (VZV), HHV6 
and occasionally adenovirus, poxvirus, papillomavirus or polyoma virus, and 
may be used to treat these infections in immunocompromised hosts.
Foscarnet 
This analogue of inorganic pyrophosphate acts as a non-competitive 
inhibitor of HSV, VZV, HHV6/7 or CMV DNA polymerase. It does not 
require signicant intracellular phosphorylation and so may be effective 
when HSV or CMV resistance is due to altered drug phosphorylation. It 
has variable CSF penetration.
Letermovir 
Letermovir is a CMV DNA terminase inhibitor that plays a role in cleavage 
of viral DNA for packaging into mature virions. It is available in oral and 
intravenous formulations. It is well tolerated and is approved for proph-
ylaxis of CMV in allogeneic haematopoeitic stem cell transplant recipi-
ents. Gastrointestinal disturbance and drug–drug interactions occur and 
resistance may develop.
Anti-inuenza agents 
Zanamivir and oseltamivir 
These agents inhibit inuenza A and B neuraminidase, which is 
required for release of virus from infected cells (see Fig. 6.2). They 
are used in the treatment and prophylaxis of inuenza. Administration 
within 48 hours of disease onset reduces the duration of symptoms 
by approximately 1–1½ days. In the UK, their use is limited mainly 
to adults with chronic respiratory or renal disease, signicant car-
diovascular disease, immunosuppression or diabetes mellitus, dur-
ing known outbreaks. Peramivir has been developed as a distinct 
chemical structure, which means that it retains activity against some 
oseltamivir- and zanamivir-resistant strains. It has poor oral bioavail-
ability and has been developed as an intravenous or intramuscular 
formulation for treatment of severe cases of inuenza, e.g. in intensive 
care units. It is now approved for use in adults in a number of coun-
tries. An intravenous formulation of zanamivir is also in development 
for critically ill patients. Laninamivir is approved as an intranasal for-
mulation in Japan.

[[p151]]
124    PRINCIPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Other anti-inuenza agents 
Amantidine and rimantadine inhibit viral M2 protein ion channel function, 
which is required for uncoating (see Fig. 6.2). Resistance is widespread, 
and these are only used to treat oseltamivir-resistant inuenza A in 
patients unable to take zanamivir (e.g. ventilated patients) and when the 
strain is susceptible to these agents. Baloxavir marboxil inhibits a com-
ponent of viral RNA synthesis. It is licensed for uncomplicated inuenza 
but is likely to be reserved for neuraminidase-resistant strains. Faviparvir 
is an oral or intravenous RNA-dependent RNA polymerase that may 
also play a role against resistant strains of inuenza but also other RNA 
viruses and has been studied against SARS-CoV-2.
Other agents used to treat viruses 
Antiviral agents used to treat hepatitis B and C virus are discussed on pages 
886 and 889, and those used against HIV-1 are described on page 366.
Remdesivir 
Remdesivir is an intravenous RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor 
that has a broad antiviral spectrum in vitro and has decreased the time to 
recovery following SARS-Cov-2 infection. So far it has not demonstrated 
efcacy against other viruses clinically. Initial studies have not shown signi-
cant effects on SARS-CoV-2 viral replication, suggesting it may need to be 
used early in the course of infection before peak viral replication. The main 
side-effects include abnormal liver function tests and infusion reactions.
Ribavirin 
Ribavirin is a guanosine analogue that inhibits nucleic acid synthesis in 
a variety of viruses. It is used in particular in the treatment of hepatitis C 
virus but also against certain viral haemorrhagic fevers, e.g. Lassa fever, 
although it has not been useful against Ebola virus.
Antiparasitic agents 
Antimalarial agents 
Artemisinin (qinghaosu) derivatives 
Artemisinin originates from a herb (sweet wormwood, Artemisia annua), 
which was used in Chinese medicine to treat fever. Its derivatives, 
artemether and artesunate, were developed for use in malaria in the 
1970s. Their mechanism of action is unknown. They are used in the 
treatment, but not prophylaxis, of malaria, usually in combination with 
other antimalarials, and are effective against strains of Plasmodium spp. 
that are resistant to other antimalarials. Artemether is lipid-soluble and 
may be administered via the intramuscular and oral routes. Artesunate is 
water-soluble and is administered intravenously or orally. Serious adverse 
effects are uncommon. Current advice for malaria in pregnancy is that 
the artemisinin derivatives should be used to treat uncomplicated fal-
ciparum malaria in the second and third trimesters, but should not be 
prescribed in the rst trimester until more information becomes available.
Atovaquone 
Atovaquone inhibits mitochondrial function. It is an oral agent, used for 
treatment and prophylaxis of malaria, in combination with proguanil (see 
below), without which it is ineffective. It is also employed in the treatment 
of mild cases of Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, or as prophylaxis, 
where there is intolerance to co-trimoxazole. Signicant adverse effects 
are uncommon.
Folate synthesis inhibitors (proguanil,  
pyrimethamine–sulfadoxine) 
Proguanil inhibits dihydrofolate reductase and is used for malaria prophy-
laxis. Pyrimethamine–sulfadoxine may be used in the treatment of malaria.
Quinoline-containing compounds 
Chloroquine and quinine are believed to act by intraparasitic inhibition 
of haem polymerisation, resulting in toxic build-up of intracellular haem. 
The mechanisms of action of other agents in this group (quinidine, 
amodiaquine, meoquine, primaquine, etc.) may differ. They are employed 
in the treatment and prophylaxis of malaria. Primaquine is used for 
radical cure of malaria due to Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale (destruction 
of liver hypnozoites). Chloroquine may also be given for extraintestinal 
amoebiasis.
Chloroquine can cause signicant pruritus. If used in long-term, high-
dose regimens, it causes an irreversible retinopathy. Overdosage leads 
to life-threatening cardiotoxicity. The side-effect prole of meoquine 
includes neuropsychiatric effects ranging from mood change, nightmares 
and agitation to hallucinations and psychosis. Quinine may cause hypo-
glycaemia and cardiotoxicity, especially when administered parenterally. 
Primaquine causes haemolysis in people with glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deciency, which should be excluded before therapy. 
Chloroquine is considered safe in pregnancy but meoquine should be 
avoided in the rst trimester.
Chloroquine (and its metabolite hydroxychloroquine) exhibits in vitro 
activity against the virus SARS-CoV-2 but has not demonstrated clinical 
efcacy.
Lumefantrine 
Lumefantrine is used in combination with artemether to treat uncom-
plicated falciparum malaria, including chloroquine-resistant strains. 
Its mechanism of action is unknown. Signicant adverse effects are 
uncommon.
Drugs used in trypanosomiasis 
The antiparasitic agents used to treat human African trypanosomiasis 
(HAT) and American trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease) (benznidazole, 
eornithine, fexinidazole, melarsoprol, nifurtimox, pentamidine and 
suramin) are discussed in detail on pages 324 and 325.
In addition to its use in HAT, pentamidine is used in leishmaniasis 
(p. 327) and in severe Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, if co-trimox azole 
cannot be tolerated or is ineffective. It is administered via intravenous or 
intramuscular routes. It is a relatively toxic drug, commonly causing rash, 
renal impairment, profound hypotension (especially on rapid infusion), 
electrolyte disturbances, blood dyscrasias and hypoglycaemia.
Other antiprotozoal agents 
Pentavalent antimonials 
Sodium stibogluconate and meglumine antimoniate inhibit protozoal 
glycolysis by phosphofructokinase inhibition. They are used parenter-
ally (intravenous or intramuscular) to treat leishmaniasis. Adverse effects 
include arthralgia, myalgias, raised hepatic transaminases, pancreatitis 
and electrocardiogram changes. Severe cardiotoxicity leading to death 
is not uncommon.
Diloxanide furoate 
This oral agent is used to eliminate luminal cysts following treatment 
of intestinal amoebiasis, or in asymptomatic cyst excreters. The drug 
is absorbed slowly (enabling luminal persistence) and has no effect in 
hepatic amoebiasis. It is a relatively non-toxic drug, the most signicant 
adverse effect being atulence.
Iodoquinol (di-iodohydroxyquinoline) 
Iodoquinol is a quinoline derivative with activity against Entamoeba his-
tolytica cysts and trophozoites. It is used orally to treat asymptomatic 
cyst excreters or, in association with another amoebicide (e.g. metroni-
dazole), to treat extraintestinal amoebiasis. Long-term use of this drug is 
not recommended, as neurological adverse effects include optic neuritis 
and peripheral neuropathy.
Nitazoxanide 
Nitazoxanide is an inhibitor of pyruvate–ferredoxin oxidoreductase-
dependent anaerobic energy metabolism in protozoa. It is a broad-spec-
trum agent, active against various nematodes, tapeworms, ukes and 

[[p152]]
Further information     125
6
intestinal protozoa. Nitazoxanide also has activity against some anaero-
bic bacteria and viruses. It is administered orally in giardiasis and crypto-
sporidiosis. Adverse effects are usually mild and involve the gastrointestinal 
tract (e.g. nausea, diarrhoea and abdominal pain).
Paromomycin 
Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside that is used to treat visceral leish-
maniasis and intestinal amoebiasis. It is not signicantly absorbed when 
administered orally, and is therefore given orally for intestinal amoebiasis 
and by intramuscular injection for leishmaniasis. It showed early prom-
ise in the treatment of HIV-associated cryptosporidiosis but subsequent 
trials have demonstrated that this effect is marginal at best.
Drugs used against helminths 
Benzimidazoles (albendazole, mebendazole) 
These agents act by inhibiting both helminth glucose uptake, causing 
depletion of glycogen stores, and fumarate reductase. Albendazole 
is used for hookworm, ascariasis, threadworm, Strongyloides infec-
tion, trichinellosis, Taenia solium (cysticercosis) and hydatid disease. 
Mebendazole is used for hookworm, ascariasis, threadworm and whip-
worm. The drugs are administered orally. Absorption is relatively poor but 
is increased by a fatty meal. Signicant adverse effects are uncommon.
Bithionol 
Bithionol is used to treat uke infections with Fasciola hepatica. It is well 
absorbed orally. Adverse effects are mild (e.g. nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea, rashes) but relatively common (approximately 30%).
Diethylcarbamazine 
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is an oral agent used to treat lariasis and loi-
asis. Treatment of lariasis is often followed by fever, headache, nausea, 
vomiting, arthralgia and prostration. This is caused by the host response 
to dying microlariae, rather than the drug, and may be reduced by 
pre-treatment with glucocorticoids.
Ivermectin 
Ivermectin binds to helminth nerve and muscle cell ion channels, 
causing increased membrane permeability. It is an oral agent, used in 
Strongyloides infection, lariasis and onchocerciasis. Signicant side-
effects are uncommon.
Niclosamide 
Niclosamide inhibits oxidative phosphorylation, causing paralysis of 
helminths. It is an oral agent, used in Taenia saginata and intestinal 
T. solium infection. Systemic absorption is minimal and it has few signi-
cant side-effects.
Piperazine 
Piperazine inhibits neurotransmitter function, causing helminth mus-
cle paralysis. It is an oral agent, used in ascariasis and threadworm 
(Enterobius vermicularis) infection. Signicant adverse effects are uncom-
mon but include neuropsychological reactions such as vertigo, delirium 
and convulsions.
Praziquantel 
Praziquantel increases membrane permeability to Ca2+, causing violent 
contraction of worm muscle. It is the drug of choice for schistosomi-
asis and is also used in T. saginata, T. solium (cysticercosis) and uke 
infections (Clonorchis, Paragonimus) and in echinococcosis. It is admin-
istered orally and is well absorbed. Adverse effects are usually mild and 
transient, and include nausea and abdominal pain.
Pyrantel pamoate 
This agent causes spastic paralysis of helminth muscle through a 
suxa methonium-like action. It is used orally in ascariasis and thread-
worm infection. Systemic absorption is poor and adverse effects are 
uncommon.
Thiabendazole 
Thiabendazole inhibits fumarate reductase, which is required for energy 
production in helminths. It is used orally in Strongyloides infection and 
topically to treat cutaneous larva migrans. Signicant adverse effects are 
uncommon.
Further information 
Websites 
cdc.gov. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, USA. Provides 
information on all aspects of communicable disease, including prophylaxis 
against malaria. 
gov.uk/government/collections/immunisation-against-infectious-disease-the-
green-book. UK Department of Health recommendations for immunisation. 
ecdc.europa.eu. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Includes 
data on prevalence of antibiotic resistance in Europe. 
gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england. Public Health England. 
Provides information on infectious diseases relating mainly to England, 
including community infection control. 
idsociety.org. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Publishes up-to-date, 
evidence-based guidelines. 
who.int. World Health Organization. Provides up-to-date information on global 
aspects of infectious disease, including outbreak updates. Also has information 
on the ‘World Antibiotic Awareness Week’ campaign. 

[[p153]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p154]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 6.1. A 19-year-old student who had not received any childhood 
vaccines through parental choice attends a music festival. Nine 
days later she develops an illness consisting of conjunctivitis and 
malaise with some intraoral lesions, followed by a generalised 
maculopapular rash. With respect to the most likely causative 
organism, which of the following statements is false?
 A. The basic reproduction number (R0) for this pathogen is one of 
the highest encountered for an infectious disease
 B. R0 gives an estimate of how many infections are likely to 
arise from an infected individual and is dependent on vaccine 
uptake and previous infections
 C. R0 for this infection is higher than that for SARS-CoV-2 and 
Ebola
 D. Since R0 for this infection is high the proportion of the 
population who need to be immunised to prevent spread of 
infection is high
 E. Re gives an estimate of how many infections are likely to arise 
from an infected individual taking into account vaccine uptake 
in the population
Answer: B.
The case describes a measles infection. R0 is an estimate of the num-
ber of cases that can be expected to be acquired from a single primary 
case when all individuals in the population are susceptible to infection, 
and is high for measles (usually cited as 12–18). R0 is dependent on the 
inherent transmissibility of the organism and assumes susceptibility of 
the population. R0 is affected by the social habits and interactions of a 
population at the time it is calculated, and therefore the Ro for a disease 
transmitted by close contact will be higher if calculated in a densely pop-
ulated area than a sparsely populated area. Because measles has a high 
R0 the number of people in the population who need to be vaccinated 
to control measles is high. Re gives a more accurate assessment of the 
number of infections that can be expected to arise within a population 
than R0 because it takes into account the number of susceptible indi-
viduals within the population (i.e. vaccinated individuals and those who 
have acquired immunity through natural infection) as well as changes
in behaviour (e.g. the introduction of social distancing, use of personal 
protective equipment etc.). Re therefore varies with time and population 
behaviour.
 6.2. A 23-year-old woman with cystic brosis and a history of multiple 
infectious exacerbations is admitted to hospital with increasing 
breathlessness. A chest X-ray reveals patchy inltrates throughout 
the right lower lung on a background of bronchial dilatation in both 
lungs. Sputum culture yields profuse growth of an oxidase-positive 
Gram-negative bacillus. The patient has a history of rash with 
piperacillin-tazobactam but has tolerated cephalosporins without 
previous problems. Which of the following would be a suitable 
agent to treat the most likely causative organism?
 A. Cefaclor
 B. Cefazolin
 C. Ceftriaxone
 D. Ceftazidime
 E. Cephalexin
Answer: D.
The patient has a history of cystic brosis with multiple infectious exac-
erbations. Although an oxidase-positive Gram-negative bacillus could 
describe several organisms, the most likely one in a setting of cystic 
brosis with multiple infective exacerbations is P. aeruginosa. As the 
patient has tolerated cephalosporins previously with no problems, it is 
reasonable to treat her with an anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin despite 
her history of rash with another beta-lactam antibiotic (piperacillin- 
tazobactam). Ceftazidime is the only anti-pseudomonal cephalosporin 
on this list. The only other third-generation cephalosporin that has good 
Gram-negative coverage on the list is ceftriaxone, but it lacks activity 
against P. aeruginosa
 6.3. A 58-year-old man with diabetes mellitus is hospitalised with 
an acute myocardial infarction. He develops cardiac failure and 
acute kidney injury (AKI) and spends a period of time in the 
cardiac intensive care unit. He subsequently develops a fever and 
his blood cultures are positive for a yeast, which is identied as 
Candida krusei. An antifungal agent is selected on the basis of 
likely susceptibility and patient comorbidities. The mechanism of 
action of this antifungal is:
 A. Accumulation of toxic 14α-methylated sterols
 B. DNA topoisomerase inhibition
 C. Ergosterol synthesis inhibition in the cell membrane
 D. Impairment of DNA synthesis due to inhibition of thymidylate 
synthase
 E. Inhibition of β-1,3-glucan synthesis in the cell wall
Answer: E.
The candidaemia is likely to be related to a central venous catheter 
infection and Candida krusei is resistant to antifungal azoles. The best 
initial therapy is therefore an echinocandin such as caspofungin, which 
acts by inhibiting fungal β-1,3-glucan synthase. It would not be appro-
priate to treat this patient with an amphotericin B preparation because 
of his AKI and the potential for nephrotoxicity. Antifungal azoles act by 
inhibiting ergosterol synthesis resulting in toxic accumulation of 14α- 
methylated sterols. Flucytosine (5-uorocytosine) inhibits DNA synthesis 
by its actions on thymidylate synthase. Inhibition of bacterial DNA topo-
isomerases is the mechanism of action of uoroquinolones, but not of 
any antifungals.
 6.4. A 26-year-old man who grew up on a farm in rural Argentina 
is investigated for chronic abdominal pain and weight loss. He 
is found on investigation to have infection with Taenia saginata
and treatment is recommended. Guidelines suggest you should 
prescribe praziquantel but your pharmacy is not able to obtain any 
supplies of this drug. What would be a suitable alternative agent to 
use to treat this infection?
 A. Bithionol
 B. Diethycarbazamine
 C. Niclosamide
 D. Piperazine
 E. Thiabendazole
Answer: C.
Infections with intestinal tapeworms such as T. saginata are often 
asymptomatic but can occasionally give rise to symptoms, as in this 
case. The preferred treatment for Taenia infections is praziquantel but 
niclosamide or nitazoxanide are alternatives. The other agents listed are 
used for other helminth infections.

[[p155]]
S Clive
M Stares7
Clinical examination of the cancer patient 128
Clinical examination of the patient on cancer treatment 129
The 10 hallmarks of cancer 130
1. Genome instability and mutation 130
2. Resisting cell death 130
3. Sustaining proliferative signalling 131
4. Evading growth suppressors 131
5. Enabling replicative immortality 131
6. Inducing angiogenesis 132
7. Activating invasion and metastasis 132
8. Deregulating cellular energetics 133
9. Tumour-promoting inammation 133
10. Evading immune destruction 133
Environmental and genetic determinants of cancer 133
Investigations 133
Determining the extent of disease (staging) 133
Establishing the type of cancer 135
Assessing tness 137
Multidisciplinary teams 138
Acute oncology 138
Acute presentation of new cancer 138
Oncological emergencies 139
Other acute presentations in oncology 142
Symptoms from locally advanced cancer or metastatic sites 143
Treatment-related toxicities 145
Therapeutics in oncology 145
Surgical treatment 145
Radiotherapy 145
Systemic anti-cancer therapy 146
Evaluation of treatment 148
Late toxicity of therapy 148
Cancer clinical trials 148
Specic cancers 149
Breast cancer 149
Ovarian cancer 150
Endometrial cancer 150
Cervical cancer 150
Head and neck tumours 151
Survivorship 151
Oncology

[[p156]]
128    OncOlOgy
Clinical examination of the cancer patient
Observation
Breast asymmetry, lump
Lymph nodes (see p. 923)
Cervical
Supraclavicular
Axillary
Inguinal
Face
Conjunctival pallor
Icterus
Horner syndrome
Cushingoid features
Cardiovascular
Superior vena cava obstruction
(SVCO) (see Box 7.15)
Atrial fibrillation
Pericardial effusion (see Ch. 16)
Hypo-/hypertension
Abdomen (see p. 783)
Surgical scars
Umbilical nodule
Mass in epigastrium
Visible peristalsis
Abdominal distension
Ascites
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Renal mass
Pelvic or adnexal mass
 Cachexia
 Dehydration
 Asymmetry/lumps
Hands
Clubbing
Signs of smoking
Pallor
Periphery
Calf tenderness, venous
thrombosis
Rash, skin changes (see also p. 1065)
Skin tethering above the
nipple
Finger clubbing in
lung cancer
SVCO in a patient with a
mediastinal mass
Skeletal survey
Focal bone tenderness
(pelvis, spine, long bones)
Wrist tenderness
(hypertrophic pulmonary
osteoarthropathy)
Neurological
Ascites (ovarian carcinoma)
6
5
7
8
9
10
3
4
2
1
6
7
Respiratory
Stridor
Consolidation
Pleural effusion (see p. 481)
4
8
9
10
1
5
3
2
Focal neurological signs
Sensory deficit
Spinal cord compression
Memory deficit
Personality change

[[p157]]
ciia examiatio of the patiet o aer treatmet    129
7
Clinical examination of the patient on cancer treatment
Peripheral neuropathy – cisplatin,
oxaliplatin, taxanes, gemcitabine,
brentuximab, immunotherapy
Encephalopathy – ifosfamide, cisplatin,
immunotherapy
Nervous system
Hearing loss – cisplatin
Posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome (PRES) – VEGF inhibitors,
rituximab, immunotherapy
Eye
Uveitis – immunotherapy, BRAF inhibitors,
cytarabine, erlotinib 
Cataracts – anti-oestrogen 
Lens – steroids
Heart
Cardiomyopathy – HER2 inhibitors,
anthracyclines, radiotherapy 
Myocarditis – immunotherapy, cisplatin
Myocardial ischaemia – 5-FU/ capecitabine,
bevacizumab, radiotherapy
Arrhythmia/QTc prolongation – cytotoxic,
TKIs
Kidneys
Nephritis – immunotherapy
Nephrotic syndrome – VEGF inhibitors
Haemorrhagic cystitis – ifosfamide
Nephrotoxicity – cisplatin
GI tract
Nausea and vomiting – all treatment
Diarrhoea – all treatment
Colitis – ipilimumab, 5-FU/capecitabine,
taxanes, radiotherapy
Paralytic ileus – vinca alkaloids
Bowel perforation – bevacizumab
Strictures – radiotherapy
Haematological
Neutropenia – cytotoxics,
CDK4/6 inhibitors, PARP inhibitors
Bleeding – cytotoxics, VEGF inhibitors
Anaemia – cytotoxics, radiotherapy
Hands and feet
Palmar plantar erythrodysesthesia –
5-FU, capecitabine, VEGF inhibitors
Paronychia – EGFR inhibitors
Colour key
Finger tip cracks – EGFR inhibitors
Vascular
Venous/arterial thrombo-embolism –
platinum agents, taxanes, TKIs
Phlebitis – fluorouracil, epirubicin, cisplatin,
gemcitabine
Hair
Constitutional all
Fatigue – all treatment
Fever – all treatment
Alopecia – cytotoxic
Cytotoxic chemotherapy  Hormone therapy  Targeted therapy  Immunotherapy  Radiotherapy  Supportive
Trichomegaly – EGFR inhibitors
Loss of pigmentation – pazopanib
Skin
Dry skin – all
Maculopapular rashes – TKIs 
Acneiform rashes – EGFR inhibitors
DRESS syndrome – immunotherapy
Telangiectasia – radiotherapy
Tattoo point marks – radiotherapy
Mouth
Dysgeusia – all treatment
Xerostomia – all treatment
Stomatitis – 5-FU, methotrexate,
cyclophosphamide, radiotherapy
Osteonecrosis of jaw – VEGF inhibitors,
bisphosphonates
Lungs
Pneumonitis – immunotherapy, taxanes,
bleomycin, gemcitabine, TKIs, radiotherapy
Fibrosis – bleomycin, gemcitabine,
methotrexate, cyclophosphamide,
radiotherapy 
Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema –
gemcitabine, methotrexate
Liver
Hepatitis – cisplatin, vinblastine, rituximab,
immunotherapy
Pseudocirrhosis – gemcitabine
Steatosis – oxaliplatin, irinotecan,tamoxifen
Sinusoidal obstructive syndrome –
cyclophosphamide, oxaliplatin, vincristine
Endocrine
Hypothyroidism – VEGF inhibitors,
immunotherapy, radio-iodine
Hypophysitis – immunotherapy
Adrenalitis – immunotherapy
Addison’s – steroids (withdrawal)
Diabetes – immunotherapy, steroids
Rheumatological
Arthralgia – taxanes, anti-oestrogens,
mTOR inhibitors
Myalgia – taxanes, anti-oestrogens
Bone pain – G–CSF
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
(CDK = cyclin-dependent kinase; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; G–CSF = granulocyte–colony stimulating factor; PARP = poly-ADP ribose polymerase; TKI =
tyrosine kinase inhibitor; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor) (Acneiform rashes) From Potthoff K, Hofheinz R, Hassel JC, et al. Interdisciplinary management of EGFR-
inhibitor-induced skin reactions: a German expert opinion. Ann Oncol 2011; 22(3):524–535. (Colitis) From Som A, Mandaliya R, Alsaadi D, et al. Immune checkpoint inhibitor-
induced colitis: A comprehensive review. World J Clin Cases 2019; 7(4):405–418.

[[p158]]
130    OncOlOgy
Cancer represents a signicant global health, social and economic 
 burden. In 2018 there were 17 million new cases of cancer worldwide 
and 9.6 million cancer deaths, making it the second leading cause of 
death. By 2030, it is projected that there will be 26 million new cancer 
cases and 17 million cancer deaths per year. The developing world is 
disproportionately affected by cancer and in 2018 approximately 70% 
of cancer deaths occurred in low- and middle-income countries. These 
deaths happen in countries with limited or no access to investigations or 
treatment and with low per capita expenditure on health care.
The most common solid organ malignancies arise in the lung, breast 
and gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 7.1), but the most common form world-
wide is skin cancer. Cigarette smoking accounts for more than 20% of 
all global cancer deaths, 80% of lung cancer cases in men and 50% 
of lung cancer cases in women worldwide, which could be prevented 
by smoking cessation. Diet and alcohol contribute to a further 30% of 
cancers, including those of the stomach, colon, oesophagus, breast 
and liver. Lifestyle modication could reduce these if steps were taken 
to avoid animal fat and red meat, reduce alcohol, increase bre, fresh 
fruit and vegetable intake, avoid obesity and increase physical activity. 
Infections account for a further 15% of cancers (25% of cancers in low- 
and middle-income countries), including those of the cervix, stomach, 
liver, nasopharynx, anus and bladder, and some of these could be pre-
vented by infection control and vaccination.
The 10 hallmarks of cancer
The formation and growth of cancer is a multistep process, during which 
normal cells are transformed into malignant cells. Ten key characteristics 
that underlie these steps, collectively referred to as the ‘Hallmarks of 
Cancer’, have been described.
1. Genome instability and mutation
Random genomic aberrations occur continuously throughout all cells of 
the body. This may include somatic point mutations, insertions, deletions 
and chromosome structural changes (i.e. copy number changes, chro-
mosomal translocations). Epigenomic aberrations, such as DNA meth-
ylation and histone modication, may also occur. Rarely, aberrations will 
confer a selective survival advantage on single cells, ‘driving’ overgrowth 
and dominance in local tissue environments. Multistep carcinogenesis 
results from successive clonal expansions of pre-malignant cells, each 
expansion being triggered by acquisition of a random driver aberration.
Under normal circumstances, genome maintenance systems and 
DNA repair mechanisms are so effective that almost all spontaneous 
genomic aberrations are repaired, or damaged cells are forced into 
senescence or apoptosis. In cancer cells, though, the accumulation 
of mutations can be accelerated by compromising these maintenance 
mechanisms. In turn, this leads to the accumulation of driver genomic 
aberrations which lead to cancer growth and progression. Genomic 
sequencing technology demonstrates that the pattern of aberrations 
vary dramatically between cancer types. However, defects in genome 
maintenance mechanisms leading to genome instability are common 
ndings across all cancers. This enabling characteristic may lead to the 
acquisition of other hallmarks.
2. Resisting cell death
There are three principal mechanisms through which cell death occurs in 
healthy tissues: apoptosis, autophagy and necrosis.
Apoptosis
This is programmed cell death. It is frequently found at markedly reduced 
rates in cancers, particularly those of high grade or those resistant to 
treatment. The cellular apoptotic system has regulatory elements that 
sense intrinsic and extrinsic pro-apoptotic signals. This initiates a cas-
cade of proteolysis and cell disassembly with nuclear fragmentation, 
chromosomal condensation and shrinking of the cell with loss of inter-
cellular contact, followed by cellular fragmentation and the formation of 
apoptotic bodies that are phagocytosed by neighbouring cells. The most 
important regulator of apoptosis is the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, 
often described as the ‘guardian of the genome’ as it is able to induce 
apoptosis in response to sufcient levels of genomic damage. The larg-
est initiator of apoptosis via TP53 is cellular injury, particularly that due 
to DNA damage from cytotoxic chemotherapy, oxidative damage and 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Disruption of p53 protein function as a result of 
mutations in the TP53 gene are found in over half of cancers.
Autophagy
This is a catabolic process during which cellular constituents are 
degraded by lysosomal machinery within the cell. It is an important phys-
iological mechanism; it usually occurs at low levels in cells but can be 
induced in response to environmental stresses, particularly radiotherapy 
and cytotoxic chemotherapy, which induce elevated levels of autophagy 
that are cytoprotective for malignant cells, thus impeding rather than per-
petuating the killing actions of these stress situations. Severely stressed 
cancer cells have been shown to shrink via autophagy to a state of 
reversible dormancy.
Necrosis
This is the premature death of cells and is characterised by the release of 
cellular contents into the local tissue microenvironment, in marked con-
trast to apoptosis, where cells are disassembled in a step-by-step fash-
ion and the resulting cellular fragments are phagocytosed. Necrotic cell 
Fig. 7.1 The most commonly diagnosed cancers in the UK.
(CNS = central nervous system; NHL = non-Hodgkin lymphoma) Statistics 
from Cancer Research UK website (http://info.cancerresearchuk.org)
Breast
Prostate
Lung
Bowel
Melanoma
NHL
Kidney
Head and neck
CNS
Pancreas
Bladder
Leukaemia
Uterus
Oesophagus
Cancer of unknown primary
Ovary
Stomach
Liver
Myeloma
Thyroid
Other
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Number of new cases (thousands)
Male
Female

[[p159]]
The 10 hamarks of aer    131
7
death results in the recruitment of inammatory immune cells,  promotion 
of angiogenesis and release of stimulatory factors that increase cellular 
proliferation and tissue invasion, thereby enhancing rather than inhibiting 
carcinogenesis.
3. Sustaining proliferative signalling
The ‘cell cycle’ is tightly controlled at different stages. Normal cells grow 
and divide in response to external signals, typically growth factors. These 
are able to bind to cell surface-bound receptors that activate an intra-
cellular tyrosine kinase-mediated signalling cascade, ultimately leading to 
changes in gene expression that promote cellular proliferation and growth.
The cell cycle
The cell cycle is composed of four ordered, strictly regulated phases 
referred to as G1 (gap 1), S (DNA synthesis), G2 (gap 2) and M (mitosis) 
(Fig. 7.2). Normal cells grown in culture will stop proliferating and enter 
a quiescent state called G0 once they become conuent or are deprived 
of serum or growth factors. The rst gap phase (G1) prior to the initiation 
of DNA synthesis represents the period of commitment that separates 
M and S phases as cells prepare for DNA duplication. Cells in G0 and 
G1 are receptive to growth signals, but once they have passed a restric-
tion point, they are committed to enter DNA synthesis (S phase). Cells 
demonstrate arrest at different points in G1 in response to different inhib-
itory growth signals. Mitogenic signals promote progression through G1
to S phase, utilising phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene product 
(pRB, p. 40). Following DNA synthesis, there is a second gap phase (G2) 
prior to mitosis (M), allowing cells to repair errors that have occurred 
during DNA replication and thus preventing propagation of these errors 
to daughter cells. Although the duration of individual phases may vary, 
depending on cell and tissue type, most adult cells are in a G0 state at 
any one time.
Stimulation of the cell cycle
Many cancer cells produce growth factors, which drive their own prolifer-
ation by a positive feedback mechanism known as autocrine stimulation. 
Examples include transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-α) and platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF). Other cancer cells express growth factor 
receptors at increased levels due to gene amplication or express abnor-
mal receptors that are permanently activated. This results in abnormal cell 
growth in response to physiological growth factor stimulation or even in 
the absence of growth factor stimulation (ligand-independent signalling). 
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is often over-expressed in 
lung and gastrointestinal tumours and the human epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu receptor is frequently over-expressed in breast 
cancer. Both receptors activate the Ras–Raf–mitogen activated protein 
(MAP) kinase pathway, causing cell proliferation.
4. Evading growth suppressors
The cell cycle is orchestrated by a number of molecular mechanisms, 
most importantly by cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). 
Cyclins bind to CDKs and are regulated by both activating and inacti-
vating phosphorylation, with two main checkpoints at G1/S and G2/M 
transition. The genes that inhibit progression play an important part in 
tumour prevention and are referred to as tumour suppressor genes (e.g. 
TP53, TP21, TP16 genes). The products of these genes deactivate the 
cyclin–CDK complexes and are thus able to halt the cell cycle. The com-
plexity of cell cycle control is susceptible to dysregulation, and mutations 
within inhibitory proteins are common in cancer.
5. Enabling replicative immortality
Normal cells have a limited number of divisions before they are unable 
to divide further (senescence) or before they die (crisis). These limits 
are controlled by telomeric DNA sequences, which protect and stabilise 
chromosomal ends. During replication, telomeres shorten progressively 
as small fragments of telomeric DNA are lost with successive cycles of 
replication. This shortening process represents a mitotic clock and even-
tually prevents the cell from dividing further. Telomerase, a specialised 
polymerase enzyme, adds nucleotides to telomeres, allowing continued 
cell division and thus preventing premature arrest of cellular replication. 
The telomerase enzyme is almost absent in normal cells but is expressed 
at signicant levels in the majority of human cancers.
Fig. 7.2 The cell cycle and sites of action of chemotherapeutic agents. (CDK = cyclin-dependent kinase; RB = retinoblastoma gene)
DNA replication
 checkpoint for:
  Damaged DNA
RB blocks
TP53
CDKs blocked
Restriction point
(regulated by growth 
factors)
G1
Quiescent
G1
Cell
growth
G0
Cyclin D
CDK4, 6
Cell growth
Cyclin E
CDK2
G
S
M
Cyclin A
CDK2
Cyclin B
CDK
2
1
Terminal
differentiation
Apoptosis
Mitosis
Prophase 
 telophase
Nuclear and cellular division
Terminal differentiation
Apoptosis
G2 checkpoint for:
  DNA damage
  DNA replication
  incomplete
Further growth
or DNA repair

[[p160]]
132    OncOlOgy
6. Inducing angiogenesis
All cells and body tissues require sustenance in the form of nutrients 
and oxygen, as well as an ability to evacuate metabolic waste products 
and carbon dioxide. Tumours require a functional vascular network to 
ensure continued growth and are unable to grow beyond 1 mm3 without 
stimulating the development of a vascular supply through angiogenesis 
(Figs. 7.3 and 7.4).
Angiogenesis is dependent on the production of angiogenic growth 
factors, of which vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and plate-
let-derived growth factor (PDGF) are the best characterised. During 
tumour progression, an angiogenic switch is activated and remains on, 
causing normally quiescent vasculature to develop new vessels continu-
ally to help sustain expanding tumour growth. Angiogenesis is governed 
by a balance of pro-angiogenic stimuli and angiogenesis inhibitors, such 
as thrombospondin (TSP)-1, which binds to transmembrane receptors 
on endothelial cells and evokes suppressive signals. A number of cells 
can contribute to the maintenance of a functional tumour vasculature 
and therefore sustain angiogenesis. These include pericytes and a variety 
of bone marrow-derived cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, mast 
cells and myeloid progenitors.
7. Activating invasion and metastasis
The ability to invade neighbouring tissue determines whether a tumour 
is benign or malignant. Clinically, the presence of metastases often 
determines whether a cancer can be cured. The invasion-metastatic 
cascade is a complex multistep process. The initiation of this process 
is enabled by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Cancer cells in a 
tumour lose normal cell–cell adhesion through the down-regulation or, 
occasionally, mutational inactivation of E-cadherin, a calcium-dependent 
cell–cell adhesion glycoprotein. After breaking through the basement 
membrane, cancer cells enter the blood stream (intravasation). These cir-
culating tumour cells (CTCs) then exit the blood stream into distant tissues 
(extravasation) to form small nodules of cancer cells (micrometastases). 
Fig. 7.3 Oncogenesis. The multistep origin of cancer, showing events implicated in cancer initiation, progression, invasion and metastasis.
Basal lamina
First mutation
Inherited or acquired
gain of oncogene
Loss of tumour
suppressor gene
Normal
epithelium
Blood vessel
Connective
tissue
Lymphatic
First mutation
Initial proliferation
Clonal expansion
Further mutation
Further mutation; subset
selected for rapid growth
Localised
Further mutation 
Blood spread
Lymphatic
spread
Ectopic
growth factor
production and
autostimulation
Failed apoptosis
(e.g. TP53 mutation)
Local invasion
through basal
lamina
   Angiogenesis
   to support
   tumour growth
 (see Fig. 7.4)
Breakdown of connective tissue
via tumour production of
  e.g. collagenase
         tissue metalloproteinases
Loss of cell adhesion molecules
  e.g. E-cadherin
invasion or metastasis
Inhibition
Loss of
inhibition
Viable tumour cell
Apoptotic
tumour cell
Angiogenic
factors
VEGF
VEGF
receptor
Tissue
factor
αvβ3 integrin
Plasminogen
Coagulation factor
Coagulation
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
Cell adhesion
Urokinase
Urokinase
receptor
Proteolysis
Plasmin
A
B
C
Fig. 7.4 Angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis.
beyond 1 mm3
the release of angiogenic factors by the tumour cells and loss of inhibition of the 
matrix allow cells to extravasate into the blood stream and metastasise to distant 
sites. (VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor)
Following mesenchymal–epithelial transition these micrometastatic lesions 
develop into macroscopic tumours (colonisation) (see Fig. 7.3).
Cross-talk between cancer cells and cells of the surrounding stro-
mal tissue is involved in the acquired capability for invasive growth and 
metastasis. Mesenchymal stem cells in tumour stroma have been found 

[[p161]]
Ivestiatios    133
7
to secrete CCL5, a protein chemokine that helps recruit leucocytes into 
inammatory sites. With the help of particular T-cell-derived cytokines 
(interleukin (IL)-2 and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ)), CCL5 induces pro-
liferation and activation of natural killer cells and then acts reciprocally 
on cancer cells to stimulate invasive behaviour. Macrophages at the 
tumour periphery can foster local invasion by supplying matrix-degrading 
enzymes such as metalloproteinases and cysteine cathepsin proteases.
8. Deregulating cellular energetics
Under aerobic conditions, oxidative phosphorylation functions as the 
main metabolic pathway for energy production; cells process glucose, 
rst to pyruvate via glycolysis and thereafter to carbon dioxide in the 
mitochondria. While under anaerobic conditions, glycolysis is favoured 
to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Cancer cells can reprogram 
their glucose metabolism to limit energy production to glycolysis, even 
in the presence of oxygen. This has been termed ‘aerobic glycolysis’. 
Up-regulation of glucose transporters, such as GLUT1, is the main 
mechanism through which aerobic glycolysis is achieved.
This reprogramming of energy metabolism appears paradoxical, as 
overall energy production from glycolysis is signicantly lower (18-fold) 
than that from oxidative phosphorylation. One explanation may be that 
the increased production of glycolytic intermediates can be fed into var-
ious biosynthetic pathways, including those that generate the nucleo-
sides and amino acids, necessary for the production of new cells.
9. Tumour-promoting inammation
Almost all tumours show inltration with immune cells on pathological inves-
tigation and historically this nding was thought to represent an attempt of 
the immune system to eradicate the cancer. It is now clear that tumour-
associated inammatory responses contribute to several hallmark capabili-
ties and promote tumour formation and cancer progression. Immune cells 
may promote invasive behaviour, and bioactive molecules such as cytokines, 
growth factors and pro-angiogenic factors may be released into the tumour 
microenvironment. In particular, the release of reactive oxygen species, which 
are actively mutagenic, will accelerate the genetic evolution of surrounding 
cancer cells, enhancing growth and contributing to cancer progression.
10. Evading immune destruction
Cancer cells continuously shed antigens into the circulatory system, 
prompting an immune response that includes cytotoxic T-cell, natural 
killer cell and macrophage production. The immune system is thought 
to provide continuous surveillance, with resultant elimination of cells that 
undergo malignant transformation. However, if not all cancer cells are 
eliminated there may be a period of equilibrium where tumour growth is 
controlled by the immune system and cancer cells may enter a dormant 
state, sometimes for many years. Alternatively, cancer cells may escape 
immune control and grow into clinically apparent tumours. Several fac-
tors may contribute to immune escape, including reduced immune rec-
ognition, increased resistance or survival and the development of an 
immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment.
Immune checkpoints are increasingly recognised as key factors in the 
immune escape of tumours. These pathways are crucial for regulating 
the immune response to normal cells by down-regulating the immune 
system and promoting self-tolerance by suppressing T-cell immune 
activity. However, some cancers co-opt these protective mechanisms 
by stimulating immune checkpoint molecular targets such as the pro-
grammed cell death ligand (PD-L1), a protein that helps stop immune 
cells from attacking other cells in the body (see Fig. 7.12).
Environmental and genetic determinants  
of cancer
The majority of cancers do not have a single cause but rather are the 
result of a complex interaction between genetic factors and exposure 
to environmental carcinogens. These are often tumour type-specic but 
some general principles do apply.
Environmental factors
Environmental triggers for cancer have mainly been identied through 
epidemiological studies that examine patterns of distribution of cancers 
in patients in whom parameters such as age, sex, presence of other 
illnesses, social class, geography and diet differ. Sometimes, these give 
strong pointers to the molecular or cellular causes of the disease, such 
as the association between aatoxin production within contaminated 
food supplies and hepatocellular carcinomas. For most solid cancers, 
however, there is evidence of a multifactorial pathogenesis, even when 
there is a principal environmental cause (Box 7.1).
Smoking is now established beyond all doubt as a major cause of lung 
cancer, but there are additional predisposing factors since not all smok-
ers develop cancer. Similarly, most carcinomas of the cervix are related 
to infection with human papillomavirus (HPV subtypes 16 and 18). For 
carcinomas of the bowel and breast, there is strong evidence of an envi-
ronmental component. For example, the risk of breast cancer in women 
of Far Eastern origin remains relatively low when they rst migrate to a 
country with a Western lifestyle, but rises in subsequent generations to 
approach that of the resident population of the host country. The precise 
environmental factors that cause this change are unclear but may include 
diet (higher intake of saturated fat and/or dairy products), reproductive 
patterns (later onset of rst pregnancy) and lifestyle (increased use of 
articial light and shift in diurnal rhythm).
Genetic factors
A number of inherited cancer syndromes are recognised and account 
for 5%–10% of all cancers (Box 7.2). Their molecular basis is discussed 
in Chapter 3, but in general they result from inherited mutations in driver 
genes that regulate cell growth, cell death and apoptosis. Although carri-
ers of these gene mutations have a greatly elevated risk of cancer, none 
has 100% penetrance and additional modulating factors, both genetic 
and environmental, are likely to be operative. Exploration of a possible 
genetic contribution is a key part of cancer management. It may inform 
anti-cancer therapy decisions in people with cancer. Patients and their 
family members may also benet from screening investigations to detect 
cancer early, or preventative treatments such as prophylactic mastec-
tomy in women who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation.
Investigations
When a patient is suspected of having cancer, a full history should be 
taken. Attention should be paid to potential risk factors such as smoking 
and occupational exposures, any family history of cancer and elucidating 
potential complications of the disease. A thorough clinical examination 
is essential to identify both the primary cancer site and possible sites of 
metastases, and to discover any other conditions that may have a bear-
ing on the management plan.
In order to plan the most appropriate investigations and management, 
information is needed on:
 the extent of disease
 the type of cancer
 the patient’s tness.
Determining the extent of disease (staging)
The extent of disease, such as how large a tumour is and if it has spread, 
is determined by the process of staging. It entails clinical examination, 
imaging (e.g. CT, MRI, PET), specialised investigations (e.g. colonoscopy, 
endoscopy, laparoscopy, mediastinoscopy) and, in some cases, surgery. 
The outcome is recorded using a standard staging classication that 

[[p162]]
134    OncOlOgy
7.1 Environmental factors that predispose to cancer
Environmental aetiology
Processes
Diseases
Occupational exposure
(see ‘Radiation’ below)
Dye and rubber manufacturing (aromatic amines)
Bladder cancer
Asbestos mining, construction work, shipbuilding (asbestos)
Lung cancer and mesothelioma
Vinyl chloride (PVC) manufacturing
Liver angiosarcoma
Petroleum industry (benzene)
Acute leukaemia
Chemicals
Cytotoxic chemotherapy (e.g. melphalan, cyclophosphamide)
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Cigarette smoking
Exposure to carcinogens from inhaled smoke
Lung, throat, oesophagus and bladder cancer
Viral infection
Epstein–Barr virus
Human papillomavirus
Hepatitis B and C viruses
Burkitt lymphoma and nasopharyngeal cancer
Cervical cancer, anal cancer, oropharyngeal cancer
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Bacterial infection
Helicobacter pylori
Gastric MALT lymphomas, gastric cancer
Parasitic infection
Liver uke (Opisthorchis sinensis)
Schistosoma haematobium
Cholangiocarcinoma
Squamous cell bladder cancer
Dietary factors
Low-roughage/high-fat content diet
High nitrosamine intake
Aatoxin from contamination of Aspergillus avus
Colonic cancer
Gastric cancer
Hepatocellular cancer
Obesity
Reduced physical activity, increased insulin
Increased oestrogen
Colon cancer
Breast and endometrial cancer
Radiation
UV exposure
Basal cell carcinoma
Melanoma
Non-melanocytic skin cancer
Nuclear fallout following explosion (e.g. Hiroshima, Chernobyl)
Leukaemia
Solid tumours, e.g. thyroid
Diagnostic exposure (e.g. CT)
Cholangiocarcinoma following Thorotrast usage
Occupational exposure (e.g. beryllium and strontium mining)
Lung cancer
Therapeutic radiotherapy
Medullary thyroid cancer
Sarcoma
Inammatory diseases
Ulcerative colitis
Colon cancer
Hormonal
Use of diethylstilbestrol
Oestrogens
Vaginal cancer
Endometrial cancer
Breast cancer
(CT = computed tomography; MALT = mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; UV = ultraviolet)
allows comparisons to be made between different groups of patients. 
One of the most commonly used systems is the T (tumour), N (regional 
lymph nodes), M (metastatic sites) approach of the International Union 
against Cancer (UICC, see Box 7.3). For most cancers staging will dene 
patients into having:
 early, localised disease, which can be cured with surgery  
or other localised therapy (e.g. radiotherapy or ablative  
therapies)
 locally advanced disease, which can often be cured with a com-
bination of surgery and/or systemic anti-cancer therapy and 
radiotherapy
 metastatic disease, where the cancer has spread to distant sites, 
which can only rarely be cured with systemic anti-cancer therapy, 
radiotherapy and/or surgery.
Imaging plays a critical role in the diagnosis and staging of cancer. It is 
also used to determine the response to treatment. The imaging modality 
employed depends primarily on the site of the disease and likely patterns 
of spread.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is a key investigation in cancer patients and 
is particularly useful in imaging the thorax and abdomen (Fig. 7.5). With 
modern scanners it is possible to visualise the large bowel if it is prepared 
(CT colonography), allowing accurate detection of colorectal cancers 
and adenomas ≥10 mm.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is useful in characterising lesions within the liver, kidney, pan-
creas and reproductive organs. It may be used for guiding biopsies of 
tumours in the breast and liver. Endoscopic ultrasound is helpful in stag-
ing upper gastrointestinal and pancreatic cancers, involving a special 
endoscope with an ultrasound and biopsy probe attached.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a high resolution and is the pre-
ferred technique for brain, bone and pelvic imaging. It is widely employed 
for the staging of rectal, cervical and prostate cancers.
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) visualises metabolic activity of 
tumour cells and is often used in combination with CT (PET–CT) to eval-
uate the extent of the disease, particularly in the assessment of potential 
distant metastases when a radical treatment approach is being consid-
ered. Not all tumour types are ‘PET-avid’ and the metabolic activity of 

[[p163]]
Ivestiatios    135
7
7.2 Inherited cancer predisposition syndromes
Syndrome
Malignancies
Inheritance
Gene
Ataxia telangiectasia
Leukaemia, lymphoma, ovarian, gastric, brain, colon
AR
AT
Bloom syndrome
Leukaemia, tongue, oesophageal, colonic, Wilms' tumour
AR
BLM
Breast/ovarian
Breast, ovarian, colonic, prostatic, pancreatic
AD
BRCA1, BRCA2
Cowden syndrome
Breast, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, pancreatic
AD
PTEN
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Colonic, upper gastrointestinal tract
AD
APC, MUTYH
Familial atypical multiple mole 
melanoma (FAMMM)
Melanoma, pancreas
AD
CDKN2A (TP16)
Fanconi anaemia
Leukaemia, oesophageal, skin, hepatoma
AR
FACA, FACC, FACD
Gorlin syndrome
Basal cell skin, brain
AD
PTCH
Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer
Diffuse gastric cancer
AD
E-cadherin
Hereditary non-polyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC)
Colonic, endometrial, ovarian, pancreatic, gastric
AD
MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, PMS1, PMS2
Li–Fraumeni syndrome
Sarcoma, breast, osteosarcoma, leukaemia, glioma, 
adrenocortical
AD
TP53
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN) 1
Pancreatic islet cell, pituitary adenoma, parathyroid 
adenoma and hyperplasia
AD
MEN1
MEN 2
Medullary thyroid, phaeochromocytoma, parathyroid 
hyperplasia
AD
RET
Neurobromatosis 1
Neurobrosarcoma, phaeochromocytoma, optic glioma
AD
NF1
Neurobromatosis 2
Vestibular schwannoma
AD
NF2
Papillary renal cell cancer 
syndrome
Renal cell cancer
AD
MET
Peutz–Jegher syndrome
Colonic, ileal, breast, ovarian
AD
STK11
Prostate cancer
Prostate
AD
HPC1
Retinoblastoma
Retinoblastoma, osteosarcoma
AD
RB1
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome
Haemangioblastoma of retina and CNS, renal cell, 
phaeochromocytoma
AD
VHL
Wilms’ tumour
Nephroblastoma, neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
AD
WT1
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Skin, leukaemia, melanoma
AR
XPA, XPC, XPD (ERCC2), XPF
(AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; CNS = central nervous system)
small but malignant lymph nodes may not be detected, limiting the sen-
sitivity of PET-CT.
Biochemical markers
Many cancers produce substances called tumour markers, some of 
which may assist in diagnosis, response evaluation and detection of 
relapse. Unfortunately, most tumour markers are neither sufciently sen-
sitive nor sufciently specic to be used in isolation for diagnosis and 
need to be interpreted in the context of other clinical features. Some 
can be used for antibody-directed therapy or imaging, where they have 
a greater role in diagnosis. Tumour markers in routine use are outlined 
in Box 7.4
Establishing the type of cancer
In most cases a biopsy is required in order to establish the tumour type. 
Biopsies can be taken at endoscopy, laparoscopy, surgery or by ultra-
sound- or CT- guided biopsy with the help of interventional radiology. At 
times a diagnosis can be obtained by examination of cells (cytology) from 
uid (e.g. pleural or peritoneal), from a smear (e.g. cervical) or by doing 
ne needle aspiration of a palpable or visible lump (Box 7.5).
7.3 TNM classication
Extent of primary tumour*
TX
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
Not assessed
No tumour
Increase in primary tumour size or 
depth of invasion
Increased involvement of nodes*
NX
N0
N1
N2/3
Not assessed
No nodal involvement
Increases in involvement
Presence of metastases
MX
Not assessed
M0
Not present
M1
Present
*Exact criteria for size and region of nodal involvement have been dened for  
each anatomical site.

[[p164]]
136    OncOlOgy
Fig. 7.5 Computed tomography (CT) images.
after cytotoxic chemotherapy showing a partial radiological response to treatment. These remain stable 9 years later.
A
B
P
P
7.4 Commonly used serum tumour markers
Name
Natural occurrence
Tumours
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
Glycoprotein found in yolk sac and fetal liver tissue. 
Transient elevation in liver diseases. Has a role in 
screening during pregnancy for the detection of neural 
tube defects and Down syndrome
Ovarian non-seminomatous germ cell tumours (80%), 
testicular teratoma (80%), hepatocellular cancer (50%)
Beta-2-microglobulin
A human leucocyte antigen (HLA) common fragment 
present on surface of lymphocytes, macrophages and 
some epithelial cells. Can be elevated in autoimmune 
disease and renal glomerular disease
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, myeloma
Calcitonin
32-amino-acid peptide from C cells of thyroid. Used to 
screen for MEN 2
Medullary cell carcinoma of thyroid
Cancer antigen 125 (CA-125)
Differentiation antigen of coelomic epithelium (Müller’s 
duct). Raised in any cause of ascites, pleural effusion or 
heart failure. Can be raised in inammatory conditions
Ovarian epithelial cancer (75%), gastrointestinal cancer 
(10%), lung cancer (5%) and breast cancer (5%)
CA-19.9
A mucin found in epithelium of fetal stomach, intestine 
and pancreas. It is eliminated exclusively via bile and so 
any degree of cholestasis can cause levels to rise
Pancreatic cancer (80%), mucinous tumour of the 
ovary (65%), gastric cancer (30%), colon cancer (30%)
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
Glycoprotein found in intestinal mucosa during embryonic 
and fetal life. Elevated in smokers, cirrhosis, chronic 
hepatitis, ulcerative colitis, pneumonia
Colorectal cancer, particularly with liver metastasis, 
gastric cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, mucinous 
cancer of the ovary
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
Glycoprotein hormone, 14 kD α subunit and 24 kD β
subunit from placental syncytiotrophoblasts. Used for 
disease monitoring in hydatidiform mole and as the basis 
of a pregnancy test
Choriocarcinoma (100%), hydatidiform moles (97%), 
ovarian non-seminomatous germ cell tumours 
(50%–80%), seminoma (15%)
Placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP)
Isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase
Seminoma (40%), ovarian dysgerminoma (50%)
Prostate-specic antigen (PSA)
Glycoprotein member of human kallikrein gene family. 
PSA is a serine protease that liquees semen in excretory 
ducts of prostate. Can be elevated in benign prostatic 
hypertrophy and prostatitis
Prostate cancer (95%)
Thyroglobulin
Matrix protein for thyroid hormone synthesis in normal 
thyroid follicles
Papillary and follicular thyroid cancer
(MEN = multiple endocrine neoplasia)
Histopathology
Histopathological analysis of tumour tissue is pivotal in identifying the 
type of cancer and provides information that may direct subsequent 
management. The results of histopathological analysis are most informa-
tive when combined with knowledge of the clinical picture; biopsy results 
should therefore be reviewed and discussed within the context of a multi-
disciplinary team meeting.
Light microscopy
Examination of tumour samples by light microscopy remains the core 
method of cancer diagnosis and, in cases where the primary site is 
unclear, may give clues to the origin of the tumour:
 Signet-ring cells favour a gastric primary.
 Presence of melanin favours melanoma.

[[p165]]
Ivestiatios    137
7
 Mucin is common in gut/lung/breast/endometrial and ovarian 
cancers.
 Psammoma bodies are a feature of ovarian cancer (mucin +) and 
thyroid cancer (mucin ).
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for tumour markers can provide 
useful diagnostic information and may help with treatment decisions. 
Commonly used examples of IHC in clinical practice include:
 Oestrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptor positivity indicate 
that the cancer may be sensitive to hormonal manipulation.
 Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) 
favour germ-cell tumours.
 Prostate-specic antigen (PSA) favours prostate cancer.
 Cytokeratins and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) favour epithelial 
carcinomas.
 HER2 receptor positivity in breast or gastric cancers indicate that 
the tumour may respond to HER2 inhibitor targeted therapy.
 T-cell receptor and cluster designation (CD) antigen expression aid in 
the diagnosis and classication of lymphomas.
Molecular pathology
Molecular proling of individual tumours is used to better understand 
their clinical behaviour and to stratify treatment options. Treatment selec-
tion is increasingly tailored to specic ‘druggable’ molecular pathways 
which include:
 EGFR mutations – predict response to EGFR inhibitor targeted  
therapy in lung cancer
 RAS mutations – predict resistance to EGFR inhibitor targeted  
therapy in colon cancer
 ALK fusion oncogene rearrangement – predict response to ALK 
inhibitor targeted therapy in lung cancer
 microsatellite instability – predict response to checkpoint inhibitor 
immunotherapy in several cancer types
Cytogenetic analysis
Some tumours demonstrate typical chromosomal changes that help in 
diagnosis. The utilisation of uorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) tech-
niques can be useful in Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral neuro-ectodermal 
tumours where there is a translocation between chromosome 11 and 22: 
t(11;22)(q24;q12). In some cases, gene amplication can be detected via 
FISH (e.g. determining over-expression of HER2/neu).
Assessing tness
When making decisions about investigations and management in patients 
with cancer it is important to consider an individual’s general condition 
and comorbidities. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status (PS) scale is used to formally assess a patient’s t-
ness (Box 7.6). Outcomes for patients with PS 3–4 are worse in almost 
all malignancies than for those with PS 0–2, and this has a strong inu-
ence on the approach to treatment in the individual patient. Additionally, 
outcomes are typically worse for patients with a low albumin and raised 
inammatory markers (i.e. white blood cell count, C-reactive protein). 
Comorbidities also frequently inuence treatment options. For example, 
hepatic or renal dysfunction means some systemic therapies cannot be 
used or can only be given in lower doses. In some patients poor tness 
or comorbidities may preclude any anti-cancer therapy options, in which 
case comprehensive diagnostic and staging investigations add little clini-
cal value and may not be in the best interests of the patient.
Although the incidence of cancer increases with patient age, the 
approach to investigation and management is similar at all ages (Box7.7). 
However, assessing tness in this group of patients can be difcult, with 
7.5 How to perform a ne needle aspiration (FNA) of a tumour/
lesion
 Ensure the patient is in a comfortable position with the lesion accessible to the 
operator.
 Identify the tumour, conrm that it is easily palpable and make sure there are no 
nearby critical structures.
 If tumour is not palpable or concern about nearby critical structures then 
perform FNA under ultrasound guidance.
 Clean the skin over the lesion.
 Inject local anaesthetic (if required) into the skin over the lesion.
 Label glass slide(s) and have ready near to the patient.
 Immobilise the lesion between thumb and forenger of one hand.
 Introduce needle (usually with syringe attached) into lesion with the other hand.
 When the needle tip is at the edge of the lesion, apply negative pressure by 
pulling on the syringe and continue to enter the lesion.
 Make multiple rapid passes through the lesion, varying the angles if necessary.
 Stop sampling if blood is seen in the syringe hub as blood reduces the quality of 
the sample.
 Release the negative pressure while the needle is still in the lesion.
 Withdraw the needle and expel the cellular material from the needle onto the 
labelled glass slide(s) for pathological evaluation.
7.6 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance 
status scale
0
Fully active, able to carry on all usual activities without restriction and 
without the aid of analgesics
1
Restricted in strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out light 
work or pursue a sedentary occupation. This group also contains patients 
who are fully active, as in grade 0, but only with the aid of analgesics
2
Ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to work. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours
3
Capable of only limited self-care, conned to bed or chair more than 
50% of waking hours
4
Completely disabled, unable to carry out any self-care and conned 
totally to bed or chair
7.7 Cancer in old age
 Incidence: around 50% of cancers occur in the 15% of the population aged 
over 65 years.
 Screening: women over 65 in the UK are not invited to breast cancer  
screening but can request it. Uptake is low despite increasing incidence with 
age.
 Presentation: may be later for some cancers. When symptoms are non-
specic, patients (and their doctors) may initially attribute them to age alone.
 Life expectancy: an 80-year-old woman can expect to live 8 years, so cancer 
may still shorten life and an active approach remains appropriate.
 Prognosis: histology, stage at presentation and observation for a brief period 
are better guides to outcome than age.
 Rate of progression: malignancy may have a more indolent course. This is 
poorly understood but may be due to reduced effectiveness of angiogenesis 
with age, inhibiting the development of metastases.
 Response to treatment: equivalent to that in younger people – well 
documented for a range of cancers and for surgery, radiotherapy, cytotoxic 
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy.
 Toxicity of treatment: may be greater due to subclinically reduced baseline 
hepatic, renal and bone marrow function and reduced baseline energy.
 Treatment selection: chronological age is of minor importance compared to 
comorbid illness and patient choice. Although older patients can be treated 
effectively and safely, aggressive intervention is not appropriate for all. Symptom 
control may be all that is possible or desired by the patient.

[[p166]]
138    OncOlOgy
increasing comorbidity and declining physiological reserve in particular 
placing patients at increased risk of treatment toxicity. Geriatric assess-
ment tools to assess patient tness and toxicity risks have been developed.
Multidisciplinary teams
The multidisciplinary team (MDT) is well established in oncology and 
meets on a regular basis to discuss patient progress and provide a 
forum for patient-centred, interdisciplinary communication to coor-
dinate care and decision-making. It is a platform on which individual 
clinicians can discuss complex cases or situations and draw on the 
collective experience of the team membership to decide on the best 
approach for an individual patient. This can be particularly important 
when discussing patients with a rare condition or in an unusual situation. 
As a minimum, most MDTs include a radiologist, pathologist, specialist 
physician, specialist surgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, 
nurse specialist, auditor and scheduler. Additional staff may be relevant 
to different MDTs, e.g. dermatologists in skin cancer MDTs, dieticians 
in upper gastrointestinal cancer MDTs, stoma nurses in colorectal can-
cer MDTs, palliative care doctors in pancreatic cancer or cancer of 
unknown primary (CUP) MDTs. Specic roles of the MDT are outlined 
in Box 7.8
Acute oncology
Cancer centres are usually based in cities and have busy radiother-
apy and systemic anti-cancer therapy units containing specialist 
equipment and teams of highly trained physicians, surgeons, nurses, 
pharmacists, radiographers, physicists and support workers amongst 
others. Most patients with cancer undergo investigations, assess-
ments and treatment as outpatients. However, patients may present 
acutely to any specialty in any hospital with a new cancer, cancer-re-
lated symptoms, emergency complications of cancer or with treat-
ment-related toxicities.
Acute presentation of new cancer
Despite cancer screening initiatives, most patients still present with symp-
tomatic disease. They may have symptoms related to the local effect of 
a primary tumour or metastatic deposit, such as nding a lump, dyspha-
gia or persistent pain. These are sometimes called ‘red ag’ symptoms 
of cancer (Box 7.9). Patients may present with constitutional symptoms 
such as unexplained weight loss, fatigue or fevers. Paraneoplastic syn-
dromes due to the production of biologically active hormones by the 
tumour, or as the result of an immune response to the tumour, may also 
be the presenting symptom of new cancer (Box 7.10). The pattern of 
symptoms, detailed clinical history and examination will most often direct 
the initial investigations and early referral to the appropriate specialist 
multidisciplinary team.
Cancer of unknown primary (CUP)
When a patient is found to have advanced or metastatic cancer but 
history, examination and imaging is unable to dene a primary cancer 
site, an assessment of patient tness, disease extent, comorbidities and 
patient wishes should be made. Selected investigations should be car-
ried out (Box7.11). However, a primary cancer site does not need to 
be ‘hunted down’ in all patients and investigations should be limited to 
those that will help management. Specialist investigations (e.g. endos-
copies) are only indicated when there is radiological suspicion or if there 
are localising symptoms.
In some cases, such as those with clinical suspicion of germ cell 
tumours, high-grade lymphoma or small cell cancer, or those present-
ing with oncological emergencies, urgent referral directly to oncology or 
haematology is essential to allow rapid initiation of anti-cancer therapy, 
sometimes before investigations are completed (Fig. 7.6).
If patients are t to undergo investigations and t enough to be consid-
ered for treatment then a core biopsy of the most accessible metastatic 
7.8 Specic roles of the cancer multidisciplinary 
team (MDT)
 Agreeing on cancer type and nal stage.
 Deciding on the appropriate primary treatment modality (most commonly 
surgery but the use of neoadjuvant systemic anti-cancer therapy and/or 
radiotherapy before surgery is increasing).
 Arranging review by the appropriate team to coordinate management.
 Planning surveillance strategies.
 Diagnosing cancer recurrence or metastases.
 Ensuring the appropriate transition from treatment with curative intent to that of 
palliation.
 Promoting recruitment into clinical trials.
 Agreeing on operational policies to deliver high-quality care to patients.
 Planning and reviewing audit data to ensure delivery of quality care to patients.
 Identifying late effects of cancer treatments.
7.9 Red ag symptoms of malignancy
Symptom
Typical site or possible tumour
Lump
Breast, lymph node (any site), testicle
Skin abnormality
Melanoma, basal cell carcinoma
Bleeding
Stomach, colon, lung, endometrium, 
bladder, kidney
Dysphagia, odynophagia
Oesophagus, bronchus, gastric, head 
and neck
Change in bowel habit
Colon, rectum, ovary
Cough, hoarseness, stridor
Lung, head and neck, thyroid
Bone pain or fracture
Bone (primary sarcoma, secondary 
metastasis from breast, prostate, 
bronchus, thyroid, kidney)
Abdominal swelling (ascites)
Ovary, stomach, pancreas
Unexplained weight loss, anorexia
Lung, gastrointestinal tract, CUP
Unexplained fatigue
Any
(CUP = cancer of unknown primary)
7.10 Paraneoplastic syndromes
Feature
Common cancer site associations
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome
Small cell lung cancer
Subacute cerebellar 
degeneration
Small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer
Encephalomyelitis
Small cell lung cancer
Retinopathy
Non-small cell lung cancer
Dermatomyositis/polymyositis
Gastric, lung cancer
Acanthosis nigricans
Gastric, oesophageal cancer
Vitiligo
Melanoma
Pruritus
Lymphoma, leukaemia, central nervous 
system tumours
Pemphigus
Lymphoma, Kaposi’s sarcoma, thymic
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma 
(EATL)

[[p167]]
Aute ooo    139
7
Metastatic malignant disease of undened primary 
origin (MUO)
Patients who present as emergencies to hospital with symptomatic new 
metastatic cancer often have a short prognosis. Features associated 
with poor prognosis, irrespective of subsequent diagnosis, include: poor 
performance status (PS 3–4), requirement for hospital admission, bulky 
or multi-organ metastatic disease, signicant comorbidity, raised LDH, 
raised inammatory markers and low albumin. Further investigations, 
including biopsy, may not be warranted and honest conversations about 
palliative care and end-of-life planning are often preferable. Appropriate 
analgesia, palliative radiotherapy (for bleeding or pain) and interventional/
surgical palliation can all help improve symptoms.
Oncological emergencies
Oncological emergencies are a group of potentially life-threatening con-
ditions that occur as a direct result of cancer or its treatment. Positive 
outcomes depend upon prompt recognition and implementation of 
appropriate management.
Malignant spinal cord compression
Malignant spinal cord compression complicates 5% of cancers and is 
most common in myeloma, prostate, breast and lung cancers that most 
frequently involve bone. Malignant spinal cord compression often results 
from posterior extension of a vertebral body mass but intrathecal spinal 
cord metastases can cause similar signs and symptoms. The thoracic 
region is most commonly affected (Fig. 7.7).
Clinical features
The earliest sign is back pain, often rapidly worsening or in a ‘band’, 
most marked on coughing and lying at. Subsequently, sensory 
changes develop in dermatomes below the level of compression, and 
motor weakness distal to the block occurs. Finally, sphincter distur-
bance, causing urinary retention and bowel incontinence, is observed. 
7.11 Initial diagnostic tests in patients presenting with 
carcinoma of unknown primary
 Detailed medical history and examination, including breast, nodal areas, skin, 
genital, rectal and pelvic regions
 Full blood count, urea and electrolytes, renal function, liver function tests, 
albumin, calcium, urinalysis, lactate dehydrogenase, CRP
 Myeloma screen (if lytic bone lesions)
 CT scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis
 CT neck if thyroid lump or neck nodes
 Histological examination by biopsy, with immunohistochemistry and/or 
molecular pathology if required
 Upper or lower gastrointestinal endoscopy if gastrointestinal symptoms
 Mammography and/or breast MRI for women with axillary nodes or 
adenocarcinoma
 Breast MRI for women with adenocarcinoma limited to axillary nodes
 Testicular ultrasound (if midline disease in young man or clinical features 
suggest germ cell tumour)
 Naso-endoscopy for squamous neck nodes
 PET scan for single-site disease or squamous neck nodes with no primary on 
endoscopic evaluation
 Tumour markers: prostate-specic antigen (PSA) in men with bone lesions, 
cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) in women with peritoneal malignancy or ascites, 
α-fetoprotein (AFP) in liver-limited disease, α-fetoprotein (AFP) and human 
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) in midline disease in young men
(CRP = C-reactive protein; CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; 
PET = positron emission tomography)
Fig. 7.6 Young male patient presenting with a bulky midline tumour and 
elevated hCG and AFP suggestive of a non-seminomatous testicular cancer.
P
lesion is usually the quickest way of obtaining tissue for pathological eval-
uation of cancer type. Review of tumour morphology, immunohistochem-
istry and molecular pathology will usually be sufcient to plan appropriate 
treatment. Patients with clinico-pathological features suggestive of a 
particular cancer should be identied early and referred promptly to the 
appropriate multidisciplinary/oncology team for consideration of further 
investigations and treatment. Where the primary site remains unclear fol-
lowing comprehensive investigations, a patient is said to have a cancer 
of unknown primary (CUP).
Whilst it is crucial to identify patients with highly treatable CUPs 
(Box 7.12), some of whom can live for years (see Fig. 7.5), or even 
be cured by treatment, most CUPs are poorly differentiated cancers 
or adenocarcinomas with liver and/or multi-site metastases. These 
cancers often behave aggressively so early discussion with oncology, 
within the context of a specialist MDT, is essential to streamline investi-
gations and assess tness for anti-cancer treatment. Whilst responses 
to generic systemic anti-cancer treatment are modest, gene expression 
tests or molecular tumour proling are increasingly providing greater 
information about likely tissue of origin or possible treatment targets 
which may ultimately lead to improved understanding of CUP and 
better outcomes.
7.12 Cancer of unknown primary – favourable 
clinicopathological features
Clinicopathological features
Management
Women with serous papillary 
adenocarcinoma of the peritoneal 
cavity
Treat like ovarian cancer
Women with isolated adenocarcinoma 
of axillary lymph nodes
Treat like breast cancer
Men with poorly differentiated 
carcinoma with midline distribution
Treat like germ cell cancer
Poorly differentiated neuro-endocrine 
carcinoma of unknown origin
Treat like small cell cancer
Well-differentiated neuro-endocrine 
tumour (NET)
Treat with somatostatin analogues 
or as per NETs of known primary 
sites
Squamous cell carcinoma of non-
supraclavicular cervical lymph nodes
Treat like head and neck squamous 
cell cancer
Adenocarcinoma with a colorectal-IHC 
prole (CK20+, CK7 , CDX2+)
Treat like colon cancer
Men with blastic bone metastases 
or elevated prostate-specic antigen 
(adenocarcinoma)
Treat like prostate cancer
Isolated inguinal adenopathy 
squamous carcinoma
Treat like anogenital squamous 
cancer
Patients with one small, potentially 
resectable tumour
Assess for surgical resection

[[p168]]
140    OncOlOgy
Involvement of the lumbar spine may cause conus medullaris or cauda 
equina  compression (Box 7.13). Physical examination ndings consist-
ent with an upper motor neuron lesion, but lower motor neuron nd-
ings, may predominate early on or in cases of nerve root or cauda 
equina compression.
Management
Malignant spinal cord compression is a medical emergency and 
should be treated with analgesia and high-dose glucocorticoid therapy 
(Box 7.14). Neurosurgical intervention produces superior outcomes and 
survival compared to radiotherapy alone, and should be considered rst 
for all patients. It is the preferred treatment if there is a single site of 
disease, low volume metastatic disease, if a biopsy is required to make 
a diagnosis or if it is a treatable cancer (e.g. lymphoma, breast cancer). 
Radiotherapy is used for the remaining patients and selected tumour 
types when the cancer is likely to be radiosensitive. The prognosis varies 
considerably, depending on tumour type, but the degree of neurological 
dysfunction at presentation is the strongest predictor of outcome, irre-
spective of the underlying diagnosis. Mobility can be preserved in more 
Fig. 7.7 MRI images of patient presenting with back pain and lower limb neurological disturbance.
arising from thoracic vertebra compressing spinal cord.
B
A
7.13 Comparison of features of neurological decit
Clinical feature
Spinal cord
Conus medullaris
Cauda equina
Weakness
Symmetrical and profound
Symmetrical and variable
Asymmetrical, may be mild
Reexes
Increased (or absent) knee and ankle 
reexes with extensor plantar reex
Increased knee reex, decreased ankle 
reex, extensor plantar reex
Decreased knee and ankle reexes with 
exor plantar reex
Sensory loss
Symmetrical, sensory level
Symmetrical, saddle distribution
Asymmetrical, radicular pattern
Sphincters
Late loss
Early loss
Often spared
Progression
Rapid
Variable
Variable
7.14 Management of suspected spinal cord compression
 Conrm diagnosis with urgent MRI scan of whole spine
 Administer high-dose glucocorticoids:
Dexamethasone 16 mg IV or oral stat
Dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily orally
 Ensure adequate analgesia
 Refer for surgical decompression or urgent radiotherapy
(IV = intravenous; MRI – magnetic resonance imaging)

[[p169]]
Aute ooo    141
7
than 80% of patients who are ambulatory at presentation, but neurologi-
cal function is seldom regained in patients with established decits such 
as paraplegia.
Superior vena cava obstruction
Superior vena cava obstruction (SVCO) is a common complication of 
cancer that can occur through extrinsic compression or intravascu-
lar blockage. The most common causes of extrinsic compression are 
lung cancer, lymphoma and metastatic tumours (Fig. 7.8). Patients with 
cancer can also develop SVCO due to intravascular blockage in asso-
ciation with a central catheter or thromboembolism secondary to the 
tumour.
Clinical features
The classical presentation is with breathlessness, oedema of the arms 
and face, distended neck and arm veins and dusky skin coloration over 
the chest, arms and face. Collateral vessels may develop over a period of 
weeks and the ow of blood in the collaterals helps to conrm the diag-
nosis. Headache secondary to cerebral oedema arising from the back-
ow pressure may also occur and tends to be aggravated by bending 
forwards, stooping or lying down. The severity of symptoms is related to 
the rate of obstruction and the development of a venous collateral circu-
lation. Accordingly, symptoms may develop rapidly or gradually. Clinical 
features are summarised in Box 7.15
Investigations and management
The investigation of choice is a CT scan of the thorax to conrm the diag-
nosis and distinguish between extra- and intravascular causes.
A biopsy should be obtained when the tumour type is unknown 
because tumour type has a major inuence on treatment. CT of the 
head may be indicated if cerebral oedema is suspected. Tumours that 
are exquisitely sensitive to cytotoxic chemotherapy, such as germ cell 
tumours and lymphoma, can be treated with cytotoxic chemotherapy 
alone. For most other patients with symptomatic SVCO, SVC stenting 
provides the best outcomes although mediastinal radiotherapy may also 
be considered. Where possible, these measures should be followed 
by treatment of the primary tumour, as long-term outcome is strongly 
dependent on the prognosis of the underlying cancer.
Neutropenic fever
Neutropenia is a common complication of malignancy. It is usually sec-
ondary to cytotoxic chemotherapy but may occur with radiotherapy, if 
large amounts of bone marrow are irradiated, and some targeted therapy 
agents; it may also be a component of pancytopenia due to malignant 
inltration of the bone marrow. After cytotoxic chemotherapy neutropenic 
fever is most commonly dened as a single oral temperature of ≥ 38.3°C 
or a temperature of ≥ 38°C sustained for over 1 hour in a patient with a 
neutrophil count of <0.5 × 109/L (or <1.0 × 109/L if the nadir is anticipated 
to drop to < 0.5 × 109/L in the next 48 hours). The risk of sepsis is greater 
with profound neutropenia (neutrophil count <0.1 × 109/L), prolonged neu-
tropenia (<0.5 neutrophils for ≥7 days) or a rapid rate of decline in neu-
trophils as well as the presence of other risk factors, such as intravenous 
cannulae or urinary catheters. Neutropenic fever is an emergency in can-
cer patients as, if left untreated, it can result in sepsis with a high mortality 
rate.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with high fever, and affected patients may 
feel non-specically unwell. If patients have been taking paracetamol or 
steroids then fever or symptoms may be masked. Examination is usually 
unhelpful in dening a primary source of the infection. Hypotension is 
an adverse prognostic feature and may progress to systemic circulatory 
shutdown and organ failure.
Investigations and management
An infection screen should be performed, including blood cultures (both 
peripheral and from central lines), urine culture, chest X-ray and swabs 
for culture (throat, central line, wound). High-dose intravenous antibiotics 
should be commenced (ideally within 1 hour of admission) for all febrile 
patients on systemic anti-cancer therapy, without awaiting test results. 
The standard approach is to commence empirical broad-spectrum anti-
biotics according to local hospital policies agreed with microbiologists 
and based on local antibiotic resistance patterns. Depending on the 
patient’s MASCC risk index score (Box 7.16) and likely organisms this 
Fig. 7.8 Computed tomography (CT) image of extrinsic compression of the 
superior vena cava by a small cell lung cancer (arrow) performed as part of 
investigations for an acute presentation of cancer.
7.15 Common symptoms and physical ndings in superior 
vena cava obstruction*
Symptoms
 Dyspnoea (63%)
 Facial swelling and head fullness (50%)
 Cough (24%)
 Arm swelling (18%)
 Chest pain (15%)
 Dysphagia (9%)
Physical ndings
 Venous distension of neck (66%)
 Venous distension of chest wall (54%)
 Elevated, non-pulsatile jugular venous 
pulse (66%)
 Facial oedema (46%)
 Cyanosis (20%)
 Plethora of face (19%)
 Oedema of arms (14%)
*Percentage of patients affected.
7.16 MASCC* risk index score for neutropenic fever
Characteristic
Score
Burden of current illness
No or mild symptoms (normal function)
5
Moderate symptoms (uncomfortable or inuences daily 
activities)
3
Severe symptoms (signicant discomfort or limits daily activities)
0
No hypotension (systolic BP > 90 mmHg)
5
No chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
4
Solid tumour or lymphoma with no previous fungal infection
4
No dehydration requiring parenteral uids
3
Outpatient at onset of fever
3
Age <60 years
2
Score ≥21 = low risk febrile neutropenia
Score <21 = high risk febrile neutropenia
*Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer.

[[p170]]
142    OncOlOgy
may be either monotherapy (e.g. piperacillin–tazobactam or  meropenem) 
or combination therapy (e.g. with the addition of gentamicin if high risk 
on MASCC score, metronidazole if anaerobic infection is suspected, or 
vancomycin/teicoplanin where Gram-positive infection is suspected). 
Antibiotics should be adjusted according to culture results, although 
these are often negative. If there is no clinical improvement after 
36–48hours antibiotics should be reviewed with microbiological advice, 
and antifungal cover should be considered (e.g. uconazole or liposomal 
amphotericin B). Granulocyte–colony-stimulating factor (G–CSF) can be 
used to hasten neutrophil recovery in some patients with febrile neutro-
penia, in line with local guidelines. Other supportive therapy, including 
intravenous uids, oxygen, inotrope therapy, ventilation or haemoltra-
tion, may be required.
Hypercalcaemia of malignancy
Hypercalcaemia is the most common metabolic disorder in patients with 
cancer and has a prevalence of up to 20% in cancer patients. The inci-
dence is highest in myeloma and breast cancer (approximately 40%), 
intermediate in non-small cell lung cancer, and uncommon in colon, 
prostate and small cell lung carcinomas. It is most commonly due to 
over-production of PTHrP (80%), which binds to the PTH receptor and 
elevates serum calcium by stimulating osteoclastic bone resorption and 
increasing renal tubular reabsorption of calcium. Direct invasion of bone 
by metastases accounts for around 20% of cases while other mecha-
nisms, such as ectopic PTH secretion, are rare.
Clinical features
The symptoms of hypercalcaemia are often non-specic and may mimic 
those of the underlying malignancy. They include drowsiness, delirium, 
nausea and vomiting, constipation, polyuria, polydipsia and dehydration.
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is made by measuring serum total calcium and adjust-
ing for albumin. It is especially important to correct for albumin in can-
cer because hypoalbuminaemia is common and total calcium values 
under-estimate the level of ionised calcium. The principles of manage-
ment are outlined in Box 7.17
Patients should initially be treated with intravenous 0.9% saline to 
improve renal function and increase urinary calcium excretion. This 
alone often results in clinical improvement. Concurrently, intravenous 
bisphosphonates should be given to inhibit bone resorption. Calcitonin 
acts rapidly to increase calcium excretion and to reduce bone resorp-
tion, and can be combined with uid and bisphosphonate therapy for 
the rst 24–48hours in patients with life-threatening hypercalcaemia. 
Bisphosphonates will usually reduce the serum calcium levels to nor-
mal within 5 days, but, if not, treatment can be repeated. The dura-
tion of action is up to 4 weeks and repeated therapy can be given at 
3–4-weekly intervals in the outpatient department. Hypercalcaemia is 
frequently a sign of tumour progression and the patient requires fur-
ther investigation to establish disease status and review the anti-cancer 
treatment strategy.
Immune-related adverse events
Immunotherapy has revolutionised the treatment of many cancers 
(see ‘Immunotherapy’ below). Checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy, in 
particular, is now widely used in the treatment of many different cancers. 
Side-effects of checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy agents occur when 
the immune system is stimulated to attack healthy cells and tissues in 
the body. These immune-related adverse events (IRAEs) are increasingly 
being recognized as oncological emergencies.
Clinical features
Almost any body system may be affected, but inammation of the colon, 
endocrine organs (thyroid, adrenal and pituitary glands) lungs, liver, 
skin and nervous system are most frequently seen (see p. 129). IRAEs 
may occur at any point in a patient’s treatment, or even after they have 
stopped receiving the checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy agent.
Investigations and management
Investigation and management of IRAEs requires a multidiscipli-
nary approach including oncologists and relevant system specialists. 
Specialist investigations may be required depending on the body system 
affected. The focus of treatment is on dampening the immune response, 
often using high-dose steroids. Additional immunosuppressant therapies 
are sometimes required. In the case of endocrine organ inammation, 
replacement of decient hormones is also important. In patients who 
experience severe IRAEs, checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy treatment 
will usually be permanently discontinued. In other cases, and in patients 
with endocrine IRAEs who commence replacement hormone therapy, 
it may be possible to reintroduce checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy 
treatment.
Tumour lysis syndrome
The acute destruction of a large number of cells can be associated with 
metabolic sequelae and is called tumour lysis syndrome. It is usually 
related to bulky, chemosensitive disease, including lymphoma, leukae-
mia and germ cell tumours. More rarely, it can occur spontaneously.
Clinical features
Cellular destruction results in the release of potassium, phosphate, 
nucleic acids and purines that can cause transient hypocalcaemia, 
hyperphosphataemia, hyperuricaemia and hyperkalaemia. This can lead 
to acute impairment of renal function and the precipitation of uric acid 
crystals in the renal tubular system. These can manifest with symptoms 
associated with multiple underlying electrolyte abnormalities, including 
fatigue, nausea, vomiting, cardiac arrhythmia, heart failure, syncope, 
 tetany, seizures and sudden death.
Investigations and management
Serum biochemistry should be monitored regularly for 48–72hours 
after treatment in patients at risk. Elevated serum potassium may 
be the earliest biochemical marker but pre-treatment serum lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) correlates with tumour bulk and may indicate 
increased risk. Good hydration and urine output should be maintained 
throughout treatment administration. Prophylaxis with allopurinol 
should be considered and recombinant urate oxidase (rasburicase) 
can be used to reduce uric acid levels when other treatments fail. 
Adequate hydration is vital, as it has a dilution effect on the extracel-
lular uid, improving electrolyte imbalance, and increases circulating 
volume, improving ltration in the kidneys. In high-risk patients, hydra-
tion and rasburicase should be commenced 24hours before the start 
of treatment. If normal treatment methods fail to correct the problems, 
haemodialysis should be considered at an early stage to prevent pro-
gression to irreversibility.
Other acute presentations in oncology
Venous thromboembolism
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the second leading cause of death 
amongst patients with cancer. Malignancy is a strong risk factor for 
7.17 Medical management of severe hypercalcaemia
 IV 0.9% saline 2–4 L/day
 Zoledronic acid 4 mg IV or pamidronate 60–90 mg IV
 For patients with severe, symptomatic hypercalcaemia that is refractory to 
zoledronic acid, denosumab (initial dose 60 mg SC, with repeat dosing based on 
response) is an alternative option
(IV = intravenous; SC = subcutaneous)

[[p171]]
Aute ooo    143
7
VTE and may be the rst presenting feature of an underlying cancer. 
Several mechanisms lead to a prothrombotic state in cancer. This 
includes the ability of cancer cells to produce procoagulant/brinolytic 
substances and inammatory cytokines and the physical interaction 
between tumour cells and blood (monocytes, neutrophils, platelets) or 
endothelial cells. Anti-cancer therapy (i.e. surgery, cytotoxic chemo-
therapy, hormone therapy and radiotherapy) and any in-dwelling 
access devices (i.e. central venous catheters) further increase the risk. 
As in patients without cancer, the management of cancer-associated 
VTE primarily involves anticoagulation therapy. However, the choice of 
therapy must take into account bleeding risk and possible interactions 
with anti-cancer therapies and their side-effects, such as thrombocy-
topenia. In patients with metastatic cancer, anticoagulation therapy will 
often be lifelong.
Ectopic hormone production
Some cancers are associated with metabolic abnormalities due to 
ectopic production of hormones by tumour cells, including insulin, 
ACTH, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH), broblast growth fac-
tor (FGF)-23, erythropoietin and parathyroid hormone-related protein 
(PTHrP). This can result in a wide variety of presentations, as summa-
rised in Box 7.18
Neurological paraneoplastic syndromes
These form a group of conditions associated with cancer that are 
thought to be due to an immunological response to the tumour that 
results in damage to the nervous system or muscle (see Box 7.10). 
The cancers most commonly implicated are those of the lung, pan-
creas, breast, prostate, ovary and lymphoma. Many are associated 
with specic detectable immune biomarkers such as antibodies to 
pre-synaptic calcium channels (Lambert–Eaton syndrome), anti-Hu 
antibodies (encephalomyelitis) and anti-Yo or anti-Tr antibodies (cere-
bellar degeneration). However, these are not always specic and neg-
ative results do not exclude the diagnosis. The management of these 
syndromes is multidisciplinary and includes treatment of the underly-
ing cancer itself and treatment of the syndrome primarily with immu-
nosuppressive agents.
Cutaneous manifestations of cancer
Cancers can present with skin manifestations that are not due to metas-
tases (see Box 7.10). The clinical features and management of these skin 
conditions are discussed in Chapter 27
Symptoms from locally advanced cancer or 
metastatic sites
Metastatic disease is the major cause of death in cancer patients and the 
principal cause of morbidity. For the majority of patients with metastatic 
disease the goal of treatment is to control cancer, maintain quality of life, 
treat symptoms and prolong life (i.e. ‘palliative treatment’). Patients of PS 
3–4 (Box 7.6) or with low albumin plus high inammatory markers often 
have a limited prognosis irrespective of anti-cancer treatments. Systemic 
anti-cancer therapies have resulted in improved survival for many can-
cers so that some patients live a good quality life for many years with 
metastatic cancer. Treatment of a solitary metastasis or highly treatable 
cancers (e.g. germ cell) can be curative.
Brain metastases
Brain metastases occur in 10%–30% of adults and 6%–10% of chil-
dren with cancer and are an increasingly important cause of morbidity. 
Cancers of lung, breast, melanoma and gastrointestinal tract most com-
monly metastasise to the brain. Most involve the brain parenchyma but 
can also affect the meninges, cranial nerves, the blood vessels and other 
intracranial structures. In cases of solitary metastasis to the brain, the use 
of surgery followed by adjuvant radiotherapy, or alternatively stereotactic 
radiotherapy, has been shown to increase survival in patients whose dis-
ease is otherwise controlled. Outcomes for patients with more advanced 
brain metastases depends on the primary cancer, extent of extracranial 
disease and what systemic treatment options are available. For patients 
with advanced untreatable cancer and multiple brain metastases, prog-
nosis is often short. Glucocorticoids can improve symptoms, particularly 
where there is evidence of peri-lesional oedema. In treatable cancers 
whole brain radiotherapy can allow steroid dose to be reduced whilst 
systemic therapy is used to treat the remaining cancer. With improved 
systemic therapies, including targeted therapies and immunotherapy, 
some patients are now living for several years with brain metastases.
Clinical features
Presentation is with headaches and nausea (40%–50%), focal neuro-
logical dysfunction (20%–40%), cognitive dysfunction (35%), seizures 
(10%–20%) and papilloedema (<10%).
Investigations and management
The diagnosis can be conrmed by CT or contrast-enhanced MRI. 
Treatment options include high-dose glucocorticoids for tumour-associated 
oedema (dexamethasone 4–12 mg daily depending on amount of oedema), 
anticonvulsants for seizures, whole-brain radiotherapy and systemic 
anti-cancer therapy. Surgery may be considered for single sites of disease 
and can be curative; stereotactic radiotherapy may also be considered for 
solitary site involvement or where surgery is more difcult or not possible.
Lung metastases
Lung metastases are common in breast cancer, colon cancer, renal can-
cer, sarcoma and tumours of the head and neck. The presentation is usu-
ally with a lesion on chest X-ray or CT. Solitary lesions require investigation, 
as single metastases can be difcult to distinguish from a primary lung 
tumour. Patients with two or more pulmonary nodules can be assumed 
to have metastases. The approach to treatment depends on the extent 
of disease in the lung and elsewhere. For solitary lesions, surgery should 
be considered, with a generous wedge resection, or radiofrequency abla-
tion if available. Radiotherapy and systemic anti-cancer therapies can be 
used, dependent on the underlying primary cancer diagnosis (Fig. 7.9).
Liver metastases
Metastatic cancer in the liver can represent the sole or life-limiting com-
ponent of disease for many with colorectal cancer, ocular melanoma, 
7.18 Ectopic hormone production by tumours
Hormone
Consequence
Tumours
ACTH
Cushing’s syndrome
SCLC
Erythropoietin
Polycythaemia
Kidney, HCC,  
cerebellar 
haemangioblastoma, 
uterine broids
FGF-23
Hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia
Mesenchymal tumours
PTHrP
Hypercalcaemia
NSCLC (squamous 
cell), breast, kidney
Vasopressin (ADH)
Hyponatraemia
SCLC
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; ADH = antidiuretic hormone; FGF = broblast growth 
factor; HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma; NSCLC = non-small cell lung cancer; PTHrP = 
parathyroid hormone-related protein; SCLC = small cell lung cancer)

[[p172]]
144    OncOlOgy
neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs) and, less commonly, other tumour 
types. The most common clinical presentations are with right upper 
quadrant pain due to stretching of the liver capsule, jaundice, deranged 
liver function tests or an abnormality detected on imaging. In selected 
cases, resection of the metastasis can be contemplated. In colorectal 
cancer, successful resection of metastases improves 5-year survival from 
3% to 30%–40%. Other techniques, such as chemoembolisation, radio-
frequency ablation or microwave ablation, can also be used, provided 
the number and size of metastases remain small. If these are not feasible, 
symptoms may respond to systemic anti-cancer therapy (Fig. 7.5).
Bone metastases
Bone is the third most common organ involved by metastasis, after 
lung and liver. Bone metastases are a major clinical problem in patients 
with myeloma and breast or prostate cancers, but other tumours that 
commonly metastasise to bone include those of the kidney and thyroid. 
Bone metastases are increasingly seen in other tumour types that do not 
classically target bone, due to effective anti-cancer treatments prolong-
ing survival of patients with many cancers. Accordingly, effective man-
agement of bony metastases has become a focus in the treatment of 
patients with many incurable cancers.
Clinical features
The main presentations are with pain, pathological fractures, spinal 
cord compression (see above) and hypercalcaemia. Pain tends to be 
progressive and worst at night, and may be partially relieved by activ-
ity, but subsequently becomes more constant in nature and is exacer-
bated by movement. Most pathological fractures occur in metastatic 
breast cancer (53%); other tumour types associated with fracture 
include the kidney (11%), lung (8%), thyroid (5%), lymphoma (5%) and 
prostate (3%).
Investigations and management
The most sensitive way of detecting bone metastases is by isotope bone 
scan. This can have false-positive results in healing bone, particularly as 
a are response following treatment and false-negative results occur in 
multiple myeloma due to suppression of osteoblast activity. Plain X-ray 
lms or MRI scans are therefore preferred for any sites of bone pain, 
as lytic lesions may not be detected by a bone scan. In patients with a 
single lesion, it is especially important to perform a biopsy to obtain a 
tissue diagnosis, since primary bone tumours may look very similar to 
metastases on X-ray. The main goals of management are:
 pain relief
 preservation and restoration of function
 skeletal stabilisation
 local tumour control (e.g. relief of tumour impingement on normal 
structure).
Surgical intervention may be warranted where there is evidence of 
skeletal instability (e.g. anterior or posterior spinal column fracture) or 
an impending fracture (e.g. a large lytic lesion on a weight-bearing bone 
with more than 50% cortical involvement). Intravenous bisphosphonates 
(pamidronate, zoledronic acid or denosumab) are widely used for bone 
metastases and are effective at improving pain and in reducing further 
skeletal related events, such as fractures and hypercalcaemia. In certain 
types of cancer, such as breast and prostate, hormonal therapy may be 
effective. Radiotherapy, in the form of external beam therapy or systemic 
radionuclides (strontium treatment), can also help pain. In some settings 
(e.g. breast carcinoma), systemic anti-cancer therapy may be used in the 
management of bony metastases.
Malignant pleural effusion
This is a common complication of cancer and 40% of all pleural effusions 
are due to malignancy. The most common causes are lung and breast 
cancers, and the presence of an effusion indicates incurable disease. 
The presentation may be with dyspnoea, cough or chest discomfort, 
which can be dull or pleuritic in nature. Diagnosis and management of 
pleural effusion is discussed on page 494.
Investigations and management
Pleural aspirate is the key investigation and may show the presence of 
malignant cells. Malignant effusions are commonly blood-stained and 
are exudates with a raised uid to serum LDH ratio (> 0.6) and a raised 
uid to serum protein ratio (>0.5). Treatment should focus on palliation of 
symptoms and be tailored to the patient's physical condition, treatment 
options and prognosis. Aspiration alone may be an appropriate treat-
ment in frail patients with a limited life expectancy. Those who present 
with malignant pleural effusion as the initial manifestation of breast can-
cer, small cell lung cancer, germ cell tumours or lymphoma should have 
the uid aspirated and should be given systemic anti-cancer therapy to 
try to treat disease in the pleural space. Treatment options for patients 
with recurrent pleural effusions include pleurodesis, implanted drainage 
catheters, pleurectomy and pleuroperitoneal shunt.
Other common symptoms
Other symptoms that commonly arise from metastatic cancer are: 
 gastrointestinal obstruction, malignant abdominal ascites, hydronephro-
sis and cancer cachexia.
Fig. 7.9 
A
B
R

[[p173]]
Therapeutis i ooo    145
7
Treatment-related toxicities
Whilst most anti-cancer therapies cause some side-effects, most 
of these can be managed with supportive medicines at home. Some 
patients will develop severe toxicities and an acute assessment will be 
needed. Examination of the patient on anti-cancer treatment (p. 128) 
should consider the type of anti-cancer treatment, duration since the 
last treatment and other concurrent toxicities. Patients on anti-cancer 
therapy can deteriorate quickly and prompt assessment and manage-
ment is required. There may be specic management protocols to help 
manage treatment-related toxicities and advice should be sought from 
the patient’s cancer centre or acute oncology team.
Therapeutics in oncology
Anti-cancer therapy may be used with either curative or palliative intent, 
and this distinction inuences the approach to management of individual 
patients. The goal of treatment should be recorded in the medical notes.
 Curative therapy is given with the aim of achieving complete remis-
sion. Surgery to remove all macroscopic disease is most frequently 
the primary curative intervention. However, in some circumstances 
radiotherapy, systemic anti-cancer therapy or a combination of 
these may be used with curative, or radical, intent.
 Adjuvant therapy is additional therapy given after the primary 
curative intervention to lower the risk of disease recurrence. 
Radiotherapy and/or systemic anti-cancer therapy may be given 
after surgery with the intention of eradicating any micrometastatic 
disease that remains.
 Neoadjuvant therapy is additional therapy given prior to the primary 
curative intervention. Systemic anti-cancer therapy may be admin-
istered prior to planned surgery. The principal aim is to lower the 
risk of disease recurrence. Any reduction in the volume of disease, 
or ‘downstaging’, may also allow less extensive surgery, increase 
the likelihood of successful debulking and improve subsequent 
surgical morbidity. Direct evaluation of the surgical specimen allows 
assessment of the effectiveness of neoadjuvant therapies, guiding 
subsequent management and lending this approach to translational 
research.
 Palliative therapy is primarily used to treat patients with metastatic 
disease, or where curative treatment is not possible. The goal is to 
control cancer, with the aim of improving or maintaining quality of 
life, treating and preventing symptoms and improving survival. The 
choice of therapy depends on the clinical situation and a careful 
evaluation of the risks and benets of the intervention.
Surgical treatment
Surgery has a pivotal role in the management of cancer. It is the main 
curative management of most solid cancers. In early localised cases of 
colorectal, breast and lung cancer, cure rates are high with surgery. There 
is evidence that outcome is related to surgical expertise, and most multi-
disciplinary teams include surgeons experienced in the management of 
a particular cancer. There are some cancers for which surgery is one of 
two or more options for primary management, and the role of the MDT is 
to recommend appropriate treatment for an individual patient. Examples 
include prostate and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, in which 
radiotherapy and surgery may be equally effective. Specialised surgical, 
or interventional radiology techniques may also be employed with cura-
tive intent. Radiofrequency ablation, microwave ablation or cryotherapy 
may be used to treat small renal cell carcinomas or hepatocellular carci-
nomas. Surgery has less of a role in lymphoma, high-grade neuro-endo-
crine tumours or small cell cancer, where systemic anti-cancer therapy is 
the main treatment used.
Surgical procedures are often the quickest and most effective way 
of palliating symptoms in patients with metastatic disease. Examples 
include the treatment of faecal incontinence with a defunctioning 
 colostomy; xation of pathological fractures; decompression of spinal cord 
compression; and the treatment of fungating skin lesions by ‘toilet’ sur-
gery. Debulking cytoreductive surgery may improve survival in some can-
cers, including renal cell carcinoma and ovarian cancer. In very selected 
cases, such as patients with oligometastatic disease, resection of metas-
tases may improve survival and reduce the need for other therapies.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy (radiation therapy) involves treating the cancer with ionis-
ing radiation such as X-rays, gamma rays, electrons or charged atoms. 
Ionising radiation kills cancer cells by two mechanisms; directly damag-
ing cancer DNA or indirectly by triggering the formation of very reactive 
molecules (free radicals) that also damage cancer DNA.
Two main types of radiation therapy exist: external beam radiotherapy, 
and brachytherapy (internal radiotherapy). External beam radiotherapy is 
most commonly delivered by a linear accelerator, which produces elec-
tron or photon beams. As normal tissues can also be damaged by radio-
therapy, treatments are planned to ensure maximum exposure of the 
tumour and minimal exposure of surrounding normal tissues. Improved 
localisation of the target volume, or tumour, can be achieved by the 
use of surgical clips at the site of resection and fusion of radiotherapy- 
planning CT scans with diagnostic MRI or PET-CT scans. Treatment-
planning software controls the size and shape of the beam. Intensity 
modulated radiotherapy (which allows for more homogeneous dose 
distribution), and volumetric radiotherapy (in which the shape of the radi-
ation beam is designed to closely t the tumour), have largely replaced 
conventional methods that use a limited number of square or rectangular 
beams. Stereotactic radiotherapy is a highly targeted method to deliver 
focused radiation beams from many different angles which converge 
on the tumour to deliver high doses precisely. Proton therapy uses a 
cyclotron to produce beams of high-energy protons, which deposit their 
radiation dose by a means that allows further sparing of normal tissues.
Brachytherapy, or internal radiation therapy, involves the direct appli-
cation of a radioactive source onto or into a tumour. This allows the deliv-
ery of a high, localised dose of radiation. Brachytherapy is a common 
treatment for cancers of the prostate, uterus and cervix. Most commonly, 
an applicator device is used to deliver a radioactive source to the tumour 
for a set time, typically 10–20 minutes. In other cases, such as in prostate 
cancer, small radioactive seeds may be permanently placed, releasing 
radiation slowly over several months. Radioactive liquid treatments, such 
as 223radium for bone metastases from prostate cancer or 131iodine for 
thyroid cancers are other examples of internal radiation therapy.
Biological differences between normal and tumour tissues are 
exploited to obtain therapeutic benet. Fundamental to this is fractiona-
tion, which entails delivering the radiation as a number of small doses on 
a daily basis. This allows normal cells to recover from radiation damage 
but recovery occurs to a lesser degree in malignant cells. Fractionation 
regimens vary depending on the tumour being treated, the total radia-
tion dose to be delivered and the intent of treatment. Curative, or rad-
ical treatments typically deliver a higher overall dose in 20–35 fractions 
over 4–7 weeks. For palliative treatments a smaller dose given over 1–10 
fractions is usually adequate. Malignant tissues vary widely in their sen-
sitivity to radiotherapy. Germ cell tumours and lymphomas are extremely 
radiosensitive, and relatively low doses are adequate for cure. However, 
most other cancers require higher doses. Normal tissue also varies in its 
radiosensitivity, with the central nervous system, small bowel and lung 
being among the most sensitive.
The side-effects of radiotherapy depend on the site being treated, the 
tissue’s radiosensitivity and the dose delivered. For example, skin reac-
tions are common with high-dose radical head and neck cancer treat-
ments, or proctitis and cystitis with treatment to the bladder or prostate. 
These acute reactions typically settle within a few weeks after treatment. 
Late effects of radiotherapy develop more than 6 weeks after treatment 
and occur in 5%–10% of patients. Examples include brachial nerve 
damage and subcutaneous brosis after breast cancer treatment. There 

[[p174]]
146    OncOlOgy
Fig. 7.10 Commonly used cytotoxic chemotherapy agents and their mechanisms of action.
Precursors
Purine
biosynthesis
DNA
Proteins
Antimetabolites
Alkylating
agents
Alkaloids
Topoisomerase
inhibitors
Antitumour
antibiotics
Enzymes
Microtubules
RNA
(transfer, messenger,
ribosomal)
Precursors
Ribonucleotides
Deoxyribonucleotides
Pyrimidine
biosynthesis
Antifolates
Fluoropyrimidines
Mitotic inhibitors
Microtubule
aggregators
Nucleoside analogues
Platinum agents
Nitrogen mustards
Topoisomerase I
inhibitors
Topoisomerase II
inhibitors
Anthracyclines
Bleomycin
Actinomycin D
1. Intercalate with DNA
and inhibit the
progression
of topoisomerase I
2. Induce DNA strand
breaks by oxidative
damage 
3. Bind to DNA
to prevent
transcription
Antifolates
Fluoropyrimidines
Nucleoside
analogues
Nitrogen
mustards
Platinum
agents
Topoisomerase
I/II inhibitors
Mitotic
inhibitors 
Microtubule
aggregators
Others –
acting on DNA
Mechanism
of action
Examples
1. Anthracyclines:
epirubicin, doxorubicin
2. Bleomycin
3. Actinomycin D
Inhibit
dihydrofolate
reductase and
so purine and
pyrimidine
synthesis
Inhibit thymidylate
synthase and so
pyrimidine synthesis
Incorporated
into DNA
during
synthesis,
leading to
irreparable
errors
Form covalent
cross-links between
DNA molecules by
adding an alkyl 
group to DNA
Form inter-/
intra-strand
cross-links
between DNA
molecules, 
not by adding 
an alkyl group,
so considered
alkylating-like
agents
Prevent re-ligation
of DNA strands by
topoisomerase I/II
Bind tubulin,
blocking
microtubule
formation
Stabilise the
microtubule
polymer
preventing its
disassembly
Methotrexate
5-Fluorouracil,
capecitabine
Gemcitabine, 
fludarabine
Cyclophosphamide,
ifosfamide
Cisplatin,
carboplatin,
oxaliplatin
Etoposide (II);
topotecan,
irinotecan (I)
Vinca alkaloids:
vincristine,
vinblastine,
vinorelbine
Taxanes:
paclitaxel,
docetaxel
is also a risk of inducing new cancer after radiotherapy, which varies 
depending on the site treated and on whether the patient has had other 
treatment such as cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Systemic anti-cancer therapy
Systemic anti-cancer therapy (SACT) is a collective term to describe the 
growing number of differing drug therapies used to treat cancer. These 
drugs reach throughout the body to treat cancer cells wherever they may 
be. Increasingly, treatment is tailored to a patient’s particular cancer and 
its molecular prole, allowing more personalised therapy.
Cytotoxic chemotherapy
Cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs work by interfering with the processes 
involved in cell division. They are sub-classied by their mode of action 
(Fig. 7.10). Cytotoxic chemotherapies have their greatest activity in prolif-
erating cells and this provides the rationale for their use in the treatment 

[[p175]]
Therapeutis i ooo    147
7
of cancer. However, they are not specic for cancer cells and the side-
effects of treatment are largely a result of their antiproliferative actions in 
normal tissues such as the bone marrow, skin and gut (p. 129). Other 
organs, such as the heart, kidney and peripheral nervous system, may 
also be affected by some cytotoxic drugs.
The choice of cytotoxic chemotherapy agent, or combination of 
treatments, is determined by the cancer type. The dosing schedule is 
determined by the choice of treatments and recovery of normal tissues, 
usually the bone marrow. For most common cytotoxic chemotherapy 
regimens the treatment is administered in cycles. A course of treatment 
may constitute a pre-dened number of cycles, or may continue inde-
nitely until evidence of disease progression or until limiting side-effects. 
Supportive therapy is used to enable patients to tolerate therapy and 
achieve benet. Nausea and vomiting are common, but with modern 
antiemetics, regimens such as the combination of dexamethasone and 
highly selective 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT3, serotonin) receptor antago-
nists such as ondansetron, most patients now receive cytotoxic chemo-
therapy without any signicant problems. Myelosuppression is common 
to almost all cytotoxics and this not only limits the dose of drug but also 
can cause life-threatening complications. The risk of neutropenia can 
be reduced with the use of specic growth factors that accelerate the 
repopulation of myeloid precursor cells. The most commonly employed 
is G–CSF, which is widely used in conjunction with cytotoxic chemother-
apy regimens that induce a high rate of neutropenia.
Hormone therapy
Hormones are important cell-signalling molecules and, in some cancers, 
may be key drivers of tumour growth. Blocking hormonal signalling path-
ways in these cancers may be a very effective treatment strategy.
Approximately 80% of breast tumours are positive for expression of 
the oestrogen receptor (ER). Assessment of ER status is now standard 
in the diagnostic workup of breast cancer. Drugs that reduce oestrogen 
levels or block the effects of oestrogen on the receptor are widely used in 
the management of ER-positive breast cancer. Adjuvant hormone ther-
apy may reduce the risk of relapse and death at least as much as cyto-
toxic chemotherapy and in advanced cases can induce stable disease 
and remissions that may last months to years, with acceptable toxicity.
Hormonal manipulation may be effective in other cancers. In prostate 
cancer, hormonal therapy (e.g. luteinising hormone releasing hormone 
(LHRH) analogues such as goserelin and/or anti-androgens such as 
bicalutamide) aimed at reducing androgen levels can provide good long-
term control of advanced disease. The side-effects of hormone therapies 
are linked to their hormonal targets.
Targeted therapies
Advances in knowledge about the molecular basis of cancer have 
resulted in the development of treatments to target specic genes and 
proteins that are involved in the growth and survival of cancer cells 
(Fig. 7.11). These signalling pathways may have broad importance to a 
range of cancer types or be specic to certain cancers. They may not 
be important in all tumours of the same cancer type, requiring specic 
molecular testing to predict whether the patient may benet.
Targeted therapies are broadly divided into two groups: monoclonal 
antibodies (-mab) and small molecule inhibitors (-ib). The -mab family are 
typically utilised for targets that are overexpressed on the outside of the 
cancer cell. The -ib family typically target processes within the cell, such 
as the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, and are designed to be small enough 
to enter the cell.
A wide range of targeted therapies are now used routinely in onco-
logical practice. Some of these are described below. The side effects 
of targeted therapies are determined by the molecular pathway being 
targeted (p. 129).
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important transmem-
brane signalling protein. Mutations in the EGFR gene lead to overexpres-
sion of the EGFR protein or constitutive activation of the cell-signalling 
Fig. 7.11 Examples of targeted anti-cancer therapies and their actions in 
relation to the Hallmarks of Cancer. (For abbreviations see text.)
Deregulating
cellular
energetics:
aerobic glycolysis
inhibitors
Resisting
cell death:
BCL-2 inhibitors
Genome instability
and mutation:
PARP inhibitors
Tumour-
promoting
inflammation:
selective anti-
inflammatory
agents
Enabling
replicative
immortality:
telomerase
inhibitors
Avoiding
immune
destruction:
checkpoint
inhibitors as
immunotherapy
Evading growth
suppressors:
CDK4/6
inhibitors
Sustaining
proliferative
signalling:
EGFR, HER2
and BRAF
inhibitors
Inducing
angiogenesis:
VEGF inhibitors
Activating
invasion and
metastases:
HGF/c-MET
inhibitors
pathway, leading to uncontrolled cell division, in several cancer types. 
Approximately 15% of lung adenocarcinomas have activating mutations 
of EGFR, which may be targeted with drugs such as getinib, erlotinib or 
osimertinib. The latter of these agents has been designed to overcome 
a particular mutation (i.e. T790M) responsible for 50% of resistance to 
older EGFR inhibitors. In colorectal cancer drugs such as cetuximab and 
panitumumab are active in patients where molecular testing does not 
detect resistance inferred by mutations in the RAS/RAF family of genes.
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) inhibitors such 
as sunitinib, pazopanib and cabozantinib have been a pillar of renal cell 
carcinoma treatment for over a decade. Activation of members of the 
VEGFR family play an important role in tumour angiogenesis. VEGFR 
small molecule inhibitors are commonly used in the management of 
hepatocellular carcinoma and thyroid cancer. Bevacizumab, a monoclo-
nal antibody therapy targeted at VEGF-A, is active in a number of can-
cers, including ovarian, colorectal and breast.
HER2 is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor family. 
Amplication or over-expression of HER2 is found in breast, gastric, pan-
creatic, lung and some uterine cancers. Approximately 20% of breast 
cancers are HER2-positive, where it is associated with increased risk of 
recurrence and poor prognosis. Several agents have been developed to 
target HER2, including trastuzumab and pertuzumab. The agent tras-
tuzumab emtansine is an antibody-drug conjugate consisting of trastu-
zumab covalently linked to the cytotoxic chemotherapy agent emtansine 
which is delivered specically to the HER2-positive breast cancer cell.
Immunotherapy
The term immunotherapy encompasses a range of anti-cancer thera-
pies that work by harnessing the immune system to attack cancer cells. 
Cytokines, such as interferon alpha and interleukin-2, have been used 
with some success in melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. However, in 
recent years the development of other immunotherapy treatments has 
revolutionized the management of several cancer types.
Immune checkpoints are key regulators of the immune system 
which work to prevent the immune response from attacking normal 
healthy cells. Cancers may co-opt this mechanism to evade immune 
destruction. Targeted therapies that inhibit these checkpoint molecules 
(CTLA4, PD-1) or their ligands (PD-L1) (Fig. 7.12) are now licensed in 

[[p176]]
148    OncOlOgy
the management of many cancers, including melanoma, renal cell car-
cinoma, lung, bladder, head and neck, and, more broadly, any cancers 
demonstrating microsatellite instability. Checkpoint inhibitor immunother-
apies may be used alone, or in combination with other checkpoint inhibi-
tor immunotherapies, targeted therapies or cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Adoptive cell therapy, also known as cellular immunotherapy, is increas-
ingly being used, particularly in haematological malignancies. Immune 
cells isolated from either the patient’s tumour or bloodstream may be acti-
vated and expanded, before being infused back into the patient to attack 
cancer cells (i.e. tumour inltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy). The immune 
cells may also be genetically modied to improve the likelihood that they 
identify the cancer cells (i.e. engineered T-cell (TCR) therapy, chimeric 
antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy). Cancer treatment vaccines are 
also in development. These aim to boost the immune system’s ability to 
recognise and destroy antigens using a number of different techniques.
Immunotherapy treatment is likely to become more prevalent in 
the future for many types of cancers and indications. In patients with 
advanced or metastatic disease a key observation has been the poten-
tial for durable treatment responses. For example, average survival for 
patients with metastatic melanoma has improved from 6–8 months in the 
pre-immunotherapy era to over 5 years with the use of combination anti-
CTLA4 and anti-PD-1 checkpoint inhibitors in clinical trials. However, 
many patients do not respond and others are affected by potentially 
life-threatening immune-related adverse events (see above).
Evaluation of treatment
In advanced or metastatic cancer the evaluation of treatment is an 
ongoing process and includes assessments of treatment response, tox-
icity and quality of life. Clinical evaluation alongside radiological imaging 
or biochemical monitoring are commonly used to determine whether 
a treatment is being effective. Uniform criteria have been established 
to measure these, including the response evaluation criteria in solid 
tumours (RECIST, Box 7.19) and common toxicity criteria (e.g. common 
terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE)). This allows clinicians to 
inform patients accurately about the prognosis, effectiveness and toxicity 
of systemic anti-cancer therapy and empowers patients to take an active 
role in treatment decisions.
Late toxicity of therapy
The late toxicities of treatment for cancer are particularly important 
for patients where multimodality therapy is given with curative intent, 
where the patient is young and as more patients are living longer. 
This can cause considerable morbidity: for example, radiotherapy 
can retard bone and cartilage growth, impair intellect and cognitive 
function, and cause dysfunction of the hypothalamus, pituitary and 
thyroid glands. Late consequences of cytotoxic chemotherapy include 
heart failure due to cardiotoxicity, pulmonary brosis, nephrotoxicity 
and neurotoxicity.
Premature gonadal failure can result from cytotoxic chemotherapy 
or radiotherapy and leave a patient subfertile. Patients should be made 
aware of this before treatment is initiated, as it may be possible to store 
sperm for male patients before treatment starts; this should always be 
offered, if practical. Egg storage or embryo banking after in vitro fertil-
isation may be an option for young women. Sterility develops at higher 
radiotherapy doses but erectile dysfunction is seen in patients receiving 
high radiotherapy doses to the pelvis, as in prostate cancer. Additional 
social or psychological support may be required to address these issues. 
Infertility and pubertal delay are potential late effects of therapy in chil-
dren, especially boys.
Second malignancies may be induced by cancer treatment and 
occur at greatest frequency following chemoradiation. Secondary 
acute leukaemia (mostly AML) can occur 1–2 years after treatment 
with topoisomerase II inhibitors, or 2–5 years after treatment with 
alkylating agents. The most common second malignancy within a 
radiation eld is osteosarcoma but others include soft tissue sarcoma 
and leukaemia.
Cancer clinical trials
Cancer clinical trials are embedded within routine practice in oncol-
ogy. Close collaboration with laboratory scientists, active recruitment 
of cancer patients into clinical trials and robust translational research 
have led to many new cancer treatments, personalised therapies and a 
transformation of cancer management over the last 20 years. As many 
Fig. 7.12 
activation and tumour cell death. (PD-1 = programmed cell death protein 1; 
PD-L1 = programmed cell death ligand 1)
A
T cell
T-cell
inhibited
T-cell
activated
T-cell receptor
Antigen
T-cell receptor
Antigen
Tumour cell
PD-L1
PD-1
B
T cell
Tumour cell
death
PD-L1
PD-1
Anti-PD-1
Anti-PD-L1
T-cell
proliferation
T-cell effector
function
7.19 Response evaluation criteria in solid tumours (RECIST)
Response
Criteria
Complete response (CR)
Disappearance of all target lesions
Partial response (PR)
At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the 
longest diameter (LD) of target lesions, 
taking as reference the baseline sum LD
Progressive disease (PD)
At least a 20% increase in the sum of the 
LD of target lesions, taking as reference 
the smallest sum LD recorded since 
the treatment started and at least 5 mm 
increase or the appearance of one or more 
new lesions
Stable disease (SD)
Neither sufcient shrinkage to qualify for 
PR nor sufcient increase to qualify for PD, 
taking as reference the smallest sum LD 
since the treatment started

[[p177]]
Speifi aers    149
7
anti-cancer drugs are expected to have toxicities, which may ultimately 
limit the deliverable dose, clinical trials in cancer differ from trials of other 
medicines.
 Phase I cancer clinical trials take treatments of interest from labor-
atory studies and test them in patients with advanced cancer for 
whom no other standard anti-cancer treatment exists. Phase I trials 
assess the safety of a treatment and identify an optimal dose and 
dosing schedule. Initial doses are very low and each sequential 
cohort of patients receives a higher dose. Doses are escalated in 
controlled cohorts of 1–6 patients, according to toxicities, pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics, until the maximum tolerated 
dose is reached.
 Phase II cancer clinical trials treat patients with specic cancers of 
interest with the trial drug, using the dose established in phase I 
trials. Phase II trials may be randomised or non-randomised but will 
recruit enough patients to further assess the safety of the treatment 
and whether it results in enough anti-cancer activity in a specic 
cancer to develop the drug further by way of phase III trials.
 Phase III cancer trials are large, multi-centre randomised controlled 
trials to compare the new treatment of interest with the current 
established therapy for this indication. Cancer response, toxicity, 
quality of life and survival data will usually be assessed. Phase III 
trials may also compare current standard treatment with a different 
treatment, either looking for improved outcome or improved quality 
of life with non-inferior outcome. If a treatment is deemed to be safe 
and effective it will be licensed for clinical use.
 Phase IV trials involve the continuing safety surveillance of a treat-
ment after it receives a licence for clinical use. This can be particu-
larly useful to detect any rare or long-term adverse effects in a much 
larger population and longer time period than was possible during 
Phase I–III trials.
Specic cancers
As cancer management becomes more complex and personalised, and 
incorporates multi-modality treatment approaches, oncology teams are 
increasingly subspecialised and work as part of tumour-specic multidis-
ciplinary teams. The diagnosis and management of specic cancers are 
discussed in more detail elsewhere in the book (Box 7.20). Here we dis-
cuss the pathogenesis, clinical features, investigation and management 
of some common tumours that are not covered elsewhere.
Breast cancer
Globally, the incidence of breast cancer is second only to that of lung 
cancer, and the disease represents the leading cause of cancer-re-
lated deaths among women. Invasive ductal carcinoma with or with-
out ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is the most common histology, 
accounting for 70%, whilst invasive lobular carcinoma accounts for 
most of the remaining cases. DCIS constitutes 20% of breast cancers 
detected by mammography screening. It is multifocal in one-third of 
women and has a high risk of becoming invasive (10% at 5years fol-
lowing excision only). Pure DCIS does not cause lymph node metas-
tases, although these are found in 2% of cases where nodes are 
examined, owing to undetected invasive cancer. Lobular carcinoma in 
situ (LCIS) is a predisposing risk factor for developing cancer in either 
breast (7% at 10 years). The survival for breast cancer by stage is 
outlined in Box 7.21
Pathogenesis
Both genetic and hormonal factors play a role: about 5%–10% of breast 
cancers are hereditary and occur in patients with mutations of BRCA1, 
BRCA2, AT or TP53 genes. Prolonged oestrogen exposure associated 
with early menarche, late menopause and use of hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT) has been associated with an increased risk. Other risk 
factors include obesity, alcohol intake, nulliparity and late rst pregnancy. 
There is no denite evidence linking use of the contraceptive pill to 
breast cancer.
Clinical features
Breast cancer usually presents as a result of mammographic screen-
ing or as a palpable mass with nipple discharge in 10% and pain 
in 7% of patients. Less common presentations include inammatory 
carcinoma with diffuse induration of the skin of the breast, and this 
confers an adverse prognosis. Around 40% of patients will have axil-
lary nodal disease, with likelihood correlating with increasing size of 
the primary tumour. Distant metastases are infrequently present at 
diagnosis and the most common sites of spread are bone (70%), lung 
(60%), liver (55%), pleura (40%), adrenals (35%), skin (30%) and brain 
(10%–20%).
Investigations
Following clinical examination, patients should undergo imaging with mam-
mography or ultrasound evaluation, and a biopsy using ne needle aspi-
ration for cytology or core biopsy for histology. Histological assessment 
should be carried out to assess tumour type and to determine oestrogen 
and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status and HER2 status. If distant 
spread is suspected, CT of the thorax and abdomen and an isotope bone 
scan are required. Molecular subtyping is being used to classify tumours 
into four major subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, HER2 type and basal-like 
7.20 Specic cancers covered in other chapters
Bladder cancer
p. 607
Colorectal cancer
p. 826
Familial cancer syndromes
p. 55
Gastric cancer
p. 817
Hepatocellular carcinoma
p. 901
Leukaemia
p. 963
Lung cancer
p. 528
Lymphoma
p. 971
Mesothelioma
p. 546
Myeloma
p. 976
Oesophageal cancer
p. 809
Pancreatic cancer
p. 855
Prostate cancer
p. 610
Renal cancer
p. 606
Seminoma
p. 611
Skin cancer
p. 1082
Teratoma
p. 611
Thyroid cancer
p. 665
7.21 Five-year survival rates for breast cancer by stage
Tumour stage
Stage denition
5-year survival (%)
I
Tumour <2 cm, no lymph 
nodes
98
II
Tumour 2–5 cm and/or 
mobile axillary lymph nodes
90
III
Chest wall or skin xation 
and/or xed axillary lymph 
nodes
72
IV
Metastasis
26

[[p178]]
150    OncOlOgy
(often called ‘triple negative’, as these tumours are ER-, PR- and HER2-
negative). This may allow more targeted selection of therapies in future.
Management
Surgery is the mainstay of curative treatment. This can range from a 
lumpectomy, where only the tumour is removed, to mastectomy, where 
the whole breast is removed. Breast-conserving surgery is as effective as 
mastectomy if complete excision with negative margins can be achieved. 
Lymph node sampling is performed at the time of surgery.
There is signicant evidence to support the use of additional therapies 
to reduce the risk of breast cancer recurrence. Adjuvant radiotherapy is 
given to reduce the risk of local recurrence. In those patients considered 
at high risk of recurrence (i.e. tumour of >1 cm, ER-negative disease or the 
presence of involved axillary lymph nodes) cytotoxic chemotherapy may 
be offered. In patients with HER2-positive breast cancer adjuvant trastu-
zumab, a humanised monoclonal antibody to HER2, may be used along-
side standard cytotoxic chemotherapy. These treatments are increasingly 
being used in the neoadjuvant setting, with the aim of achieving a complete 
pathological response when the cancer is resected, often with a more 
organ-preserving surgical procedure. In patients with ER-positive tumours 
adjuvant hormonal therapy may gain additional disease-free and overall 
survival benets. Patients at low risk of recurrence (i.e. small, ER-positive 
disease) may require only adjuvant hormonal therapy. In post-menopausal 
women adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy may also be used.
The treatment of metastatic breast cancer is complex. Radiotherapy 
may be used to palliate painful bone metastases. SACT decisions are 
made with consideration of ER status, HER2 status, the distribution 
of metastatic disease and previous neo/adjuvant treatment, alongside 
assessments of performance status (PS) and comorbidities. For exam-
ple, in a post-menopausal patient with ER-positive, HER2-negative 
bone-only metastatic disease who is PS 0, hormonal therapy (i.e. an 
aromatase inhibitor) in combination with a CDK4/6 targeted therapy 
(i.e. palbociclib, abemaciclib or ribociclib) may be used as rst-line 
treatment. In a similar patient with additional symptomatic liver metas-
tases, cytotoxic chemotherapy may be more appropriate.
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer is the most common gynaecological tumour in Western 
countries. Most ovarian cancers are epithelial in origin (90%), and up 
to 7% of women with ovarian cancer have a positive family history. 
Patients often present late in ovarian cancer with vague abdominal dis-
comfort, low back pain, bloating, altered bowel habit and weight loss. 
Occasionally, peritoneal deposits are palpable as an omental ‘cake’ and 
nodules in the umbilicus (Sister Mary Joseph nodules).
Pathogenesis
Genetic and environmental factors play a role. The risk of ovarian cancer 
is increased in patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, and Lynch 
type II families (a subtype of hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer, 
HNPCC) can have ovarian, endometrial, colorectal and gastric tumours 
due to mutations of mismatch repair enzymes. Advanced age, nulliparity, 
ovarian stimulation and European descent all increase the risk of ovarian 
cancer, while suppressed ovulation appears to protect, so pregnancy, 
prolonged breastfeeding and the contraceptive pill have all been shown 
to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer.
Investigations
Initial workup for patients with suspected ovarian cancer includes imaging in 
the form of ultrasound and CT. Serum levels of the tumour marker CA-125 
are often measured. Surgery plays a key role in the diagnosis, staging and 
treatment of ovarian cancer, and in early cases, palpation of viscera, perito-
neal washings and biopsies are generally performed to dene disease extent.
Management
In early disease, surgery followed by adjuvant cytotoxic chemotherapy 
with carboplatin, or carboplatin plus paclitaxel, is the treatment of choice. 
Surgery should include removal of the tumour along with total abdom-
inal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy. 
Even in advanced disease, surgery is undertaken to maximally debulk the 
tumour and is followed by cytotoxic chemotherapy, typically using carbo-
platin and paclitaxel. Bevacizumab, a targeted therapy against VEGFR, 
is indicated for patients with high-grade tumours that are suboptimally 
debulked or those with a more aggressive biological pattern. Subsequent 
treatment decisions are made with consideration of response to rst-line 
cytotoxic chemotherapy and germline BRCA mutation status. Options 
include further platinum/paclitaxel combination, liposomal doxorubicin or 
targeted therapy against poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP, e.g. olapa-
rib, niraparib or rucaparib).
The serum tumour marker CA-125 and clinical examination may be 
used to monitor treatment response in ovarian cancer, with CT imaging 
for those with suspected progressive disease.
Endometrial cancer
Endometrial cancer accounts for 4% of all female malignancies, produc-
ing a 1 in 73 lifetime risk. The majority of patients are post-menopausal, 
with a peak incidence at 50–60 years of age. Mortality from endome-
trial cancer is currently falling. The most common presentation is with 
post-menopausal bleeding, which often results in detection of the dis-
ease before distant spread has occurred.
Pathogenesis
Oestrogen plays an important role in the pathogenesis of endometrial 
cancer, and factors that increase the duration of oestrogen exposure, 
such as nulliparity, early menarche, late menopause and unopposed HRT, 
increase the risk. Endometrial cancer is 10 times more common in obese 
women and this is thought to be due to elevated levels of oestrogens.
Investigations
The diagnosis is conrmed by endometrial biopsy.
Management
Surgery is the treatment of choice and is used for staging. A hysterec-
tomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy are performed with peritoneal 
cytology and, in some cases, lymph node dissection. Where the tumour 
extends beyond the inner 50% of the myometrium or involves the cer-
vix and local lymph nodes, or there is lymphovascular space invasion, 
adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy is recommended. Cytotoxic chemotherapy 
is used as adjuvant therapy, and hormonal therapy and cytotoxic chemo-
therapy are used to palliate symptoms in recurrent disease.
Cervical cancer
Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women and the 
leading cause of death from gynaecological cancer worldwide. The 
incidence is decreasing in high-income industrialised countries but con-
tinues to rise in low- and middle-income nations. The most common 
presentation in the UK is with an abnormal smear test, but with locally 
advanced disease the presentation is with vaginal bleeding, discomfort, 
discharge or symptoms attributable to involvement of adjacent struc-
tures, such as bladder, or rectal or pelvic wall. Occasionally, patients 
present with distant metastases to bone and lung.
Pathogenesis
Almost all cases of cervical cancer are linked to high-risk human papil-
lomaviruses (HPV), transmitted through sexual contact. This has under-
pinned the introduction of programmes to immunise adolescents against 
HPV in an effort to prevent up to 90% of cervical cancer.
Investigations
Diagnosis is made by smear or cone biopsy. Further examination may 
require cystoscopy and exible sigmoidoscopy if there are symptoms ref-
erable to the bladder, colon or rectum. In contrast to other gynaecological 

[[p179]]
Further iformatio    151
7
Management
In general, the majority of patients with early or locally advanced disease 
are treated with curative intent. In localised disease where there is no 
involvement of the lymph nodes, long-term remission can be achieved in 
up to 90% of patients with surgery or radiotherapy. The choice of surgery 
versus radiotherapy often depends on patient preference, as surgical 
treatment can be mutilating with an adverse cosmetic outcome. Patients 
with lymph node involvement are treated with a combination of surgery 
and radiotherapy (often with a radiosensitising agent such as cisplatin 
or cetuximab), and this produces long-term remission in approximately 
60%–70% of patients. Recurrent or metastatic tumours may be palli-
ated with further surgery or radiotherapy to aid local control, or systemic 
cytotoxic chemotherapy or immunotherapy may be used. Second malig-
nancies are common (3% per year) following successful treatment for pri-
mary disease, and all patients should be encouraged to give up smoking 
and drinking alcohol to lower their risk.
Survivorship
Advances in cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment mean that 
more people are surviving cancer. Cancer survival has doubled in the last 
40years in the UK. There are an estimated 2 million people living with, or 
beyond, cancer in the UK today and 50% of those diagnosed with can-
cer will survive their disease for 10 years or more. Cancer survivorship 
has at least two common meanings:
 completing treatment for cancer and having no signs of cancer after 
nishing treatment
 living with, through and beyond cancer, thus including people who 
receive curative treatment and people who receive intermittent 
anti-cancer treatment to control their cancer over a longer time.
Many people feel that life is never the same after a cancer diagno-
sis. There are often long-lasting physical, social and emotional conse-
quences of both cancer and its treatment. These start at diagnosis and 
last through rst treatment (acute survivorship), continue through and 
beyond cancer treatments (extended survivorship) and can be long- 
lasting, even when risk of cancer recurrence is low (permanent survivor-
ship). An increasing awareness of survivorship, the impact of a cancer 
diagnosis and its wide-ranging effects on patients has highlighted the 
need for holistic and patient-centred care, support and services through-
out and after cancer treatment.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Cassidy J, Bissett D, Spence RAJ, etal. Oxford handbook of oncology, 4th edn. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2015.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer: perspectives for cancer 
medicine. In: Kerr DJ, Haller DG, van de Velde CJH, Baumann M, eds. Oxford 
textbook of oncology, 3rd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2016. Oxford 
Medicine Online DOI: 10.1093/med/9780199656103.003.0001.
Tobias J, Hochhauser D. Cancer and its management, 7th edn. Chichester: 
Wiley–Blackwell; 2014.
Websites
cancer.org American Cancer Society: clinical practice guidelines
ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html Common toxicity criteria
info.cancerresearchuk.org/cancerstats/ Cancer statistics that can be sorted by 
type or geographical location
7.22 Common presenting features by location in head and 
neck cancer
Hypopharynx
 Dysphagia
 Odynophagia
 Referred otalgia
 Enlarged lymph nodes
Mouth and tongue
 Non-healing ulcers
 Ipsilateral otalgia
Nasal cavity and sinuses
 Discharge (bloody) or obstruction
Nasopharynx
 Nasal discharge or obstruction
 Conduction deafness
 Atypical facial pain
 Diplopia
 Hoarse voice
 Horner syndrome
Oropharynx
 Dysphagia
 Pain
 Otalgia
Salivary gland
 Painless swelling
 Facial nerve palsy
malignancies, cervical cancer is a clinically staged disease, although MRI 
is often used to characterise the primary tumour. CT of the chest, abdo-
men and pelvis is performed to look for metastases in the lungs, liver and 
lymph nodes, and to exclude hydronephrosis and hydroureter.
Management
This depends on the stage of disease. Pre-malignant disease can be 
treated with laser ablation or diathermy, whereas in microinvasive dis-
ease a large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) or a simple 
hysterectomy is employed. Invasive but localised disease requires rad-
ical surgery, while cytotoxic chemotherapy and radiotherapy, including 
brachytherapy, may be given as primary treatment, especially in patients 
with adverse prognostic features such as bulky or locally advanced dis-
ease, or lymph node or parametrium invasion. In metastatic disease, 
platinum-based cytotoxic chemotherapy may be benecial in improving 
symptoms but does not increase survival signicantly.
Head and neck tumours
Head and neck cancers are typically squamous tumours that arise in 
the nasopharynx, hypopharynx and larynx. They are most common in 
older adult males but oropharyngeal cancers now occur with increasing 
frequency in a younger cohort of patients, including in women. The rising 
incidence of oropharyngeal cancers, especially in high-income countries, 
is thought to be secondary to HPV infection. Presentation depends on 
the location of the primary tumour and the extent of disease. For exam-
ple, early laryngeal cancers may present with hoarseness, while more 
extensive local disease may present with pain due to invasion of local 
structures or with a lump in the neck. Patients who present late often 
have pulmonary symptoms, as this is the most common site of distant 
metastases (Box 7.22).
Pathogenesis
The tumours are strongly associated with a history of smoking and 
excess alcohol intake, but other recognised risk factors include Epstein–
Barr virus for nasopharyngeal cancer and HPV infection for oropharyn-
geal tumours.
Investigations
Careful inspection of the primary site is required as part of the staging 
process, and most patients will require endoscopic evaluation and exami-
nation under anaesthesia. Tissue biopsies should be taken from the most 
accessible site. CT of the primary site and the thorax is the investigation of 
choice for visualising the tumour, while MRI may be useful in certain cases.

[[p180]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p181]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 7.1. A 54-year-old woman presents to the emergency department 
with fevers and a sore throat. She has recently been diagnosed 
with left-sided breast cancer and associated axillary lymph 
node disease. Twelve days ago she received her rst cycle of 
neoadjuvant cytotoxic chemotherapy (5-uorouracil, epirubicin 
and cyclophosphamide). On clinical examination her temperature 
is 38.3°C, she appears dehydrated and there is evidence of 
oral candidiasis. An intravenous catheter is placed and bloods, 
including blood cultures, taken. What is the most appropriate next 
step in this patient’s care?
 
A. Start oral uconazole
 
B. Await blood test results to inform further management
 
C. Start intravenous uids
 
D.  Perform a chest X-ray, collect a urine sample and throat 
swab to complete the infection screen
 
E.  Start high-dose broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotic  
therapy immediately
Answer: E.
The clinical features here are of fever in a patient at high risk of neu-
tropenia. This is an oncological emergency. Patients are at risk of neu-
tropenia at any point during their systemic anti-cancer therapy treatment 
cycle, with the highest risk typically 10–14 days after a treatment. In 
patients with potential neutropenic sepsis high-dose broad spectrum 
intravenous antibiotics should be commenced, ideally within 1 hour of 
admission, without awaiting test results. In this patient uconazole (A) 
for oral candidiasis, intravenous uids (C) and further tests (D) are also 
appropriate, but should not delay the rst dose of antibiotic therapy. 
Test results may later inform changes to antimicrobial therapy and its 
duration.
 7.2. A 61-year-old man recently diagnosed with colon cancer and 
associated liver and lung metastases is seen in the oncology 
clinic. He is keen to talk about treatment for his cancer. His ECOG 
performance status is 1 and he has no signicant comorbidities. 
He has some mild symptoms of abdominal discomfort and has 
lost 5 kg in weight. His routine bloods demonstrate anaemia 
(Hb105 g/L) and mild elevations in his liver enzymes. A biopsy of 
his tumour has shown a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma 
which is KRAS/NRAS wildtype and BRAF mutant. What is the 
most appropriate treatment option for this patient?
 
A.  Cytotoxic chemotherapy (5-uorouracil, folinic acid and 
oxaliplatin) alone
 
B. Surgery to all cancer sites
 
C.  Cytotoxic chemotherapy (5-uorouracil, folinic acid and 
oxaliplatin) with an EGFR inhibitor (cetuximab)
 
D.  Cytotoxic chemotherapy (5-uorouracil, folinic acid and 
oxaliplatin) with a BRAF inhibitor (dabrafenib)
 
E. Refer to palliative care
Answer: A.
This man wishes to pursue anti-cancer therapy and, from the informa-
tion provided, appears t to do so. In patients with metastatic disease 
systemic anti-cancer therapies are most often used, unless there is a 
need to palliate a specic symptom. Cytotoxic chemotherapy would be 
an appropriate option here. As the tumour is BRAF mutant he is unlikely to 
respond to an EGFR inhibitor such as cetuximab. BRAF inhibitors such 
as dabrafenib are not used in colon cancer regardless of the mutational 
status.
 7.3. A 59-year-old woman is seen in the emergency department with 
a 2-day history of severe diarrhoea. She has had 10 loose stools 
today, the most recent of which have been bloody and associated 
with crampy abdominal pain. Her past medical history includes 
metastatic melanoma and she had her fourth cycle of ipilimumab 
and nivolumab therapy 20 days ago. At the time of her treatment she 
was constipated and the outpatient systemic anti-cancer therapy unit 
doctor prescribed her a macrogol laxative. She notes that the evening 
prior to the diarrhoea starting she had reheated some leftover rice for 
her supper. What is the most important likely diagnosis?
 
A. Bacillus cereus-associated food poisoning
 
B. Overow diarrhoea
 
C. Laxative overuse
 
D. Immunotherapy-related colitis
 
E. Clostridioides difcile infection
Answer: D.
Immune-related adverse events should be considered in all patients 
who present acutely unwell following immunotherapy treatments for 
cancer. Although the other options are on the differential diagnosis list, 
severe IRAEs are oncological emergencies and prompt recognition and 
management are vital. This is a grade 3 colitis and should be treated 
with IV methylprednisolone in the rst instance. Investigations such as 
bloods, stool sample, radiological imaging and exible sigmoidoscopy or 
colonoscopy are also appropriate.
 7.4. A 58-year-old man is seen in clinic with a diagnosis of metastatic 
lung cancer. He is coping well at home, where he lives alone. 
However, he has taken early retirement as a brick-layer as he feels 
unable to work due to increasing fatigue. He awakes early each 
morning and goes to the shops to collect his newspaper, but has 
taken to napping for an hour in the afternoon. What is this man’s 
ECOG performance status?
 
A. 0
 
B. 1
 
C. 2
 
D. 3
 
E. 4
Answer: B.
This man is ambulatory and capable of self-care, but unable to under-
take strenuous activity. He is up for more than 50% of waking hours. 
Performance status is a key assessment tool in patients with cancer.
 7.5. You have been asked to see a 70-year-old man on a medical 
ward. He was admitted 2 weeks ago following a fall. On admission 
he had abnormal liver function tests and an elevated CRP. He 
has been treated for a urinary tract infection. A CT scan has 
demonstrated multiple liver, lung and bone metastases, but no 
obvious primary cancer. The ward nurses tell you he remains 
mildly confused at times, sleeps for most of the day and does not 
wish to engage with physiotherapy. What is the most appropriate 
management for this man?
 
A.  Refer to the Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Cancer 
Multidisciplinary Team
 
B. Ultrasound-guided liver biopsy
 
C. Colonoscopy
 
D. Palliative care
 
E. Cytotoxic chemotherapy
Answer: D.

[[p182]]
This man has a new diagnosis of metastatic cancer of undened pri-
mary origin (MUO). His ECOG performance status (3), requirement for 
hospital admission, multi-organ metastatic disease, end-organ dys-
function and raised inammatory markers are poor prognostic features. 
Further investigations may not be warranted and honest conversations 
about the likely diagnosis, palliative care and end-of-life care, taking into 
account the patient’s wishes are often preferable.
 7.6. A 56-year-old woman is seen in oncology clinic following surgery 
to remove a localised clear cell renal cell carcinoma. She is eligible 
for a phase III clinical trial comparing adjuvant immunotherapy 
to the current clinical standard of observation. Patients will be 
randomised to receive either the immunotherapy treatment or 
a placebo every 4 weeks for 1 year. Neither the patient nor the 
investigator will know what treatment she is receiving. Which of the 
following statements regarding randomised controlled trials (RCTs) 
is true?
 
A. Patients may choose which treatment they receive
 
B. RCTs are always ‘double blinded’
 
C.  RCTs are considered to be the ‘gold standard’ for determin-
ing efcacy and safety in clinical research
 
D. RCTs always have a control arm that uses placebo
 
E.  RCTs always equally divide patients between each  
treatment arm
Answer: C.
Phase III RCTs are often used to determine whether a treatment 
should be licensed for clinical use. Patients are randomised to each arm, 
sometimes with stratication to ensure equal allocation of patient sub-
groups. RCTs may be double-blinded, as is the case here, single-blinded 
or ‘open-label’. The control arm should be the current clinical standard 
treatment. In this example a placebo is used in the place of observation 
only to ensure blinding and avoid potential bias of results. Patients may 
be divided in alternative ratios. This is sometimes the case when earlier 
studies suggest large differences between the investigational and current 
treatment.

[[p183]]
Pain and palliative care
8
LA Colvin
M Fallon
Clinical examination in pain and palliative care 154
Clinical evaluation and management in a patient with chronic pain or in the 
palliative care setting 155
Pain 156
Functional anatomy and physiology 156
Investigations 158
Principles of management 160
Interventions 162
Chronic pain syndromes 165
Palliative care 167
Presenting problems in palliative care 167
Death and dying 172

[[p184]]
154    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
Venous system
SVC obstruction due to lung
carcinoma
Mouth
Increased secretions due to
dysphagia
Extremities
Neuropathic pain due to CRPS type I
1
Abdomen
Abdominal swelling secondary to
malignant ascites
Lower limb
Phantom limb pain (CRPS type II)
following amputation
Lungs
Dyspnoea due to pleural effusion
3
4
5
2
Hand
Muscle wasting and pain due
to nerve compression
1
2
Spine
Back pain due to bone metastases
3
4
5
6
6
7
9
9
8
7
8
Nervous system
Drowsiness due to hypercalcaemia
or brain metastases 
Insets (SVC obstruction, wasting in the hand, pleural effusion, ascites, amputation) From Forbes CD, Jackson WF. Color atlas and text of clinical 
medicine, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Mosby; 2002. (CRPS = chronic regional pain syndrome; SVC = superior vena cava)
Clinical examination in pain and palliative care

[[p185]]
Clinical evaluation and management in a patient with chronic pain or in the palliative care setting     155
8
VAS
score
Record severity of pain
Take careful history, recording
character and radiation of pain
Assess  pinprick, fine touch
and heat/cold sensation
Formulate management plan
with patient and set goals
Consider TENS and
acupuncture
Consider nerve block
or ablation
Consider psychological
therapies and mindfulness 
Increase physical activity
Conduct biopsychosocial
assessment
Conduct general examination
Educate patient on nature of pain
and promote self-management
Consider yoga, pilates or tai chi
Assess mood and screen
for depression
Check gait and whether
using a walking aid
Conduct neurological
examination
Optimise medication
(TENS = transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation)
Clinical evaluation and management in a patient with chronic pain or in the palliative care setting

[[p186]]
156    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
Pain
Pain is dened as ‘an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience 
associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms 
of such damage’. It is one of the most common symptoms for which 
people seek health-care advice. Our understanding of the mechanisms 
of pain has evolved considerably from Hippocrates’ suggestion in 450 
BC that pain arose as a result of an imbalance in vital uids. We now 
know that pain is a complex symptom that is inuenced and modied 
by many social, cultural and emotional factors, as illustrated in Figure 8.1. 
The sensation of acute pain that occurs in response to inammation or 
tissue damage plays an important role in protection from further injury. 
Chronic pain serves no useful function but results in signicant distress 
and suffering for the patient affected, as well as having a wider societal 
impact.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The functional anatomy of the somatosensory system is shown in Figures 
28.3 and 28.6. Here, discussion will focus on the mechanisms and medi-
ators that are involved in pain processing.
Peripheral nerves
Peripheral nerves contain several types of neuron. These can be classi-
ed into two groups, depending on whether or not they are surrounded 
by a myelin sheath. Myelinated neurons have a fast conduction velocity 
and are responsible for transmission of various sensory signals, such as 
proprioception, light touch, heat and cold, and the detection of localised 
pains, such as pin-prick. Unmyelinated bres have a much slower con-
duction velocity and are responsible for transmitting diffuse and poorly 
localised pain, as well as other sensations (Box 8.1).
Sensory neurons (also known as primary afferent neurons) connect 
the spinal cord to the periphery and supply a dened territory or a der-
matome, which can be used to identify the position of a nerve lesion 
(see Fig. 28.10). In healthy individuals, dermatomes have distinct bor-
ders, but in pathological pain syndromes these may become blurred as 
the result of neuronal plasticity, which means that pain may be felt in an 
area adjacent to that supplied by a specic nerve root. Autonomic neu-
rons also contain pain bres and are responsible for transmitting visceral 
sensations, such as colic. In general, visceral pain is diffuse and less well 
localised than pain transmitted by sensory neurons.
Anatomical features of the afferent pain pathway are illustrated in 
Figure 8.2. Pain signals are transmitted from the periphery to the spinal 
cord by sensory neurons. These have the following components:
 A cell body, containing the nucleus, which is situated in the dorsal 
root ganglion close to the spinal cord. The cell body is essential for 
survival of the neuron, production of neurotransmitters and neuronal 
function.
 The nerve bre (axon) and peripheral nerve endings, which are 
located in the periphery and contain a range of receptors in the 
neuronal membrane.
 Specialised receptors in the periphery, consisting of bare nerve end-
ings known as nociceptors or pain receptors, which are activated by 
various mediators. They are situated mainly in the epidermis.
 The central termination, which travels to the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord to form the rst central synapse with neurons that transmit pain 
sensation to the brain.
When a noxious stimulus is encountered, activation of nociceptors 
leads to generation of an action potential, which travels upwards to the 
dorsal root ganglion and also stimulates the release of neurotransmitters 
that have secondary effects on surrounding neurons.
Spinal cord
Sensory neurons, through their central termination, synapse with sec-
ond-order neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. There is consid-
erable modulation of pain messages at this site, both from local neurons 
within the spinal cord and from neurons that descend from the brain, 
as depicted in Figure 28.11. Several neurotransmitters are involved in 
pain processing at this level and these are summarised in Box 8.2. They 
include amino acids, such as glycine and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 
which are inhibitory, and glutamate, which is excitatory; neuropeptides, 
such as substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP); and 
endorphins. Whether or not they increase or decrease pain perception 
depends on the connectivity of the neurons on which they act.
Illness and
pain behaviour
(underlying disease, impact
on quality of life, fear avoidance)
Social
and cultural
(socioeconomics,
religion, family)
Affect and
emotional state
(mood, self-efficacy)
Cognition
(catastrophising,
acceptance)
Sensory
(genetic, anatomical,
biomedical)
Fig. 8.1 The biopsychosocial model of pain. The perception of pain as a 
symptom is dependent not only on sensory inputs but also on the individual’s 
cognitive reaction to the pain, their emotional state, their underlying disease and their 
social and cultural background.
8.1 Types of nerve bre
Fibre  
type
Diameter  
(µm)
Conduction 
velocity (ms 1)
Function
Large myelinated
Aα
12–20
70–120
Proprioception
Motor to muscle bres
Aβ
5–12
30–70
Light touch, pressure
A
3–6
15–30
Motor to muscle spindles
Small myelinated
A
2–5
12–30
Well-localised pain
Thermal sensation
B
<3
3–15
Pre-ganglionic autonomic
Unmyelinated
C
0.4–1.3
0.5–3
Diffuse pain
Poorly localised thermal 
sensation
Post-ganglionic autonomic

[[p187]]
Pain    157
8
Central processing of pain
The signals transmitted by second-order neurons in the spinal cord are 
relayed to the sensory cortex by third-order neurons, which synapse with 
second-order neurons in the thalamus. At this site, perception of pain 
is inuenced by interactions between a range of structures in the brain, 
where sensory, cognitive and emotional aspects are integrated. This is 
termed the pain neuromatrix (see Fig. 8.2). Signals within the neuromatrix 
are multidirectional in nature, involving modulation of incoming messages 
by the cerebral cortex (top-down regulation), as well as a complex net-
work of connections between other subcortical structures. Under normal 
conditions, there is a degree of descending inhibition from the brainstem 
that reduces input from peripheral stimuli.
It is thought that chronic widespread pain (CWP) and opioid-induced 
hyperalgesia may result, at least in part, from abnormalities in central pro-
cessing of pain signals. It has also been suggested that variations in the 
levels of descending inhibition between individuals may make some peo-
ple more vulnerable than others to developing chronic pain. Over recent 
years, there has been increasing interest in the role that glial cells (see Fig. 
28.1) play in pain processing. Both astrocytes and microglial cells can 
become activated in chronic pain states and release pro-inammatory 
cytokines, as well as altering re-uptake of excitatory neurotransmitters 
such as glutamate, which can inuence pain perception considerably. 
As our understanding of these processes improves, there is increasing 
potential to develop novel therapies targeted at these mediators, with 
some early clinical studies in neuropathic pain (pain related to nerve injury 
or disease, with characteristic neurobiological changes).
Sensitisation
Sensitisation is one of the key features of pain processing. It refers to the 
fact that both peripheral and central nervous systems adapt rapidly to the 
presence of pain, especially in response to tissue damage. This adaptive 
process is called neuronal plasticity. In some situations, neuronal plas-
ticity can lead to prolonged changes in the pathways that are involved 
in detecting and processing nociceptive stimuli, resulting in chronic pain 
syndromes. The specic changes in key neurotransmitters and recep-
tors differ between chronic pain states, with implications for the efcacy 
of treatments. For example, mu opioid receptors are down-regulated in 
neuropathic pain, potentially leading to limited opioid responsiveness.
Peripheral sensitisation
Peripheral sensitisation can occur in association with a variety of clin-
ical conditions, including sepsis, cancer, inammatory disease, injury, 
Primary afferent
neuron
Second-order
neuron
First central
synapse
Spinothalamic
tract
Dorsal root
ganglion
Peripheral
input
Spinal cord
Medulla
Mid-brain
Cell
body
C fibre
Nociceptors: chemicals,
changes in pH, cytokines
Thalamus
PAG
RVM
Synapse
Hypothalamus
Amygdala
Emotional
Cognitive
Sensory
Sensory
Emotional
Cerebral cortex
Fig. 8.2 Ascending and descending pain pathways. Ascending pathways are shown in blue and descending in red. Pain signals are detected in the periphery by 
nociceptors, which are activated by chemicals, changes in pH and cytokines. The signal is transmitted by the primary afferent neuron to the spinal cord, where there is a 
synapse with a second-order neuron, which transmits the signal onwards to the thalamus. Thereafter, the pain signal is transmitted to the cerebral cortex. The intensity of pain 
signals is subject to extensive modulation at several levels within the nervous system. Cognitive inuences derived from the frontal lobe, coupled with sensory inuences from 
cortex and emotional inuences from the amygdyla, affect pain perception in the mid-brain around the periaqueductal grey matter (PAG) and the rostroventrolateral medulla 
(RVM) in the medulla. These structures form part of the descending modulatory systems, which, under normal circumstances, inhibit pain perception. In some chronic pain 
states, however, dysfunction of the descending pathways can occur, increasing pain.

[[p188]]
158    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
surgery and obesity. The nal common pathway by which sensitisation 
takes place in all of these conditions is inammation. Inammation is 
accompanied by increased capillary permeability and tissue oedema 
with the release of a diverse range of mediators, including bradykinin, 
hydrogen ions, prostaglandins and adenosine, which bind to receptors 
and ion channels on nociceptors of primary afferent neurons (Fig. 8.3). 
The signalling pathways activated by these mediators generate action 
potentials, which are transmitted by sensory neurons to the spinal cord. 
If these pain-provoking stimuli persist, the activation threshold of sensory 
neurons is reduced, resulting in an increased transmission of pain signals 
to the spinal cord.
Central sensitisation
Sensitisation may also take place at the level of the spinal cord in 
response to a sustained painful stimulus. It can occur acutely and rapidly, 
such as immediately after surgery, or may progress to chronic changes, 
such as chronic infection, cancer, repeated surgery or multiple trau-
matic episodes. Glutamate, acting via the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor complex, plays a key role in central sensitisation (Fig. 8.4). In 
response to a sustained peripheral painful stimulus, increased amounts 
of glutamate are released in the spinal cord, overcoming the inhibitory 
action of magnesium ions and resulting in activation of the NMDA recep-
tor. This initiates a cascade of intracellular signalling events that lead to 
prolonged modications of somatosensory processing, with amplica-
tion of pain responses within the spinal cord and continued neuronal 
ring, even after the noxious stimulus has stopped. This phenomenon is 
termed ‘after-discharge’. In neuropathic pain, prolonged activation of the 
NMDA pathway results in a decrease in the number of inhibitory interneu-
rons, which further potentiates pain.
Genetic determinants of pain perception
There are marked ethnic and individual variations in how people respond 
to painful stimuli and studies in twins have estimated that the heritability 
of CWP ranges between 30% and 50%. In the general population, the 
individual variants in response to pain and perception of pain are most 
likely due to a complex interaction between genetic and environmental 
inuences. Few variants have been identied with robust evidence of 
association with CWP. Several rare syndromes have been described, 
however, in which insensitivity to pain or heightened pain responses 
occur as the result of a single gene disorder, as summarised in Box 8.3. 
Most are due to mutations affecting ion channels that play a key role in 
neurotransmission (see Fig. 8.3), but other causes include mutations in 
the NTKR1 gene, which encodes the receptor for nerve growth factor, 
and mutations in the PDRM12 transcription factor, which is involved in 
neuron development.
Investigations
Pain can be a presenting feature of a wide range of disorders and the 
rst step in evaluation of a patient with pain should be to perform what-
ever investigations are required to dene the underlying cause of the 
pain, unless this is already known. However, with most chronic pain 
syndromes, such as bromyalgia, complex regional pain syndrome and 
CWP, investigations are negative and the diagnosis is made on the basis 
of clinical history and exclusion of other causes. Specic investigations 
that are useful in the assessment of selected patients with chronic pain 
are discussed below.
8.2  Neurotransmitters and receptors involved in pain processing in the spinal cord
Neurotransmitter
Receptor(s)
Receptor type
Comments*
Amino acids
Glutamate
AMPA
Ion channel
Excitatory; permeable to cations: can be Ca2+, Na+ or K+, depending on  
subunit structure
NMDA
Ion channel
Excitatory; blocked by Mg2+ in the resting state; block can be altered if  
membrane potential changes; permeable to Ca2+, Na+ and K+
Kainate
Ion channel
Post synaptic – excitatory
Gp I
GPCR
Pre-synaptic – inhibitory through GABA release; permeable to Na+ and K+
Gp II
GPCR
Activates a range of signalling pathways; long-term effects on synaptic  
excitability
Gp III
GPCR
Probably inhibitory; can decrease cAMP production; pre-synaptic; decreases 
glutamate release
Glycine
GlyR
Ion channel
Mainly inhibitory; permeable to Cl ; blocked by caffeine
GABA
GABAA
Ion channel
Mainly inhibitory in spinal cord; permeable to Cl ; indirectly modulated by 
benzodiazepines (increased ion channel opening); not specically involved in 
nociception, generally depressant effect on spinal cord activity
GABAB
GPCR
Predominantly inhibitory; activated by baclofen
Neuropeptides
Substance P
Neurokinin receptors
GPCR
Mainly excitatory; increased in inammation, decreased in neuropathic pain
Cholecystokinin
CCKRs1–8
GPCR
Excitatory; clinical trials of antagonists in progress
Calcitonin gene-related 
peptide
CALCRL
GPCR
Excitatory; slows degradation of substance P; implicated in migraine
Opioids
Dynorphin
DOP
GPCR
Excitatory?; may be pro-nociceptive
β-endorphin
MOP
GPCR
Inhibitory
Nociceptin
NOP
GPCR
Inhibitory; also expressed by immune cells
(AMPA = α-amino 3-hydroxy, 5-methyl, 4-isoxazole propionic acid; CALCRL = calcitonin receptor-like receptor; cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CCKR = cholecystokinin receptor;  
DOP = delta opioid receptor; GABA = γ-aminobutyric acid; Gp = group; GPCR=G-protein-coupled receptor; MOP = mu opioid receptor; NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartate;  
NOP = nociceptin/orphan receptor)
*Excitatory = increased pain; inhibitory = reduced pain.

[[p189]]
Pain    159
8
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be helpful in the assessment of 
an underlying cause in patients with focal pain that follows a nerve root 
or peripheral nerve distribution. Imaging is seldom helpful in individuals 
with CWP.
Blood tests
Blood tests are not generally helpful in the diagnosis of chronic pain, 
except in patients with peripheral neuropathy; in this case, a number of 
blood tests may be required to investigate the underlying causes of the 
neuropathy. Full details are provided in Box 28.85. Genetic testing may 
Stimulus
ATP
Temperature or low pH
Osmosis
Cold or limitants
Cool
Low pH
Mechanical
Bradykinin
Prostanoids
ATP
NGF
Transducer
P2X
TRPV1/2
TRPV4
TRPA1
TRPM8
ASIC
Unknown
BK1/2
EP
P2Y
NTRK1
Kv
HCN2
Nav1.7
Sensitisation
Stimulus
Agonists
[H+]
Receptors
Response
Nav1.8
Nav1.9
B
A
C
Fig. 8.3 
channels that act as mediators of pain. They include sodium channels implicated in congenital pain syndromes; the purinergic 2X (P2X) and purinergic 2Y (P2Y) receptor for 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP); members of the transient receptor potential (TRP) superfamily of ion channel receptors, which detect changes in osmolality and temperature; 
acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC) receptors, which detect hydrogen ions; G-protein-coupled receptors, which detect bradykinin (BK), prostaglandins and ATP; sodium-potassium 
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (HCN2), and voltage gated potassium channels (Kv) and the neurotrophic tyrosine kinase 1 (NTRK1) receptor, which 
+] and high temperature (> 42°C) amplies action potentials, which increase pain 
signals and cause peripheral sensitisation. (EP = E-prostanoid receptor) Adapted from Bennett DL, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. The Lancet Neurol 2014; 
13:587–599; reproduced with permission from Elsevier.
Glutamate
Amino acids
(and other
neurotransmitters)
Pain
signal
Amplified
signal
Kinase
Dorsal root
ganglia
Neurotransmitter
changes
Glycine
NR1
NR2
Mg2+
Regulation of
pain response
NMDA receptor
Fig. 8.4 Mechanisms of central sensitisation. Post-synaptic activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor requires the amino acids glycine and glutamate, which 
bind to the NR1 and NR2 subunits, respectively; these amplify pain signals at the level of the spinal cord. In contrast, magnesium ions block receptor activation.

[[p190]]
160    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
be of value in patients with clinical features that point to an inherited 
disorder of pain processing (see Box 8.3).
Quantitative sensory testing
Quantitative sensory testing can be helpful in the detailed assessment 
of patients with chronic pain. A simple set of tools can be used in the 
clinical setting (Fig. 8.5). Lightly touching the skin with a brush, swab or 
cotton-wool ball can be used to test for abnormalities of ne touch. This 
may include allodynia, where a normally non-painful stimulus is perceived 
as painful. Assessing the patient’s response to a pin-prick can be used 
to test for abnormalities in mechanical hyperalgesia. Finally, touching the 
patient’s skin with warm and cool thermal rollers can be used to test for 
abnormalities of thermal sensation. An unaffected area of skin should 
be tested rst, to establish normal sensation, before testing the affected 
area.
Nerve conduction studies
Nerve conduction studies can be helpful in demonstrating and quanti-
fying a denitive nerve lesion, either peripherally or centrally. They can 
be used to help differentiate between central and peripheral neuropathic 
pain. They do not, however, effectively examine small nerve bre function.
Nerve blocks
Performing a nerve block with inltration of a local anaesthetic such as 
1% lidocaine can be used diagnostically, in assessing whether a pain 
syndrome is due to involvement of a specic nerve or nerve root. Where 
inammation and or swelling may be contributing to the underlying pain – 
for example, if there is compression of a nerve root – then a mixture of 
local anaesthetic and depot glucocorticoid may be helpful in alleviating 
pain. Nerve blockade can also be used to determine whether more radi-
cal therapies, such as nerve ablation, might be helpful in controlling pain, 
particularly that related to cancer.
Pain scoring systems
Various questionnaires and other instruments have been devised to 
localise pain, rate its severity and assess its impact on quality of life. 
Some of the most widely used are listed in Box 8.4. The distribution of 
pain can be documented on a diagram of the body, on which the patient 
can mark the sites that are painful. Similarly, other methods have been 
developed with which to assess the severity of pain using verbal, numer-
ical and behavioural rating scales. Visual scoring systems employing dif-
ferent facial expressions may be of value in paediatric patients and those 
with cognitive impairment. Documenting changes in pain scores using 
questionnaires can be helpful in indicating to what extent drug treat-
ments have been successful and can reduce the time taken to achieve 
pain control.
Principles of management
Effective management of chronic pain depends in part on the underlying 
cause but some general principles can be applied. In general terms, the 
treatment goals are to:
 educate the patient
 promote self-management
 optimise function
 enhance quality of life
 control pain.
8.3 Genetic regulators of pain perception
Gene (protein)
Mutation (inheritance)
Protein function
Phenotypes
SCN9A (Na,1.7)
LoF (AR)
Ion channel
Absent pain, hypohydrosis, anosmia
SCN9A (Na,1.7)
GoF (AD)
Ion channel
Erythromelalgia, paroxysmal pain, burning pain, 
autonomic dysfunction
SCN11A (Na,1.9)
GoF (AD)
Ion channel
Absent pain, hyperhydrosis, muscular weakness, 
gut dysmotility
SCN10A (Na,1.8)
GoF (AD)
Ion channel
Burning pain, autonomic dysfunction
TRPA1 (TRPA1)
GoF (AD)
Ion channel
Absent pain
PDRM12 (PDRM12)
LoF (AR)
Transcription factor; neuron development
Absent pain
NTRK1 (high-afnity  
NGF receptor)
LoF (AR)
Tyrosine kinase; promotes neuron  
development
Absent pain; anhydrosis, mental retardation, 
increased cancer risk
(AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; GoF = gain of function; LoF = loss of function; NGF = nerve growth factor)
Cotton wool
Neurology pin
Allodynia
Warm and cool thermal rollers
Increased or decreased thermal sensation
Hyperalgesia
Fig. 8.5 Equipment for bedside sensory testing.

[[p191]]
Pain    161
8
Clinical history
Biopsychosocial assessment
A full biopsychosocial assessment should be performed in all patients 
with chronic pain. Although this is time-consuming, the time invested is 
likely to pay dividends in improving the long-term outcome for patients. 
A biopsychosocial assessment takes account of the underlying neurobi-
ology of the condition in the context of wider inuences, including cogni-
tion and beliefs, emotions, and social and cultural factors. For example, 
an individual with abdominal pain might respond differently if a close 
relative had recently died of gastric cancer than if a colleague had been 
off work with gastric upset.
An accurate clinical history is important, taking note of the dura-
tion of pain, any precipitating and relieving factors, its location and, 
if the pain is located at more than one site, which site is the one 
that impacts most on the patient’s quality of life. The characteris-
tics of the pain should be documented, by assessing whether it is 
described as dull, sharp, aching or burning. Associated features, 
such as hypersensitivity to ne touch or temperature, numbness, 
paraesthesia, tingling and formication (the feeling of insects crawl-
ing over the skin), should be noted. It is important to determine to 
what extent the pain is interfering with normal daily activities, such as 
work, leisure pursuits and sleep. The patient’s social circumstances 
and cultural background should be documented, including any car-
ing responsibilities, employment status and social and family sup-
port. The intensity of pain should also be recorded, preferably using 
a validated questionnaire (see Box 8.4). The patient’s mood should 
be assessed and, if evidence of low mood is detected, a suicide risk 
assessment should be considered (see Box 31.14). The past medi-
cal and medication history should be recorded and specic enquiry 
made about substance misuse and any previous history of physical or 
mental abuse. This should be approached sympathetically, with infor-
mation about how to access appropriate support if required. It is also 
useful to enquire specically about the patient’s beliefs as to what 
is causing their pain, as well as what their expectation of treatment 
is; unless these are addressed, management may be less effective. 
There are some patient populations in whom particular challenges 
arise, often related to differences in communication ability. Strategies 
that can be used to overcome these difculties are summarised 
in Box 8.5
Examination
The patient’s general appearance should be noted, including ability to 
walk and use of a walking aid. In those with focal pain, neurological 
examination should be performed, focusing particularly on any areas of 
abnormal sensation, reexes and evidence of muscle wasting. A general 
examination should be carried out to determine whether there is any 
evidence of an underlying physical disorder that can account for the pain. 
In addition to the use of investigations to nd the underlying cause of 
pain, patients with persistent or chronic pain may benet from sensory 
testing or diagnostic nerve blocks to explore the underlying mechanisms 
and direct treatment. For example, a combined femoral and sciatic nerve 
block may be used in a patient with lower limb amputation to assess 
whether the pain is predominantly peripherally or centrally generated. 
If the pain is not improved by an effective nerve block, then peripherally 
directed therapies are unlikely to be effective.
8.4 Instruments used in the assessment of pain and its impact
Instrument
Comments
Brief Pain Inventory
Developed for use in cancer pain, 
validated and widely employed for 
chronic pain; based on 0–10 ratings 
of pain intensity and the impact 
of pain on a range of domains, 
including sleep, work and enjoyment 
of life
Pain Detect, s-LANSS, DN-4
A number of screening 
questionnaires to aid diagnosis of 
neuropathic pain
Pain Catastrophising Scale
Developed to assess individual levels 
of catastrophising, encompassing 
three different domains: 
helplessness, rumination and 
magnication
Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia
Measures how much an individual is 
fearful of movement
Pain Self-efcacy Questionnaire
Assesses individual beliefs about 
self-efcacy in the context of chronic 
pain, and how this impacts on 
function
Visual analogue scale (VAS)
Patient marks pain intensity on a 
horizontal line
Localisation of pain
Body chart, allowing the patient to 
indicate where pain is situated
Beck Depression Inventory
Assesses emotional function
SF-36/EQ-5D
Assesses health-related quality of life
(DN-4 = Douleur Neuropathique questionnaire; EQ-5D = EuroQol 5-Domain questionnaire; 
SF-36 = Short Form 36; s-LANSS = self-completed Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Signs 
and Symptoms)
8.5 Challenges in pain assessment in particular patient populations
Patient population
Challenges
Solutions
Paediatric
Assessment needs to be appropriate to developmental stage
Consider visual tools to aid pain assessment
Older adults
May have impaired cognitive function
Cultural factors may reduce self-reporting of pain
Risk of adverse effects of medication increased
Consider formal assessment of cognitive function
Consider non-verbal assessment
Consider visual tools to assess pain
Employ a number of tools assessing pain 
behaviours
Cognitive impairment
Reporting and expression of pain may change
Increased sensitivity to central nervous system effects of  
analgesics
Perform formal assessment of cognitive function
Use non-verbal assessment: facial expressions, 
vocalisations, body movements, changes in social 
interactions
Substance misuse
Response to analgesics altered
Increased tolerance
Increased risk of addiction
Substance misuse may affect reporting of pain
Seek specialist support early
Ensure prescribing is safe

[[p192]]
162    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
Interventions
Probably the most effective mode of treatment for pain is to identify the 
underlying cause. Examples include the use of immunosuppressive med-
ication in inammatory disease, chemotherapy, radiotherapy or hormone 
therapy in cancer, and antimicrobial therapy in patients with infection. 
There are many circumstances, however, in which the underlying cause 
of pain cannot be treated or the treatments available are incompletely 
effective. Under these circumstances, several management options are 
available. In all cases, a multidisciplinary approach is necessary that 
combines pharmacological management with supported self-manage-
ment, and other specic interventions when appropriate.
Supported self-management
Self-management strategies are useful in the treatment of chronic pain. 
Self-management works best if the patient has some understanding of 
their chronic pain, and acceptance that it is unlikely to resolve completely. 
The aim is for patients to maximise their quality of life and function despite
ongoing pain. Support for self-management can be delivered by health-
care professionals, patients who suffer from the same condition or lay 
people, either on an individual basis, in a group setting or, increasingly, 
through web-based resources. There is a strong educational component 
to supported self-management, which seeks to generate an interaction 
between patient and tutor. The key aspects include:
 increasing activity levels, while understanding and practising pacing 
techniques (not overdoing things and cycling between over- and 
under-activity)
 using relaxation and mindfulness techniques as part of daily 
management
 using medication when appropriate
 having a plan to manage pain ares.
All these are covered in formal pain management programmes (see 
‘Psychological therapies’), where a structured approach is used, in a 
group-based setting, to address all these aspects with expert multidis-
ciplinary input, that may include psychologists, occupational therapists, 
nurses, pharmacists and pain medicine specialists.
For less complex cases, or to provide ongoing support, there are a 
number of useful online self-help resources (see ‘Further information’).
Physical therapies
There is strong evidence that exercise can help in the management of 
chronic pain. Several types of exercise have been successfully delivered 
in various ways, through physiotherapists, exercise classes or individual 
tuition. In choosing a form of exercise therapy, it is important to tailor 
the approach most likely to be acceptable to the individual patient. A 
successful exercise programme can help overcome ‘fear avoidance’, a 
well-recognised problem in chronic pain, where patients associate activ-
ity with an increase in pain and therefore do progressively less activity, 
with resultant deconditioning. Because of this it is important to pace 
physical activity to ensure that patients do not cycle from over-activity, 
with a are in pain, to fatigue and deconditioning. This can be done by 
working with patients to establish their baseline level of activity and using 
an individually tailored, graded exercise programme (Box 8.6). This may 
include normal household activities, as well as targeted exercises and 
stretches. Manual therapy covers a variety of hands-on treatments, 
including manipulation, mobilisation and massage. Manual therapy can 
be provided by a range of therapists, including physiotherapists, osteo-
paths and chiropractors. There is some evidence of short-term benet 
for manual therapy but limited evidence of long-term efcacy.
Pharmacological therapies
A range of analgesics can be used in the management of chronic pain 
but, for most of these, the evidence of long-term benet is limited, and 
there may be considerable risks associated with long-term use for some 
agents. If using analgesics as part of a holistic treatment plan (e.g. to 
manage short-term are-ups, or target neuropathic pain), in general, it 
is advisable to use a multimodal approach, choosing different drugs to 
target pain processing at multiple points (Box 8.7). By employing different 
classes of analgesic, it is possible to use lower doses of each, thereby 
improving the side-effect prole and reducing risk. There is considera-
ble inter-individual variability in response to analgesics, even within the 
same class. There are many reasons for this, including genetic variations 
in the enzymes that metabolise drugs. For example, the CYP2D6 gene 
encodes for a liver enzyme, cytochrome P450 2D6, which metabolises 
a number of commonly used analgesics. Genetic variation in CYP2D6
can inuence circulating levels of many drugs, depending on whether 
someone is a rapid or poor metaboliser. This is particularly important if 
metabolites are active, as is the case with codeine and dihydrocodeine, 
which are metabolised to morphine. Genetic variations have also been 
described in the opioid receptors and downstream pathways that they 
affect, with good pre-clinical evidence that variations in mu opioid recep-
tors alter analgesic response to different opioids. Because of this there is 
a good rationale to try different drugs, even ones from the same class, if 
there is an inadequate response or there are unacceptable side-effects 
with one agent.
Whatever drug or combination of drugs is chosen, the key to suc-
cessful pharmacological management is careful assessment and review, 
aiming for an acceptable balance between the benets of treatment in 
providing pain relief, maximising function, and improving quality of life 
and adverse effects. Specic drug treatments are described below.
Non-opioid analgesics
Paracetamol
Paracetamol is widely used in the treatment of mild to moderate pain. 
Its mechanism of action is incompletely understood but it is known to 
be a weak inhibitor of the cyclo-oxygenase type 1 (COX-1) and cyclo-
oxygenase type 2 (COX-2) enzymes, providing weak anti-inammatory 
properties. There is also some evidence that it activates inhibitory 
descending spinal pathways, via a serotonergic mechanism. Other 
postulated mechanisms include endocannabinoid re-uptake inhibi-
tion, and inhibition of nitric oxide and tumour necrosis factor alpha. For 
migraine and tension-type headache it has moderate efcacy at a dose 
of 1000 mg. It is used widely for musculoskeletal disorders and osteo-
arthritis, with very little high-quality evidence that it is much better than 
placebo, even at doses of up to 4000 mg per day. Acute liver failure is a 
well-recognised complication of paracetamol overdose but this risk may 
also be increased with long-term use, even within the recommended 
dose range. In view of this, it should be employed with caution in older 
patients and those weighing less than 50 kg.
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used in the 
treatment of inammatory pain and osteoarthritis. These drugs can be 
given systemically or locally and are discussed in more detail in Chapter 26. 
They are also useful in the management of pain in cancer patients, as 
discussed later in this chapter. Although widely prescribed, there is 
8.6 Physical therapies for chronic pain
Land-based
 Walking
 Gym work
 Exercise classes
 Yoga
 Pilates
 Tai-chi
Water-based
 Hydrotherapy
 Swimming
 Exercise classes

[[p193]]
Pain    163
8
limited high-quality evidence of long-term efcacy in chronic pain, and 
concerns about risks of long-term use particularly around cardiovascular 
and renal effects. There is a clear need for further studies in this area.
Topical analgesics
Topical capsaicin cream (0.025 or 0.075%) has some efcacy for osteo-
arthritis and may be used for neuropathic pain, although evidence of 
benet is limited. A single application (done by a trained health-care 
professional) of a high-dose 8% capsaicin patch can give around 
12 weeks of pain relief for neuropathic pain and can be repeated there-
after. Capsaicin is an agonist at the transient receptor potential vanilloid 
1 (TRPV1) ion channel, found on some C bres. Capsaicin activates the 
channel, causing an initial sensation of heat, but an analgesic effect sub-
sequently results due to desensitisation of the channel, with a reduction 
in intra-epidermal nerve bre density.
Lidocaine 5% patches can also be helpful in focal neuropathic pain 
and should be applied for 12 hours out of 24 hours, with up to 4–6 
weeks before maximum benet is seen. The mode of action is blockade 
of sodium channels in primary afferent neurons and nociceptors, which 
reduces peripheral input to the spinal cord.
Anti-neuropathic agents
Anti-neuropathic agents are also termed ‘adjuvant analgesics’. This term 
is used to cover a range of medicines that are employed in the treatment 
of neuropathic pain, and in certain patients with CWP. It should be noted 
that these medicines should only be used as part of a holistic management 
plan, including physical and psychological therapies, sometimes in com-
bination with classical analgesics. Typically, these agents do not produce 
an immediate reduction in pain, but rather exert an analgesic effect over a 
longer timeframe through their effects on central processing of pain. They 
are of particular value when used in combination in the management of 
pain with a neuropathic component but require careful dose titration over a 
number of weeks, to reach a dose that balances efcacy with side-effects. 
While the response to individual agents is variable, it is often possible to 
nd an agent or combination of agents that works for most patients.
In the majority of current recommendations, including those from 
the International Association for the Study of Pain, rst-line treatments 
include antidepressants such as serotonin noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors (mainly duloxetine) or tri-cyclic anti-depressants such as ami-
triptyline and nortriptyline. Anti-epileptic agents such as gabapentin or 
pregabalin are also recommended for use as second-line treatments, 
although there is increasing concern around their abuse potential and 
association with an increase in drug deaths.
Opioid analgesics
Opioids have been used for centuries to reduce pain, and were origi-
nally obtained from the resin of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). 
Over recent years, new synthetic opioids such as fentanyl, oxycodon 
and tramadol have been introduced. The pharmacological effects of opi-
oids are mediated by binding to a number of opioid receptors which are 
G-protein-coupled receptors, as summarised in Box 8.8. When opioids 
bind to their receptors, several intracellular signalling pathways are acti-
vated, increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and 
altering calcium and potassium permeability of neurons. Opioids are tra-
ditionally divided into subclasses of weak opioids, such as codeine and 
dihydrocodeine, and strong opioids, such as morphine and oxycodone. 
While tramadol is a weak agonist at the mu opioid receptor, it is classi-
ed as a strong opioid in some countries. Codeine and dihydrocodeine 
are metabolised in the liver to morphine by CYP2D6 at a rate that is 
genetically determined. Similarly, tramadol is metabolised by CYP2D6 to 
yield o-desmethyltramadol, which has greater afnity than tramadol for 
opioid receptors. Up to 10% of people are rapid metabolisers and this 
may be associated with differences in efcacy and adverse effects of 
these drugs between individuals (see Box 2.5). The dosages and char-
acteristics of commonly prescribed opioids are shown in Box 8.9. There 
has been a large increase in the use of strong opioids for chronic pain 
over the last few decades, to the extent that it has been referred to as 
an ‘opioid epidemic’. A number of factors contribute to this, including a 
rising incidence of chronic pain with an ageing population, reluctance 
to use NSAIDs because of cardiovascular and gastrointestinal adverse 
effects, changes in patient expectation, societal attitudes and availa-
bility of new formulations of opioids. There is very limited evidence of 
short- to medium-term benet for strong opioids in low back pain and 
osteoarthritis with more recent longer-term evidence nding no improve-
ment in function, worse pain and increased side-effects in people on 
opioids compared to non-opioid analgesia. More good-quality studies of 
8.7  Pharmacological management of chronic pain
Drug or class of drug
Mechanism of action
Paracetamol
Central inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes
Mechanisms of action incompletely understood
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Inhibition of prostaglandin production
Opioids
Agonists at opioid receptors at multiple levels in the central nervous system
Blockade of ascending pain pathways
Ketamine
Antagonist of NMDA receptors
Reduction of central sensitisation
Gabapentin and pregabalin
Inhibition of glutamate release by primary afferent neurons at rst central synapse
Decrease of excitatory neuronal activity
Tricyclic antidepressants
Inhibition of serotonin and noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake at synapses in 
the spinal cord, and also potential effects in the limbic system
Inhibition of Na+ channels in neurons
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and  
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake inhibitors
Inhibition of serotonin and noradrenaline re-uptake at synapses in the spinal cord, 
and also potential effects in the limbic system
Lidocaine patches
Inhibition of Na+ in sensory neurons
Capsaicin patch
Activation of TRPV1 channels on subset of C bres, causing selective 
pharmacological denervation, with a decrease in intra-epidermal nerve bre 
density
Nerve blocks with lidocaine and glucocorticoids
Temporary denervation due to blockade of Na+ channels in sensory neurons
Local anti-inammatory effect
(COX = cyclo-oxygenase; NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartate; OP = opioid; TRPV1 = transient receptor potential vanilloid 1)

[[p194]]
164    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
long-term use are needed. Additionally, there is increasing concern about 
potential harm from long-term use. This includes addiction, dependence, 
opioid-induced hyperalgesia, endocrine dysfunction, fracture risk (espe-
cially in older people), overdose and cardiovascular events, with many 
of these adverse effects being dose-related. Doses of more than 50 mg 
morphine equivalents per day may be detrimental, with an increased in 
harm at doses of >90 mg morphine equivalents per day. National and 
international guidelines have changed to reect this, with most only rec-
ommending short- to medium-term use of opioids in carefully selected 
patients, as part of a holistic management plan. Regular review is essen-
tial to assess ongoing benet, and any opioid trial should have clear 
goals, and a plan for cessation if these are not reached. A suggested 
strategy for using strong opioids in chronic pain is shown in Box 8.10
Psychological therapies
The aims of psychological therapy are to increase coping skills and 
improve quality of life when facing the challenges of living with chronic 
pain. There are a range of ways in which psychological therapies can 
be delivered, including individual one-to-one sessions, group sessions, 
multidisciplinary pain management programmes, or web-based or tele-
phone-based programmes.
There is good evidence for the use of a cognitive behavioural therapy 
(CBT)-based approach for chronic pain, delivered either individually or in 
a group. The overall aim is to reduce negative thoughts and beliefs, and 
develop positive coping strategies. The interaction between thoughts, 
behaviours and emotions is explored, and a problem-focused approach 
is used in therapy delivery.
Relaxation techniques, such as biofeedback and mindfulness medi-
tation, require a degree of stillness and withdrawal, with regular practice 
required for sustained benet (see ‘Further information’). Acceptance 
and commitment therapy (ACT) is based on CBT principles but also uses 
components of mindfulness to improve psychological exibility in the 
context of living with chronic pain.
Stimulation therapies
These range from minimally invasive procedures like acupuncture and 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to more invasive 
techniques such as spinal cord stimulation.
8.8 Endogenous opioids and opioid receptors
Endogenous ligand
Receptor  
(IUPHAR)
Alternative  
classication
Potential sites
Pharmacological effects
Endomorphin 1 and 2
Met-enkephalin
Dynorphin A
Dynorphin B
MOP
Mu
Brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, 
immune cells
Analgesia, reduced gastrointestinal 
motility, respiratory depression, pruritus
Leu-enkephalin
Met-enkephalin
β-endorphin
DOP
Delta
Brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves
Analgesia, cardioprotection, 
thermoregulation
Dynorphin A
Dynorphin B
β-endorphin
KOP
Kappa
Brain (nucleus accumbens, neocortex, 
brainstem, cerebellum)
Analgesia, neuroendocrine 
(hypothalamic–pituitary axis), diuresis, 
dysphoria
Orphanin FQ (nociceptin)
NOP
Orphan
Nucleus raphe magnus, spinal cord, 
afferent neurons
Opioid tolerance, anxiety, depression, 
increased appetite
It is thought that opioids used clinically act through the MOP.
(IUPHAR = International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology)
8.9 Commonly used opioids
Opioid
Typical starting dose
Route
Oral morphine equivalent
Comments
Morphine
10 mg
Oral
10 mg
Most widely used
Codeine
30–60 mg; max 240 mg/24 hr
Oral
3–6 mg
Metabolised to morphine by CYP2D6 enzyme
Dihydrocodeine
60 mg; max 240 mg/24 hr
Oral
6 mg
Metabolised to morphine by CYP2D6 enzyme
Tramadol
100 mg; max 400 mg/24 hr
Oral
10 mg
Metabolised to o-desmethyl tramadol by 
CYP2D6 enzyme
Oxycodone
6.6 mg
Oral
10 mg
More predictable bioavailability than morphine
Buprenorphine
5 µg/hr
Transdermal
12 mg/day
Patch change usually every 7 days  
(frequency of change dependent on  
manufacturer and dose); advantages  
in impaired renal function
Fentanyl
12 µg/hr
Transdermal
30 mg/day
Use with care in opioid-naïve patients;  
patch change usually every 72 hrs
Tapentadol
50 mg; max 600 mg/24 hr
Oral
20 mg
Use with care in opioid-naïve patients
Hydromorphone
2 mg
Oral
10 mg
Semi-synthetic; hepatic metabolism
Morphine
3 mg
Subcutaneous, 
intramuscular, intravenous
10 mg
Mainly used for acute pain or palliative care

[[p195]]
Pain    165
8
Acupuncture (Fig. 8.6) has been used successfully in Eastern med-
icine for centuries. The mechanisms are incompletely understood, 
although endorphin release may explain, in part, the analgesic effect. 
Acupuncture is particularly effective in pain related to muscle spasm, 
with some evidence of short-term benet for patients with low back pain. 
Similar mechanisms probably apply to TENS, which is worth consider-
ing in many types of chronic pain. Neuromodulation, using implanted 
electrodes in the epidural space (or, more recently, adjacent to periph-
eral nerves), has been shown to be an effective option for neuropathic 
pain, including failed back surgery syndrome and chronic regional pain 
syndrome (see below). Specialist assessment and ongoing support is 
necessary, as there are many potential complications, including infection, 
malfunction and battery failure. The likelihood of success is increased 
when this technique is used within the context of multidisciplinary 
assessment and management.
Complementary and alternative therapies
Complementary techniques, such as herbal medicines, vitamins, 
homeopathy and reexology, have been used for the treatment of 
chronic pain but with little evidence of efcacy. It should be noted that 
herbal medications may interact with conventional drugs, causing 
adverse effects as the result of drug–drug interactions. St John’s wort 
(Hypericum perforatum) interacts with many drugs, including many 
antidepressants used in chronic pain, with increased serotonergic 
effects. Grapefruit may also increase the risk of serotonergic effects 
with some antidepressants. Ginkgo biloba may interact with paraceta-
mol to increase bleeding time.
Nerve blocks and nerve ablation
The use of specialist nerve blocks and nerve ablation therapy can be 
considered for pain that is unresponsive to less invasive approaches. 
If these are being considered, they should form part of a multidis-
ciplinary management plan, with the aim of restoring function and 
reducing pain. Local anaesthetic with or without depot glucocorticoid 
(non-particulate for neuraxial administration) can be effective in some 
circumstances. Examples include occipital nerve blocks for migraine 
or cervicogenic headache and trigger point injections for myofascial 
pain. If there is limited compression of a spinal nerve root, the nerve 
root injections into the epidural space may help settle symptoms and 
avoid the need for surgical intervention. Neurodestructive procedures 
can also be employed for intractable pain but are rarely used outside 
the palliative care setting.
Chronic pain syndromes
Chronic pain is a feature of several recognised syndromes, which are 
discussed in more detail below.
Neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is dened as ‘pain associated with a lesion or disease 
of the somatosensory nervous system’. Neuropathic pain may be acute, 
such as in sciatica, which occurs as the result of a prolapsed disc, but 
is most problematic when it becomes chronic. Neuropathic pain causes 
major morbidity; in a recent study, 17% of those affected rated their 
8.10 Use of opioids in chronic pain: Always use as part of a holistic management plan
Step
Factors to take into account
Comment
1. Assess suitability for opioids
Type of pain
Neuropathic pain and chronic widespread pain less likely to respond
Likelihood of dependence
Increased risk in those with history of alcohol and substance misuse
Co-morbidity
Avoid use in conditions where adverse effects more likely:
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic liver disease
Chronic kidney disease
2. Discuss with patient
Discuss potential benets
Improvement in pain
Improvement in function
Discuss adverse effects
Nausea
Constipation
Drowsiness
Establish treatment goal
Improvement in function
3. Plan treatment trial
Set timescale
Dene duration of treatment
Agree frequency of review
Agree on dose
Aim for lowest effective dose
Set upper dose limit
Agree on stopping rules
Consider stopping if:
Treatment goal is not met
There is no dose response
Tolerance develops rapidly
Fig. 8.6 Acupuncture.

[[p196]]
166    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
quality of life as ‘worse than death’. The clinical features of neuropathic 
pain are summarised in Box 8.11. The diagnosis is easily missed and 
so careful assessment is vital, in order to make the diagnosis in the rst 
place and then to direct management appropriately. An algorithm for the 
management of neuropathic pain is provided in Figure 8.7. It is important 
to recognise the negative impact of neuropathic pain on quality of life, 
which has been shown to be greater than with other types of chronic 
pain. As a result, appropriate support and multidisciplinary management 
should always be considered in addition to pharmacological therapies.
Complex regional pain syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a type of neuropathic pain that 
affects one or more limbs. It was previously termed reex sympathetic dystro-
phy (RSD), reecting the fact the disease is thought to be caused in part by an 
abnormality in the autonomic nervous system. It is a rare syndrome, occur-
ring in about 20 per 100 000 individuals, and is more common in females, 
typically presenting between the ages of 35 and 50. It is classied into type 
1 CRPS, which may be precipitated by a traumatic event such as a fracture 
but is not associated with peripheral nerve damage, and type 2 CRPS, which 
is associated with a peripheral nerve lesion. The diagnosis is primarily clinical, 
with the current standard being based on the Budapest criteria, as outlined in 
Box 8.12. Other diagnostic tools, none of which provide a denitive diagno-
sis, include thermography (temperature difference of >1°C), and electromy-
ography (if myoclonus is a feature). Increased tracer uptake on radionuclide 
bone scan and bone marrow oedema on MRI scan may be observed in 
CRPS but the diagnosis is primarily clinical, as outlined in Box 8.12
Prompt diagnosis and early treatment with physiotherapy, and addi-
tional approaches such as desensitisation, and graded motor imagery, 
may prevent progression of symptoms. Pharmacological management 
is similar to that for neuropathic pain. Specic approaches (with varia-
ble quality evidence) that may be considered include bisphosphonates 
or calcitonin. Intravenous regional block with guanethidine is not rec-
ommended, as there is limited evidence of benet, and an increased 
risk of adverse effects. If medical management is incompletely effective, 
consideration should be given to the appropriateness of a spinal cord 
stimulator, with reasonable evidence of efcacy.
Phantom limb pain
Phantom limb is a common complication of amputation, occurring 
in up to 70% of patients. It is a form of neuropathic pain but can 
8.11 Clinical features of neuropathic pain
Characteristic
Symptom or  
clinical feature*
Descriptive term
Spontaneous pain
No stimulus required  
to evoke pain
Positive sensory 
disturbance
Light touch painful
Pressure painful
Increased pain on 
pin-prick
Cool and warm 
temperatures  
painful
Dynamic allodynia
Punctate allodynia
Hyperalgesia
Thermal allodynia
Negative sensory 
disturbance
Numbness
Tingling
Loss of temperature 
sensitivity
Loss of sensation
Paraesthesia
Other features
Feeling of insects 
crawling over skin
Affected area feels 
abnormal
Formication
Dysaesthesia
*Symptoms may cluster, with a predominance of either positive or negative symptoms, or a 
mixture of both, reecting differences in underlying mechanisms.
Are there clinical features of
neuropathic pain? (Box 8.11)
Assess likelihood of
neuropathic pain
Tricyclic antidepressant
Gabapentin or pregabalin
SNRI
First line
(moderate to high
evidence; strong
recommendation)
Probable
Possible
Definite
Response?
Continue
Yes
Capsaicin patch
Lidocaine patch
Tramadol
Second line
(moderate evidence;
weak recommendation)
No
Yes
Response?
Continue
Botulinum toxin
Strong opioids
Third line
(moderate evidence;
weak recommendation)
No
Yes
Fig. 8.7 Algorithm for pharmacological management of neuropathic pain.
(SNRI = serotonin noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake inhibitor) Adapted from 
SIGN 136 and NeuPSIG recommendations; reproduced from Finnerup NB, Attal N, 
Haroutounian S, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Neurol 2015; 14:162–173, with permission 
from Elsevier.
be particularly distressing, as the pain is felt in the area where the 
absent limb was previously. Although usually presenting after limb 
amputation, reports of phantom pain in other body parts have been 
reported, such as phantom breast pain following mastectomy. It is 
very often associated with phantom sensations, which are described 
as non-painful sensations in the absent body part and pain in the 
stump.
Diagnostic nerve blocks may be helpful in directing therapy, with 
use of anti-neuropathic medications as outlined in Box 8.7. If there 
is a denite neuroma at the stump site that is interfering with pros-
thesis use, surgical review may be necessary. Management should 
use rehabilitation approaches with physical therapy. Additional 
approaches such as mirror visual feedback and desensitisation may 
also be considered.
Chronic widespread pain
Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is often associated with other features, 
such as fatigue and irritable bowel syndrome. Fibromyalgia is a subtype 
of CWP in which there are myofascial trigger points, and is often associ-
ated with sleep disturbance. Clinical features and management of bro-
myalgia are discussed in more detail in Chapter 26.
Joint hypermobility syndrome
Hypermobility can be associated with chronic musculoskeletal pain 
that often targets the joints and periarticular tissues. It is thought to be 
caused by abnormal stresses being placed on the joints and surrounding 

[[p197]]
Palliative care    167
8
soft tissues due to ligament laxity, although the mechanisms are poorly 
understood since many people with hypermobile joints do not suffer 
pain. It is described in more detail in Chapter 26
Palliative care
Palliative care is the term used to describe the active total care of 
patients with incurable disease. It can be distinguished from end-of-life 
care, which refers to the care of patients with far advanced, rapidly pro-
gressive disease that will soon prove fatal. The focus of palliative care 
is on symptom control alongside supportive care. While palliative care 
can and should be delivered at any stage of an incurable illness along-
side optimal disease control, the focus of end-of-life care is on quality of 
life rather than prolongation of life or cure. Palliative care encompasses 
a distinct body of knowledge and skills that all good physicians must 
possess to allow them to care effectively for patients. Palliative care is 
seen traditionally as a means of managing distress and symptoms in 
patients with cancer, when metastatic disease has been diagnosed and 
death is seen as inevitable. However, prognosis in metastatic cancers 
has evolved signicantly with the emergence of improved anti-cancer 
treatments, hence the principle of delivering palliative and supportive 
care whenever a patient needs it, as opposed to a specic stage of dis-
ease, is now even more important. There is also a growing recognition 
that the principles of palliative care and some of the interventions it uses 
are equally applicable in other conditions. Palliative care may be applied 
to any chronic disease state. Which elements are used will depend on 
the individual patient’s need.
For conditions other than cancer, the challenge is recognising when 
patients have entered the terminal phase of their illness, as there are 
fewer clear markers and the course of the illness is much more variable. 
Different chronic disease states progress at different rates, allowing some 
general trajectories of illness or dying to be dened (Fig. 8.8). These tra-
jectories are useful in decision-making for individual patients but also in 
the planning of services.
The ‘rapid decline’ trajectory following a gradual decline, as occurs 
in cancer, is the best-recognised pattern of the need for palliative care, 
although a similar trajectory may be observed in other conditions, 
such as motor neuron disease. Many traditional hospice services are 
designed to meet the needs of people on this trajectory. Over recent 
years, improvements in management of malignant disease mean that 
some types of cancer may follow an erratic or intermittent decline 
trajectory.
Many chronic diseases, such as advanced chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease (COPD) and intractable congestive heart failure, carry 
as high a burden of symptoms as cancer, as well as psychological and 
family distress. The ‘palliative phase’ of these illnesses may be more dif-
cult to identify because of periods of relative stability interspersed with 
acute episodes of severe illness. However, it is still possible to recognise 
those patients who may benet from a palliative approach to their care. 
The challenge is that symptom management needs to be delivered at 
the same time as treatment for acute exacerbations. This leads to dif-
cult decisions as to the balance between symptom relief and aggressive 
management of the underlying disease. The starting point of need for 
palliative care in these conditions is the point at which consideration of 
comfort and individual values becomes important in decision-making, 
often alongside management of the underlying disease.
The third major trajectory is categorised by years of poor function and 
frailty before a relatively short terminal period; it is exemplied by demen-
tia but is also increasingly true for patients with many different chronic 
illnesses. As medical advances extend survival, this mode of dying is 
being experienced by increasing numbers of people. The main challenge 
lies in providing nursing care and ensuring that plans are agreed for the 
time when medical intervention is no longer benecial.
In a situation where death is inevitable and foreseeable, palliative care 
aims to strike a balance between addressing the wishes, expectations 
and values of the patient with a realistic assessment of the benets of 
medical interventions. This often results in a greater focus on comfort, 
symptom control and support for patient and family, and may enable 
withdrawal of both futile and burdensome interventions. In cases of 
prognostic uncertainty, open, honest and gentle communication with 
the patient and family is important. The most common symptoms in 
palliative care are discussed in the next section. The central networks 
we have heard about above in relation to chronic pain also exist for all 
other symptoms. In addition there is an extra complexity in cancer as a 
result of the additional layer of biological complexity resulting from the 
factors released by the tumour such as pro-inammatory cytokines and 
the body’s response to these factors.
Presenting problems in palliative care
Pain
Pain is a common problem in palliative care. It has been estimated that 
about two-thirds of patients with cancer experience moderate or severe 
pain, and a quarter have three or more different sites of pain. Many of 
8.12 The Budapest criteria for diagnosis of complex regional 
pain syndrome (CRPS)
Category
Symptom or sign
Sensory
Allodynia to:
Temperature
Light touch
Deep somatic pressure
Movement
Hyperalgesia to pin-prick
Vasomotor
Temperature asymmetry
Skin colour change and/or 
asymmetry
Sudomotor
Oedema
Sweating change and/or  
asymmetry
Motor/trophic
Reduced range of motion
Motor dysfunction:
Weakness
Tremor
Dystonia
Trophic changes:
Hair
Nails
Skin
Type 1 CRPS: without evidence of major nerve damage; type 2 CRPS: evidence of major nerve 
damage. For a positive diagnosis, the patient should report at least one symptom in at least 
three out of the four categories, and at least one sign should be detected in two out of the four 
categories. Other causes that might explain the signs and symptoms should be excluded.
High
Death
Cancer
Organ failure
Physical and cognitive frailty
Function
Low
Time
Fig. 8.8 Archetypal trajectories of dying. From Murray SA, Kendall M, Boyd K, 
et al. Illness trajectories and palliative care. BMJ 2005; 330:7498; reproduced with 
permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.

[[p198]]
168    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
these are of a mixed aetiology and about half of patients with cancer-
associated pain have a neuropathic element.
Clinical assessment
The commonest barrier to assessment of pain is the development of idio-
syncratic shortcuts in the belief that these are also easier for the patient. 
A common example is, ‘How is your pain?’ The patient will often give a 
reex response such as, ‘OK’, which might be documented by the clini-
cian as 0, 1 or 2 out of 10. If the same patient were asked, ‘Have you had 
any pain in the last 24 hours, on a scale of 0–10, where 0 is none at all 
and 10 is the worst imaginable?’ the same patient might record a score 
as high as 8 or 9 out of 10. This emphasises the importance of using a 
validated question that screens for pain effectively.
Improved control of cancer-associated pain has been demonstrated 
with use of the Edinburgh Pain Assessment and management Tool (EPAT). 
This involves administration of a simple screening question about worst 
pain on a scale of 0–10 in the last 24 hours, followed by questions to 
identify specic pain/s such as neuropathic or bone, in addition to distress. 
The identied pains are linked to management algorithms. Review of pain 
and opioid side-effects completes the loop (see ‘Further information’).
Clinical features and suggested management strategies for common 
types of pain in cancer are shown in Box 8.13. The majority of patients 
with cancer-associated pain can be managed effectively using a step-
wise approach, as outlined below.
Management: pharmacological treatments
Pharmacological treatments are the mainstay of management in can-
cer-associated pain, however, they have to be underpinned by an 
appropriate assessment of pain and associated symptoms. In addition, 
non-pharmacological treatments and disease-modifying treatments run 
through each step of pain control. A stepwise approach is adopted, fol-
lowing the principles of the World Health Organization (WHO) analgesic 
ladder (Fig. 8.9), in which analgesia that is appropriate for the degree of 
pain is prescribed rst. Patients with mild pain should be started on a 
non-opioid analgesic drug, such as paracetamol (maximum: 1 g 4 times 
daily) or an NSAID (step 1). If the patient fails to respond adequately 
or has moderate pain, a weak opioid, such as codeine (60 mg 4 times 
daily), should be added (step 2). This can be prescribed separately or 
in the form of the compound analgesic co-codamol. If pain relief is still 
not achieved or if the patient has severe pain, a strong opioid should be 
substituted for the weak opioid (step 3). If the pain is severe at the outset, 
strong opioids should be prescribed and increased or titrated according 
to the patient’s response. It is important not to move ‘sideways’ (change 
from one drug to another of equal potency), which is a common problem 
during step 2 of the analgesic ladder.
In recent years there has been a tendency to use a low dose of a step 
3 opioid rather than a traditional step 2 opioid such as codeine. It has 
now been demonstrated that it is safe, effective and has cost savings 
to miss out step 2 of the analgesic ladder. This is of great importance in 
low- and middle-income countries where step 2 drugs are usually much 
more expensive than morphine.
Opioids
Opioid analgesia plays a key role in patients with moderate to severe 
pain. Its successful use depends on appropriate assessment and a 
detailed explanation to the patient and carer about the benets and 
potential side-effects of therapy. Morphine is the most commonly pre-
scribed strong opioid, although there are several alternatives, as outlined 
in Box 8.9
Oral morphine takes about 20 minutes to exert an effect and usu-
ally provides pain relief for 4 hours. Most patients with continuous pain 
should be prescribed oral morphine every 4 hours initially, as this will 
provide continuous pain relief over the whole 24-hour period. Controlled-
release morphine lasts for 12 or 24 hours, depending on the formulation, 
and if clinical circumstances dictate, a controlled-release formulation can 
be used to initiate and titrate morphine. The median effective morphine 
equivalent dose for cancer pain is about 200 mg per 24 hours.
In addition to the regular dose of morphine, an extra dose of imme-
diate-release (IR) morphine should be prescribed ‘as required’ for the 
treatment of breakthrough pain that has not been controlled by the reg-
ular prescription. As a rule of thumb, this additional dose should be one-
sixth of the total 24-hour dose of opioid. The frequency of breakthrough 
8.13 Common types of pain in cancer
Type of pain
Features
Management options
Bone pain
Tender area over bone
Possible pain on movement
NSAIDs
Bisphosphonates
Radiotherapy
Increased 
intracranial  
pressure
Headache, worse in the morning, 
associated with vomiting and 
occasionally delirium
Glucocorticoids
Radiotherapy
Opioid
Abdominal  
colic
Intermittent, severe,  
spasmodic, associated with 
nausea or vomiting
Antispasmodics
Hyoscine 
butylbromide
Antiemetic and opioid 
may be required for 
intestinal obstruction
Liver capsule  
pain
Right upper quadrant  
abdominal pain, often associated 
with tender enlarged liver
Responds poorly to opioids
Glucocorticoids
Neuropathic  
pain
Spontaneous pain
Light touch, pressure and 
temperature changes are painful; 
increased pain on pin-prick
Numbness, tingling or loss of 
temperature sensation
Skin feels abnormal
Anticonvulsants:
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Antidepressants:
Amitriptyline
Duloxetine
Ketamine
Ischaemic  
pain
Diffuse, severe, aching pain 
associated with evidence of poor 
perfusion
Responds poorly to opioids
NSAIDs
Ketamine
Incident pain
Episodic pain usually  
related to movement
Intermittent  
short-acting opioids
Nerve block
(NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
Opioid for moderate
to severe pain
  ± non-opioid
  ± adjuvant
Opioid for mild to
moderate pain
  ± non-opioid
  ± adjuvant
Non-opioid
± adjuvant
Pain persisting
or increasing
Pain persisting
or increasing
Freedom from
cancer pain
Pain
Fig. 8.9 The WHO analgesic ladder. From WHO. Cancer pain relief, 2nd edn. 
Geneva: WHO; 1996.

[[p199]]
Palliative care    169
8
doses should be dictated by their efcacy and any side-effects, rather 
than by a xed time interval. A patient may require breakthrough analge-
sia as frequently as hourly if pain is severe, but this should lead to early 
review of the regular prescription. The patient or carer should note the 
timing of any breakthrough doses and the reason for them. These should 
be reviewed daily and the regular 4-hourly dose increased for the next 
24 hours on the basis of:
 the frequency of and reasons for breakthrough analgesia
 the degree and acceptability of side-effects.
The regular dose should be increased by adding the total of the break-
through doses over the previous 24 hours, unless there are signicant 
problems with unacceptable side-effects. When the correct dose has 
been established, a continuous release (CR) preparation can be pre-
scribed, usually twice daily. Breakthrough analgesia used for move-
ment-related pain is generally not included in background opioid dose 
titration. Attempts to control movement-related pain with background 
opioid dose will usually lead to over-dosing and opioid-related side-ef-
fects. This can be a risk in metastatic bone pain.
Some patients may have concerns about using opioids and it is vital 
for these to be explored. Patients should be reassured that psycholog-
ical dependence is rare when opioids are used for cancer pain, unless 
a pre-existing dependence problem exists. Recent survey data from the 
United States have suggested that opioid abuse may occur in up to 20% 
of cancer patients, but to-date, these data have not been replicated in 
other countries. In fact, the majority of the world’s population do not have 
any access to opioids for cancer pain relief. Good prescribing practice, 
clear communication and reassessment of benets and side-effects are 
all critical in achieving good cancer pain relief. Pharmacological tolerance 
is not usually a clinically relevant problem; however, physical depend-
ence, which is physiological, as manifest by a physical withdrawal syn-
drome, can occur if opioids are suddenly discontinued.
Nearly all types of cancer pain respond to morphine to some degree 
but there is a spectrum of response, such that in some patients the 
dose of opioid required to control neuropathic pain and all elements of 
metastatic bone pain may be high and associated with unacceptable 
side-effects. In these situations, other methods of analgesia, both phar-
macological and non-pharmacological, should be explored and consid-
ered at an early stage.
The most effective and appropriate route of morphine administration 
is oral but transdermal preparations of strong opioids (usually fentanyl) 
are useful in certain situations, such as in patients with dysphagia or 
those who are reluctant to take tablets on a regular basis. Diamorphine 
is a highly soluble strong opioid used for subcutaneous infusions, par-
ticularly in the last few days of life, but is only available in certain coun-
tries and morphine is now the most commonly prescribed parenteral 
opioid.
Opioid-related adverse effects
Adverse effects are a common problem with opioids, especially on initiat-
ing treatment and on increasing the dose. The most common side-effects 
are nausea, drowsiness, constipation and dry mouth, as summarised 
in Box 8.14. Nausea and vomiting can occur initially but usually settle 
after a few days. Drowsiness is usually transient at opioid initiation and 
dose increase. If it is persistent, an alternative opioid and/or a non-opioid 
should be considered. In acute dosing, respiratory depression can occur 
but this is rare in patients on regular opioids or in those starting on small, 
regular doses with appropriate titration.
Tolerance usually develops to nausea, vomiting and drowsiness but 
not to constipation or dry mouth. All patients should therefore be pre-
scribed a laxative, unless suffering from diarrhoea, and have access to 
an antiemetic and good mouth care, along with rationalisation of any 
concomitant medication that might exacerbate drowsiness. Newer 
developments include the use of preparations in which opioids are com-
bined with opioid antagonists, such as naloxone. The naloxone is poorly 
absorbed and does not antagonise the systemic analgesic effect but 
rather acts locally to block opioid receptors in the gut, thereby reduc-
ing opioid-related constipation. Vivid dreams, visual hallucinations (often 
consisting of a sense of movement at the periphery of vision), delirium 
and myoclonus are typical of opioid-related toxicity and, if present, 
require urgent reassessment of the opioid dose. Biochemistry should 
also be checked to exclude renal impairment, dehydration, electrolyte 
disturbance or hypercalcaemia.
Since opioid toxicity can occur at any dose, side-effects should be 
assessed regularly, but particularly after a dose increase. Pain should 
be reassessed to ensure that appropriate adjuvants are being used. 
Parenteral rehydration is often helpful to speed up excretion of active 
metabolites of morphine. The dose of opioid may need to be reduced or 
the opioid changed to a strong alternative.
Different opioids have different side-effect proles in different peo-
ple. If a patient develops side-effects, switching to an alternative strong 
opioid may be helpful. Options include oxycodone, transdermal fenta-
nyl, hydromorphone and occasionally methadone, any of which may 
produce a better balance of benet against side-effects. Fentanyl has 
no renally excreted active metabolites and may be particularly useful in 
patients with renal failure. Buprenorphine is also particularly useful in 
signicant renal impairment. It is possible to switch between opioids 
but great care must be taken when doing so to make sure the dose is 
correct and to avoid prescribing too much or too little opioid.
Adjuvant analgesics
An adjuvant analgesic is a drug that has a primary indication other than 
pain but which provides analgesia in some painful conditions and may 
enhance the effect of the primary analgesic. Commonly used adjuvant 
analgesics in the palliative care setting are shown in Box 8.15. Some 
adjuvant analgesics may enhance the side-effect prole of the primary 
analgesic, and dose reductions of opioids may be required when an 
adjuvant analgesic is added. At each step of the WHO analgesic ladder, 
an adjuvant analgesic should be considered, the choice depending on 
the type of pain.
Management: non-pharmacological treatments
Neurodestructive interventions
Neurodestructive techniques have an important role in the management 
of cancer pain, where life expectancy is limited. They should be used as 
part of an overall management plan and considered when the response 
to drug treatment has been inadequate. Intrathecal analgesia, delivered 
via either an external pump or a fully implanted device, is a good option, 
8.14 Opioid side-effects
Side-effect
Management
Constipation
Regular laxative
Opioid/naloxone oral combination, in resistant 
constipation
Dry mouth
Frequent sips of iced water, soft white parafn 
to lips, chlorhexidine mouthwashes twice daily, 
sugar-free gum, water or saliva sprays
Nausea/vomiting
Oral haloperidol 0.5–1 mg at night, oral 
metoclopramide 10 mg 3 times daily or oral 
domperidone 10 mg 3 times daily
If constant, haloperidol or levomepromazine may 
be given parenterally to break the nausea cycle
Sedation
Explanation is very important
Symptoms usually settle in a few days
Avoid other sedating medication where possible
Ensure appropriate use of adjuvant analgesics 
that can have an opioid-sparing effect
May require an alternative opioid

[[p200]]
170    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
particularly where life expectancy is more than 3 months. Coeliac plexus 
blocks can be helpful for visceral pain, such as in pancreatic cancer. 
Lateral cordotomy to disrupt the spinothalamic tracts (either open or per-
cutaneous) may be considered for unilateral chest wall pain, such as may 
occur in mesothelioma, where life expectancy is limited.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for pain from bone metastases 
(see Box 8.13) and can also be considered for metastatic involvement at 
other sites. All patients with pain secondary to bone metastases should 
be considered for palliative radiotherapy, which can usually be given in a 
single dose. Some patients experience a transient are of pain after radi-
otherapy and this can be managed by 24–48 hours of dexamethasone 
(4–8 mg once in the morning).
Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy has a key role in the multidisciplinary approach to a wide 
spectrum of cancer-related symptoms, including the prevention and 
management of pain, muscle spasm, reduced mobility, muscle wast-
ing and lymphoedema. Rehabilitation in palliative care has expanded 
and now includes pre-habilitation, which involves the use of proactive 
focused exercise to maintain muscle mass during cancer chemotherapy 
and in other chronic conditions such as COPD.
Psychological techniques
As with chronic pain, there is increasing use of psychological techniques 
in cancer pain management, which train the patient to use coping strat-
egies and behavioural techniques. Other issues related to the specic 
experience of a cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment may be complex, 
and individual therapy in addition to group-based approaches can be 
helpful.
Stimulation therapies
Acupuncture and TENS are low-risk stimulation therapies that may be 
useful in palliative care for management of pain and nausea. Both are 
particularly useful for secondary muscle spasm and TENS is increasingly 
used for bone pain.
Complementary and alternative therapies
Palliative care patients often seek symptom relief from both comple-
mentary and alternative therapies. While the evidence base is poorly 
8.15 Adjuvant analgesics in cancer pain
Drug
Example
Indications
Side-effects*
NSAIDs
Diclofenac
Bone metastases, soft tissue inltration,  
liver pain, inammatory pain
Gastric irritation and bleeding, uid retention, 
headache
Caution in renal impairment
Glucocorticoids
Dexamethasone 8–16 mg per day,  
titrated to lowest dose that controls  
pain
Raised intracranial pressure, nerve 
compression, soft tissue inltration,  
liver pain
Gastric irritation if used together with 
NSAID, uid retention, proximal muscle 
myopathy, delirium, Cushingoid appearance, 
candidiasis, hyperglycaemia
Anticonvulsants
Evidence strongest for:
Duloxetine  
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Neuropathic pain of any aetiology
Mild sedation, tremor, delirium
Exacerbation of opioid-related side-effects
Tricyclic antidepressants
Amitriptyline
Nortriptyline (less sedative)
Neuropathic pain of any aetiology
Sedation, dizziness, delirium, dry mouth, 
constipation, urinary retention
Avoid in cardiac disease
Exacerbation of opioid-related side-effects
NMDA receptor blockers
Ketamine
Severe neuropathic pain (only under  
specialist supervision)
Delirium, anxiety, agitation, hypertension
*In old age, all drugs can cause delirium.
(NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartate; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
developed, individual patients can gain signicant benets from the 
complementary therapies as outlined earlier in this chapter. It is critically 
important that patients are encouraged to discuss any alternative med-
icines they are considering, given the potential interactions with other 
therapies.
Breathlessness
Breathlessness is one of the most common symptoms in palliative care 
and is distressing for both patients and carers. Patients with breathless-
ness should be fully assessed to determine whether there is a reversible 
cause, such as a pleural effusion, heart failure or bronchospasm; if so, 
this should be managed in the normal way. If symptoms persist, addi-
tional measures may be necessary. There are many potential causes of 
dyspnoea in cancer patients and in other chronic diseases; apart from 
direct involvement of the lungs, muscle loss secondary to cachexia, anx-
iety and fear can all contribute. A cycle of panic and breathlessness, 
often associated with fear of dying, can be dominant. Exploration of 
precipitating factors is important and patient education about breath-
lessness and effective breathing has been shown to be effective. Non-
pharmacological approaches that include using a hand-held fan, pacing 
and following a tailored exercise programme can help. There is no evi-
dence to suggest that oxygen therapy reduces the sensation of breath-
lessness in advanced cancer any better than cool airow, and oxygen is 
indicated only if there is signicant hypoxia. Opioids, through both their 
central and their peripheral action, can palliate breathlessness. Both oral 
and parenteral opioids are effective and are now licensed for this indica-
tion in Australia. A low dose should be used initially and titrated against 
symptoms, unless opioids are already being prescribed for pain, in which 
case the existing dose can be increased further. If anxiety is considered 
to be playing a signicant role, a quick-acting benzodiazepine, such as 
lorazepam (used sublingually for rapid absorption), may also be useful.
Cough
Persistent unproductive cough can be helped by opioids, which have 
an antitussive effect. Troublesome respiratory secretions can be treated 
with hyoscine hydrobromide (400–600 µg every 4–8 hours), although 
dry mouth is a common adverse effect. As an alternative, glycopyrro-
nium can be useful and is given by subcutaneous infusion (0.6–1.2 mg in 
24 hours).

[[p201]]
Palliative care    171
8
Nausea and vomiting
The presentation of nausea and vomiting differs depending on the under-
lying cause, of which there are many. Large-volume vomiting with little 
nausea is common in intestinal obstruction, whereas constant nau-
sea with little or no vomiting is often due to metabolic abnormalities or 
adverse effects of drugs. Vomiting related to raised intracranial pressure 
is worse in the morning. Different receptors are activated, depending on 
the cause or causes of the nausea (Fig. 8.10). For example, dopamine 
receptors in the chemotactic trigger zone in the fourth ventricle are stim-
ulated by metabolic and drug causes of nausea, whereas gastric irritation 
stimulates histamine receptors in the vomiting centre via the vagus nerve. 
Reversible causes, such as hypercalcaemia and constipation, should be 
treated appropriately. Drug-induced causes should be considered and 
the offending drugs stopped if possible. As different classes of antiemetic 
drug act at different receptors, antiemetic therapy should be based on 
a careful assessment of the probable causes and a rational decision to 
use a particular class of drug (Box 8.16). The subcutaneous route is often 
required initially to overcome gastric stasis and poor absorption of oral 
medicines.
Gastrointestinal obstruction
Gastrointestinal obstruction is a frequent complication of intra-abdomi-
nal cancer. Patients may have multiple levels of obstruction and symp-
toms may vary greatly in nature and severity. Surgical mortality is high 
in patients with advanced disease and obstruction should normally be 
managed without surgery. The key to effective management is to address 
the presenting symptoms – colic, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, 
intestinal secretions – individually or in combination, using parenteral 
drugs that do not cause or worsen other symptoms. This can be prob-
lematic when a specic treatment worsens another symptom. Cyclizine 
improves nausea and colic responds well to anticholinergic agents, such 
as hyoscine butylbromide, but both slow gut motility. Nausea will improve 
with metoclopramide, although this is usually contraindicated in the pres-
ence of colic because of its prokinetic effect. There is some low-quality 
evidence that glucocorticoids (dexamethasone 8 mg) can shorten the 
length of obstructive episodes. Somatostatin analogues, such as octre-
otide, will reduce intestinal secretions and therefore large-volume vomits. 
Occasionally, a nasogastric tube is required to reduce gaseous or uid 
distension.
Weight loss
Patients with cancer lose weight for a variety of reasons, including 
reduced appetite or the effects of drug treatment, or as a consequence of 
low mood and anxiety. There is, however, a particularly challenging syn-
drome associated with weight loss, which is known as cancer cachexia. 
This results from an alteration of metabolism caused by a complex inter-
action of tumour-related factors and the body’s response to these fac-
tors, resulting in muscle loss, along with anorexia. Treatment involves 
prescribing exercise to maintain muscle mass and strengthen muscles, 
ensuring that there is an adequate calorie intake and providing nutri-
tional supplements. Anti-inammatory medication to attenuate systemic 
inammation is the subject of research and many patients self-medicate 
with sh oil. Glucocorticoids can temporarily boost appetite and general 
well-being but may cause false weight gain by promoting uid retention. 
Their benets need to be weighed against the risk of side-effects, and 
glucocorticoids should generally be used on a short-term basis only.
Anxiety and depression
Anxiety and depression are common in palliative care but the diagnosis 
may be difcult, since the physical symptoms of depression are similar 
to those of advanced cancer. It is therefore important to acknowledge 
that these symptoms are not inevitable in advanced cancer. Patients 
should still expect to look forward to things and to enjoy them, within the 
context of the situation. Simply asking the question ‘Do you think you 
are depressed?’ can be very useful in deciding with the patient whether 
antidepressants or psychological interventions may be of benet. In this 
regard, psycho-oncology has been evolving rapidly and there is now 
good evidence for the role of ‘talk therapy’ in palliative care, along with 
other appropriate management of anxiety and depression. If antidepres-
sants are required, citalopram and mirtazapine are good choices since 
they are generally well tolerated in patients with advanced disease.
Delirium and agitation
Many patients become confused or agitated in the last days of life. It 
is important to identify and treat potentially reversible causes unless 
the patient is too close to death for this to be feasible. Early diagno-
sis and effective management of delirium are extremely important. As in 
Higher centres
Vestibular input
Vomiting centre
H1, ACh, 5-HT
Chemotactic trigger
zone
D2, 5-HT
Vagal
afferents
Metabolic
toxins
Chemoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
Retroperistalsis
Gastric pyloric
contraction
Abdominal and
thoracic wall
contraction
Peripheral
circulation
Fig. 8.10 Mechanisms of nausea. (ACh = acetylcholine; D2 = dopamine;  
5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; H1 = histamine)
8.16 Receptor site activity of antiemetic drugs
Area
Receptors
Drugs
Chemotactic trigger zone
Dopamine2
5-HT
Haloperidol
Metoclopramide
Vomiting centre
Histamine1
Acetylcholine
Cyclizine
Levomepromazine
Hyoscine
Gut (gastric stasis)
Metoclopramide
Gut distension (vagal 
stimulation)
Histamine1
Cyclizine
Gut (chemoreceptors)
5-HT
Levomepromazine
(5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin)

[[p202]]
172    PAIN AND PALLIATIVE CARE
other palliative situations, it may not be possible to identify and treat the 
underlying cause, and the focus of management should be to ensure 
that the patient is comfortable. It is important to distinguish between 
behavioural change due to pain and that due to delirium, as opioids 
will improve one and worsen the other. The management of delirium is 
detailed in Chapter 34. It is important, even in the care of the actively 
dying patient, to treat delirium with antipsychotic medicines, such as 
haloperidol, or olanzapine if under 70 years, rather than to regard it as 
distress or anxiety and use benzodiazepines only.
Dehydration
Deciding whether to give intravenous uids can be difcult when a 
patient is very unwell and the prognosis is uncertain. A patient with a 
major stroke, who is unable to swallow but is expected to survive the 
event, will develop renal impairment and thirst if not given uids and 
should be hydrated. On the other hand, when a patient has been deteri-
orating and is clearly dying, parenteral hydration needs very careful con-
sideration and it is very important to manage this on an individual basis. 
Patient comfort and avoidance of distress in the family are the primary 
aims. Where a patient and family are happy with meticulous oral hygiene 
and care to reduce the sensation of dryness in the mouth, this is usually 
more appropriate and effective at the end of life than parenteral hydra-
tion, which by itself will not necessarily improve the sensation of dryness. 
In some patients, parenteral hydration will simply exacerbate pooling 
of secretions, causing noisy and distressing breathing. Each decision 
should be individual and discussed with the patient’s family.
Death and dying
Planning for dying
There have been dramatic improvements in the medical treatment and 
care of patients with cancer and other illnesses over recent years but the 
inescapable fact remains that everyone will die at some time. Planning 
for death should be actively considered in patients with chronic dis-
eases when the death is considered to be foreseeable or inevitable. 
Doctors rarely know exactly when a patient will die but are usually 
aware that an individual is about to die and that medical interventions 
are unlikely to extend life or improve its quality signicantly. Most people 
wish their doctors to be honest about this situation to allow them time 
to think ahead, make plans and address practical issues. A few do 
not wish to discuss future deterioration or death; if this is felt to be the 
case, avoidance of discussion should be respected. For doctors, it is 
helpful to understand an individual’s wishes and values about medical 
interventions at this time, as this can help guide decisions about inter-
ventions. It is important to distinguish between interventions that will 
not provide clinical benet (a medical decision) and those that do not 
confer sufcient benet to be worthwhile (a decision that can only be 
reached with a patient’s involvement and consent). A common exam-
ple of this would be decisions about not attempting cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation.
In general, people wish for a dignied and peaceful death and most, 
but not all, prefer to die at home. Families also are grateful for the chance 
to prepare themselves for the death of a relative, by timely and gentle 
discussion with the doctor or other health professionals. Early discussion 
and effective planning improve the chances that an individual’s wishes 
will be achieved. There are two important caveats: rstly, wishes can 
and do change as the terminal situation evolves, and secondly, planning 
in general can only be done over time as patients form a relationship 
with professionals and evolve an understanding of the situation in which 
they nd themselves. Attempts to carry out and nalise advanced care 
planning at a single consultation, especially if a rst meeting, are usually 
unsatisfactory.
Structures for assessment and planning around end-of-life care are 
for guidance only and the focus should evolve with the individual patient.
Diagnosing dying
When patients with cancer or other conditions become bed-bound, 
semi-comatose, unable to take tablets and only able to take sips of 
water, with no reversible cause, they are likely to be dying and many will 
have died within 2 days. Doctors are sometimes poor at recognising this 
and should be alert to the views of other members of the multidisciplinary 
team. A clear decision that the patient is dying should be agreed and 
recorded.
Management of dying
Once the conclusion has been reached that a patient is going to die in 
days to a few weeks, there is a signicant shift in management (Box 8.17). 
Symptom control, relief of distress and care for the family become the 
most important elements of care. Medication and investigation are justi-
able only if they contribute to these ends. When patients can no longer 
drink because they are dying, intravenous uids are usually not neces-
sary and may cause worsening of bronchial secretions; however, this is 
a decision that can be made only on an individual basis. Management 
should not be changed without discussion with the patient and/or family. 
Medicines should always be prescribed for the relief of symptoms. For 
example, morphine or diamorphine may be used to control pain, levo-
mepromazine to control nausea, haloperidol to treat delirium, diazepam 
or midazolam to treat distress, and hyoscine hydrobromide to reduce 
respiratory secretions. Side-effects, such as drowsiness, may be accept-
able if the principal aim of relieving distress is achieved. It is important to 
discuss and agree the aims of care with the patient’s family. Poor com-
munication with families at this time is one of the most common reasons 
for family distress afterwards and for formal complaints.
Ethical considerations
The overwhelming force in caring for any patient must be to listen to 
that patient and family and take their wishes on board. Patients know 
8.17 How to manage a patient who is dying
Patient and family awareness
Assess patient’s and family’s awareness of the situation
Ensure patient, if able, and family understand plan of care
Medical interventions
Stop non-essential medications that do not contribute to symptom control
Stop inappropriate investigations and interventions, including routine 
observations
Resuscitation
Complete Do Not Attempt Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (DNACPR) form
Deactivate implantable debrillator
Symptom control
Ensure availability of parenteral medication for symptom relief
Support for family
Make sure you have contact details for family, that you know when they want to 
be contacted and that they are aware of facilities available to them
Religious and spiritual needs
Make sure any particular wishes are identied and followed
Ongoing assessment
Family’s awareness of condition
Management of symptoms
Need for parenteral hydration
Care after death
Make sure family know what they have to do
Notify other appropriate health professionals

[[p203]]
Further information    173
8
when health-care professionals are just receiving the information, as 
opposed to receiving and understanding the information in the context 
of the patient, their illness and needs, their carers and the socioeco-
nomic context. It is impossible to provide holistic care for a patient with-
out this comprehension. Every patient is unique and it is important to 
avoid slipping into a tick-box mentality in addressing items that should 
be covered in patients with advanced, incurable disease. While the key 
to successful palliative care is effective interdisciplinary working, every 
patient needs to know who has overall responsibility for their care. Trust 
in the whole team will come through a solid lead working with a team 
who are appropriately informed and in sympathy with the patient’s situ-
ation, each having a clear role.
Families and other carers are often unprepared for the challenge of 
caring for a dying person. It can be an exhausting experience, both 
emotionally and physically, and without a critical number of carers battle 
fatigue can ensue, resulting in urgent admissions. With much discus-
sion about advance directives, we should not lose sight of the reality of 
changing circumstances and wishes. Good anticipatory care means not 
just providing for new physical symptoms, but also planning for any time 
when care at home becomes no longer possible.
Capacity and advance directives
The wishes of the patient are paramount in Western societies, whereas 
in other cultures the views of the family are equally important. If a patient 
is unable to express their view because of communication or cognitive 
impairment, that person is said to lack ‘capacity’. In order to decide what 
the patient would have wished, as much information as possible should 
be gained about any previously expressed wishes, along with the views 
of relatives and other health professionals. An advance directive is a pre-
viously recorded, written document of a patient’s wishes. It should carry 
the same weight in decision-making as a patient’s expressed wishes at 
that time, but may not be sufciently specic to be used in a particular 
clinical situation. The legal framework for decision-making varies in 
different countries.
Euthanasia
In the UK and Europe, between 3% and 6% of dying patients will ask 
a doctor to end their life. Many of these requests are transient; some 
are associated with poor control of physical symptoms or a depressive 
illness. All expressions of a wish to die are an opportunity to help the 
patient discuss and address unresolved issues and problems. Reversible 
causes, such as pain or depression, should be treated. Sometimes, 
patients may choose to discontinue life-prolonging treatments, such as 
diuretics or anticoagulation, following discussion and the provision of 
adequate alternative symptom control. However, there remain a small 
number of patients who have a sustained, competent wish to end their 
lives, despite good control of physical symptoms. Euthanasia is now 
permitted or legal under certain circumstances in some countries but 
remains illegal in many others; public, ethical and legal debate over this 
issue continues and is often inuenced by many complex non-palliative 
care issues. The European Association for Palliative Care does not see 
euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide as part of the role of palliative 
care physicians. The British Medical Association (BMA) has published 
results from its recent poll on assisted dying in the BMJ (8 October 2020). 
Respect for others’ freedom is reected in this poll as, even though 50% 
supported a change in the law to permit assisted dying, only 36% of 
those polled would be personally willing to prescribe lethal drugs. The 
results were similar for euthanasia, with 37% supporting a change in 
the law, but only 26% willing to participate in any way in the process of 
administering drugs with the intention of ending an eligible patient’s life. It 
can be inferred from the poll, that although some BMA members would 
support a legal framework, thereby respecting freedom of opinion and 
demonstrating a toleration of others’ views, the majority would not be 
prepared to be involved in assisted dying or in euthanasia themselves, 
even if legal (see ‘Further information’).
Further information
Journal articles
Fallon M, Walker J, Colvin L, Rodriguez A, Murray G, Sharpe M, on behalf of the 
EPAT© Study Group. Does the institutionalisation of pain assessment using the 
EPAT package reduce pain in cancer unit inpatients more than usual care; a 
cluster randomised trial. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(13):1284–1290.
Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, etal. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic 
pain in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 
2015;14:162–173. A comprehensive, high-quality review of the current 
evidence for the pharmacological management of neuropathic pain .
McDonald J, Lambert DG. Opioid receptors. Cont Edu Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 
2005;5(1):22–25. https://bjaed.org/article/S1743-1816(17)30577-2/pdf.  
A concise review of opioid receptors.
Websites
bma.org.uk/advice-and-support/ethics/end-of-life/physician-assisted-dying-
survey Survey on UK doctors’ views on assisted dying.
breathworks-mindfulness.org.uk An online resource to support learning the use of 
mindfulness to deal with pain, illness or stress.
cuh.org.uk/breathlessness Information and resources from Cambridge University 
Hospital on managing breathlessness.
ed.ac.uk/cancer-centre/research/fallon-group/epat Edinburgh Pain Assessment 
Tool (EPAT)
hospiceuk.org A resource from UK hospices.
mdanderson.org Brief Pain Inventory (Short Form) questionnaire.
nhmrc.gov.au Australia and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists and Faculty of 
Pain Medicine. Acute pain management: scientic evidence, 3rd edn; 2010 .
npcrc.org Short-form McGill Pain questionnaire.
paintoolkit.org Pain toolkit self-help resource for managing pain.
palliativecareguidelines.scot.nhs.uk Regularly reviewed, evidence-based clinical 
guidelines.
palliativedrugs.com Practical information about drugs used in palliative care.
rcplondon.ac.uk/guidelines-policy/complex-regional-pain-syndrome-adults
Guidelines on CRPS, providing recommendations for diagnosis, treatment and 
referral in a variety of clinical settings (updated 2018).
sign.ac.uk/assets/sign136.pdf SIGN guideline 136 – Management of chronic pain 
(updated Aug 2019). A comprehensive review of the evidence for assessment 
and management of chronic pain.

[[p204]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p205]]
Multiple Choice Questions
8.1. A 45-year-old woman consults her GP with gradually worsening 
low back pain that started over 2 years ago. There is no radiation, 
nor any red ags. She can’t take non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) due to gastrointestinal upset. She takes 
co-codamol 30/500, at a dose of 8 tablets per day, with limited 
benet. She works as a cleaner in the local school and is a single 
parent, with three children ranging in age from 7 to 18. She has 
been off work for the last 6 months after a are-up that has not 
settled, and is worried about her job and her nances. Her mother 
lives nearby and is very supportive, helping out with child care and 
shopping. She saw a physiotherapist for one session, but didn’t 
go back as she felt the exercises were too hard and made the 
pain worse. She worries that if the pain gets worse she must be 
damaging her back, and she spends much of her time in bed or 
lying on the couch. What management approach should be used 
to increase her physical activity?
 
A.  Refer back to the physiotherapist for more effective 
exercises
 
B.  Prescribe stronger analgesics, such as morphine, to control 
the pain better, and thus allow her to do more.
 
C.  Assess what barriers there are to increasing her physical 
activity before agreeing on management
 
D.  Refer for further investigations, such as X-ray or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), of her lumbar spine to exclude 
any sinister causes, such as malignancy, or to identify any 
surgical target
 
E.  Add in diazepam to help with muscle spasm and reduce her 
anxiety about the impact of the pain
Answer: C.
There is good evidence that increasing physical activity is an effective 
way to manage chronic pain, but it is acknowledged that there may be 
a number of barriers preventing people who live with chronic pain from 
doing this successfully. These can include fear avoidance, not pacing 
activities well, nancial problems or other commitments that prevent their 
ability to attend appointments or go to a leisure centre. Advice alone is 
not enough and personal preference/previous experience will impact on 
patient engagement. There is no one type of exercise that will work for 
everyone (see Box 8.6). Strong opioids are not recommended for long-
term use in chronic pain, and combining these with other sedative drugs 
may be harmful. There is no good evidence that benzodiazepines are 
helpful in chronic low back pain. Continued investigation in the absence 
of specic concerns is not recommended.
 8.2. A 27-year-old man was involved in a severe road trafc accident, 
and suffered multiple lower limb fractures requiring orthopaedic 
intervention and several surgeries. His pain control was challenging 
whilst he was an in-patient, and he was discharged on oramorph 
10–20 mg as required for pain, prescribed up to 6 times daily, plus 
MST 40 mg 2 times daily and paracetamol 1 g 4 times daily. The 
plan was that he would be reviewed in the orthopaedic clinic, but 
he defaulted from attending. He lived alone, with no family nearby 
or supportive friends. He attended his GP complaining of severe, 
poorly controlled pain, nightmares, ashbacks to the accident 
and with very poor sleep and low mood, to the extent that he felt 
that life was not worth living. He was asking for an increase in his 
oramorph to help him cope, as he had tried taking a higher dose 
(40 mg) and felt it was effective, especially in improving sleep. What 
would be the rst step in your management plan?
  
A.  Increase his oramorph as a short-term solution in order to 
relieve distress and improve sleep
B.  Assess suicide risk and institute appropriate urgent support 
if required
C.  Refer back to the orthopaedic team for consideration of 
further investigations or surgery
D.  Add in anti-neuropathic agents, such as gabapentin, in case 
there is a neuropathic component to his pain
E.  Refer for assessment and management of possible 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) syndrome
Answer: B.
This is the most urgent action as he has a number of risk factors, 
including co-morbid mental health issues, high levels of distress, iso-
lation, limited social support, being prescribed strong opioids and not 
using them according to prescribing advice. Suicide risk assessment 
should include risk factors, evidence of planning and means to carry it 
out, and protective factors. Further management depends on the degree 
and urgency of risk, ranging from urgent involvement of the duty mental 
health team to liaison with GP/other relevant health-care professionals 
and offering information on support available (local, telephone, online).
Increasing oramorph with the aim of improving sleep and/or mood 
would not be appropriate or safe (see Box 8.10). Similarly, adding in gab-
apentin may increase the risk of death, and further assessment of neuro-
pathic features would be needed if being considered at a later date (see 
Fig. 8.7). Additionally, consideration should be given to using controlled 
dispensing arrangements to help improve safety (e.g. daily pick-up from 
the pharmacy). Further orthopaedic involvement and treatment of PTSD 
symptoms would be appropriate, but do not address the immediate 
problem.
8.3. John is a 73-year-old, retired joiner with a 3-month history of 
right-sided chest pain and cough. He has been receiving palliative 
radiotherapy for right-sided Pancoast’s tumour. He lives with his 
wife, and his family are not nearby.
Timeline
 1. John was reviewed during radiotherapy because of pain in his right 
shoulder and arm. He experiences constant severe background 
pain, rated as 9/10. He also experiences intermittent, excruciating 
shooting pain associated with pins and needles and a tight sensa-
tion, rated as 10/10.
 2. John is unable to sleep. He says he feels miserable and hopeless, 
and that he ‘doesn’t look forward to anything, each day is a chal-
lenge’. He has also lost weight and has a poor appetite.
 3. His medication is:
Co-codamol (30/500 mg) 2 tablets 4 times a day
Laxidol (laxative) 1 sachet daily
 4. He was able to give a clear history that a codeine and paracetamol 
combination worked within 40 minutes, but lasted for just an hour, 
reducing background pain from 10/10 to 8/10. John has normal 
biochemistry.
Which of the following did John’s doctor suggest?
 
A.  Stop co-codamol and start titration with a strong opioid to  
5 mg of normal release morphine orally 6 times daily, with 
the same dose provided for breakthrough analgesia (1/6 of 
the total 24-hour dose). Advice with regard to continuing 
with the laxative and a metoclopramide made available in 
case of nausea. Arranged a review in 48 hours
 
B. As in answer A, but also continue with co-codamol
 
C.  His doctor was concerned about commencing a strong 
opioid too soon, as John was not yet actively dying. So, he 
decided to try tramadol instead of co-codamol.

[[p206]]
 
D.  In view of John’s mood and inability to sleep, analgesia 
should be left unchanged; however, night sedation and an 
antidepressant can be introduced
 
E.  The doctor knew it was important to control John’s pain as 
quickly as possible, therefore slow-release morphine 60 mg 
2 times daily was commenced
Answer: A.
Pain affects, and is affected by, many other symptoms and aspects of 
daily living. Time spent on the initial detailed assessment of all aspects of 
the patient is key to successful management. For John, rapid proposed 
solutions to his myriad of problems would only lead to therapeutic chaos. 
The key decision is what is the greatest driver of the symptoms and how 
does this potentially interact with other symptoms and distress.
Our patient had very severe pain with a strong neuropathic compo-
nent, as would be expected from pressure on and/or invasion of the 
brachial plexus by the tumour. It is not surprising that he was not sleep-
ing, because of this extremely severe pain, and felt thoroughly miserable 
and hopeless. His poor appetite and weight loss could be a result of 
the uncontrolled pain; however, it could also be the result of the cancer 
process via a cachexia mechanism. It is important to recognise that neu-
ropathic pain is particularly associated with mood disturbances.
When assessing complexities, it is important to ground decisions on 
information obtained directly from the patient. John was able to give a 
clear history that a codeine and paracetamol combination worked within 
40 minutes but lasted for just an hour, and the clue here is that his pain 
was at least partially opioid responsive. It is critical not to move sideways 
on an analgesic ladder and if maximum dose of codeine is not effective, 
the patient should move to a strong opioid, such as morphine. The usual 
starting dose in this situation of normal renal function and such severe 
pain should be 5 mg of normal release morphine orally 6 times daily. If 
starting modied-release morphine, the dose is 10–15 mg 2 times daily. 
For breakthrough analgesia the dose is usually 1/6 of the total 24-hour 
dose, so 5 mg in this case. The patient should be advised that if break-
through pain relief is required it will take 30 minutes to start having an 
effect. The patient should be instructed to take a careful note of duration 
onset and duration of effect of the regular dose, and frequency of onset 
and duration and effect of the breakthrough dose.
8.4. On review after 48 hours, John reported that his background pain 
reduced from 9/10 to 4/10 within 40 minutes of taking 5 mg of 
normal-release morphine. The improvement lasted for 2 hours, 
after which background pain returned to 9/10. A breakthrough 
dose of 5 mg immediate-release morphine then reduced 
background pain to 4/10 again and this lasted for another 2 hours. 
In total 5 regular doses and 6 breakthrough doses of 5 mg normal-
release morphine were used in 24 hours.
Crucially, there was no sedation, sleepiness or vivid dreams. Bowels 
were moving normally with the laxative prescribed and no nausea was 
present.
The severe, intermittent, shooting pain was less frequent and reduced 
from 10/10 to 5/10.
Sleep, appetite, mood and interactions with others were much 
improved.
What did John’s doctor decide to do next?
 
A.  Switch to slow-release morphine, 15 mg 2 times daily and 
continue to encourage use of breakthrough analgesia with  
5 mg normal release morphine as required
 
B. As A, but also add in amitriptyline 10 mg at bedtime
 
C.  Continue on normal-release morphine 5 mg 6 times daily 
and increase breakthrough to 10 mg normal release 
morphine as required and review in 48 hours
 
D.  Switch to slow-release morphine, 30 mg 2 times daily and 
prescribe normal-release morphine 10 mg for breakthrough 
pain
 
E.  No changes to opioid regimen, but add dexamethasone for 
brachial plexus pressure, appetite and general wellbeing
Answer: D.
The strong history provided by John is of an opioid-responsive pain. 
It is clear that a dose of 10 mg 6 times daily would bring background 
pain from 9/10 to 4/10. At present there are no opioid-related side 
effects, therefore a switch to a sustained-release morphine of 30 mg 
2 times daily is reasonable, instead of 10 mg normal-release 6 times 
daily. Breakthrough normal-release morphine should be increased to 10 
mg and used as required. Ongoing review of common opioid side effects 
is crucial.
On further review of pain relief, breakthrough opioid required, intermit-
tent component of pain and other symptoms, such as mood, appetite 
and weight, may lead to further manipulation of John’s management at 
follow-up.

[[p207]]
Acute medicine and 
critical illness
VR Tallentire
MJ MacMahon
Clinical examination in critical care 176
Monitoring 177
Acute medicine 178
The decision to admit to hospital 178
Ambulatory care 178
Presenting problems in acute medicine 178
Chest pain 179
Acute breathlessness 181
Anaphylaxis 183
Syncope/presyncope 184
Headache 186
Unilateral leg swelling 188
Acute abdomen 189
Identication and assessment of deterioration 191
Early warning scores and the role of the medical emergency team 191
Immediate assessment of the deteriorating patient 191
Selecting the appropriate location for ongoing management and anticipatory 
care planning 191
Common presentations of deterioration 191
Tachypnoea 193
Hypoxaemia 194
Tachycardia 195
Hypotension 195
Hypertension 197
Decreased conscious level 197
Decreased urine output/deteriorating renal function 198
Disorders causing critical illness 198
Sepsis and the systemic inammatory response 198
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 201
Acute circulatory failure (cardiogenic shock) 202
Cardiac arrest 202
Post cardiac arrest 205
Other causes of multi-organ failure 206
9
Critical care medicine 206
Decisions around intensive care admission 206
Stabilisation and institution of organ support 207
Respiratory support 207
Cardiovascular support 210
Renal support 212
Neurological support 212
Daily clinical management in intensive care 212
Clinical review 212
Infection surveillance 212
Sedation and analgesia 212
Delirium in intensive care 213
Weaning from respiratory support 213
Extubation 214
Tracheostomy 214
Nutrition 214
Other essential components of intensive care 214
Complications and outcomes of critical illness 214
Adverse neurological outcomes 215
Airway complications 215
Micro- and macrovascular complications 215
Other complications 216
The older patient 216
Withdrawal of active treatment and death in intensive care 216
Discharge from intensive care 217
Critical care scoring systems 218

[[p208]]
176    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Clinical examination in critical care
Airway
Is the airway patent?
Is the end-tidal CO2 trace
normal?
Are there any signs of airway
obstruction?
A
B
Circulation
Is the physiology normal
(heart rate, blood pressure,
peripheral temperature,
lactate, urine output)?
How much support is required
(inotrope,vasopressor)?
C
D
E
Glucose
What is the glucose level?
Is insulin being administered?
G
G
D
Haematology
What are the haemoglobin/
platelet levels?
Are there any signs of
bleeding?
H
Infection
What is the temperature?
Review recent infective
markers and trend
What antibiotics are being
given and what is the
duration of treatment?
I
Enteral/exposure
Feeding regimen
Stool frequency
Abdominal tenderness/bowel
sounds present?
Disability
Level of responsiveness
Delirium screen
Pupillary responses
Doses of sedative drugs
F Fluids, electrolytes and
renal system
What is the fluid balance?
Urine volume and colour?
Is there any oedema?
Review the renal biochemistry
and electrolyte levels
Breathing
Is the physiology normal
(SpO2, respiratory rate, tidal
volume)?
What is the level of support?
Are there any abnormal signs
on chest examination?
Review the ventilator settings,
arterial blood gases and
recent chest X-ray
F
E
C
B
A

[[p209]]
Monitoring    177
9
Basic principles
 Uses the different red and infrared  
absorption proles of oxyhaemoglobin  
and deoxyhaemoglobin to estimate  
arterial oxyhaemoglobin saturation  
(SaO2)
 Only pulsatile absorption is  
measured
 A poor trace correlates with poor  
perfusion
Sources of error
 Carboxyhaemoglobin – absorption prole is the 
same as oxyhaemoglobin: falsely elevated SpO2
 Methaemoglobinaemia – SpO2 will tend towards 
85%
 Ambient light/poor application of probe/severe 
tricuspid regurgitation (pulsatile venous ow): 
falsely depressed SpO2
 Reduced accuracy below 80% saturation
 Hyperbilirubinaemia does not affect SpO2
Monitoring
Electrocardiography
Heart rate, rhythm and QRS morphology
Arterial line trace
Size of the area under the curve is proportional to stroke
volume
Narrow peaks suggest low stroke volume as shown here
Oxygen saturation 
Saturation of haemoglobin measured by plethysmography
(SpO2). Gives an indication of adequacy of oxygenation,
and the quality of tissue perfusion can also be inferred –
a flat trace suggests poor peripheral perfusion
Central venous pressure trace
A non-specific guide to volume status and right ventricular
function. Increased values in fluid overload and right
ventricular failure
Capnography
Numerical value of end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) is less than
arterial PCO2 (PaCO2) by a variable amount. Shape of
trace can signify airway displacement/obstruction,
bronchospasm or a low cardiac output (as shown below)
kPa mmHg
Time (secs)
0
5
40
Normal
Steep ‘upstroke’
in early expiration
Bronchospasm
Shallow ‘upstroke’
in early expiration
Partial obstruction/displacement
of airway device
Decreasing cardiac output
Decreasing size of
ETCO2 waveform
No ventilation
(from any cause)
Bedside physiological data commonly monitored in an intensive care unit setting.
Pulse oximetry (SpO2)

[[p210]]
178    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Hospital medicine is becoming ever-more specialised and people are 
living longer while accruing increasing numbers of chronic disease diag-
noses. Rather than diminishing the role of the generalist, these factors 
paradoxically create a need for experts in the undifferentiated presenta-
tion. In the UK such physicians are known as ‘general physicians’, while 
in the United States they are referred to as ‘hospitalists’.
Acute illness can present in a large variety of ways, depending on the 
nature of the illness, the underlying health of the individual, and their cul-
tural and religious background. The skills of prompt diagnosis formation 
and provision of appropriate treatment rely on the integration of infor-
mation from all the available sources, along with careful consideration of 
underlying chronic health problems.
Patients who deteriorate while in hospital make up a small but impor-
tant cohort. If they are well managed, in-hospital cardiac arrest rates will 
be low. This can be achieved through the combined effects of prompt 
resuscitation and appropriate end-of-life decision-making. Early recog-
nition of deterioration by ward teams and initial management by health-
care professionals operating within a functioning rapid response system 
are the central tenets of any system designed to improve the outcomes 
of deteriorating ward patients.
Intensive care medicine has developed into a prominent specialty, 
central to the safe functioning of a modern acute hospital. Scientic 
endeavour has resulted in a much better understanding of the molecu-
lar pathophysiology of processes such as sepsis and acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, which account for much premature death worldwide.
Acute medicine
Acute medicine is the part of general medicine that is concerned with the 
immediate and early management of medical patients who require urgent 
care. As a specialty, it is closely aligned with emergency medicine and 
intensive care medicine, but is rmly rooted within general medicine. Acute 
physicians manage the adult medical take and lead the development of 
acute care pathways that aim to reduce variability, improve care and cut 
down hospital admissions. In order to achieve these aims, acute physicians 
must use their knowledge, combined with high-level clinical reasoning and 
decision-making skills, to minimise both diagnostic error and the risks of 
over-investigation. These concepts are explained more fully in Chapter 1
The decision to admit to hospital
Every patient presenting to hospital should be assessed by a clinician 
who is able to determine whether or not admission is required. The 
requirement for admission is determined by many factors, including the 
severity of illness, the patient's physiological reserve, the need for urgent 
investigations, the nature of proposed treatments and the patient's social 
circumstances. In many cases, it is clear early in the assessment process 
that a patient requires admission. In such cases, a move into a med-
ical receiving unit – often termed a medical admissions unit (MAU) or 
acute medical unit (AMU) – should be facilitated as soon as the initial 
assessment has been completed and urgent investigations and/or treat-
ments have been instigated. In hospitals where such units do not exist, 
patients will need to be moved to a downstream ward once treatment 
has been commenced and they have been deemed sufciently stable. In 
suspected cases of airborne-transmissible infectious diseases, patients 
should be isolated initially and may require cohorting in specic areas 
of the hospital once diagnoses have been conrmed. Following the ini-
tial assessment, it may be possible to discharge stable patients home 
with a plan for early follow-up (such as a rapid-access specialist clinic 
appointment).
Ambulatory care
In some hospitals, it is increasingly possible for patient care to be coordi-
nated in an ambulatory setting, negating the need for a patient to remain 
in hospital overnight. In the context of acute medicine, ambulatory care 
can be employed for conditions that are perceived by either the patient 
or the referring practitioner as requiring prompt clinical assessment by 
a competent decision-maker with access to appropriate diagnostic 
resources. The patient may return on several occasions for investigation, 
observation, consultation or treatment. Some presentations, such as a 
unilateral swollen leg (p. 188), lend themselves to this type of manage-
ment (Box 9.1). If indicated, a Doppler ultrasound can be arranged, and 
patients with conrmed deep vein thrombosis can be anticoagulated on 
an outpatient basis. Successful ambulatory care requires careful patient 
selection; while many patients may cherish the opportunity to sleep at 
home, others may nd frequent trips to hospital or clinic too difcult due 
to frailty, poor mobility or transport difculties.
Presenting problems in acute medicine
This section details some of the most common presentations to acute med-
icine. However, many people present to hospital with physical complaints 
that do not appear to be the symptoms of a medical condition, referred 
to as ‘medically unexplained’ or ‘functional’ symptoms (see Chs 23, 28
and 31). It is thought that such symptoms may account for up to half 
of all new visits to hospital in the UK. Rather than providing reassur-
ance, a lack of understanding of the cause of the symptoms can result in 
more distress for patients. When the unexplained symptoms relate to the 
nervous system (such as limb weakness, numbness, shaking or black-
outs), the term ‘functional neurological disorder’ is used (see p. 1152). 
Medically unexplained symptoms are more common in women, younger 
people, those who have previously suffered from depression or anxiety, 
recently bereaved people and those recovering from a recent physical 
9.1 Groups of patients who are potentially suitable for ambulatory care
Group
Example(s)
Quality and safety issues
Diagnostic exclusion group
Chest pain – possible myocardial infarction;  
breathlessness – possible pulmonary embolism
Even when a specic condition has been excluded, there is still  
a need to explain the patient's symptoms through the diagnostic  
process
Low-risk stratication group
Non-variceal upper gastrointestinal bleed with 
low Blatchford score (Box 23.16); community-
acquired pneumonia with low CURB-65 score 
(see Fig. 17.32)
Appropriate treatment plans should be in place
Specic procedure group
Replacement of percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG) tube; drainage of pleural 
effusion/ascites
The key to implementation is how ambulatory care for this group  
of patients can be delivered when they present out of hours
Outpatient group with  
supporting infrastructure
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT); cellulitis
These are distinct from the conditions listed above because the 
infrastructure required to manage them is quite different

[[p211]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    179
9
illness. For every acute medical presentation, there will be a cohort of 
patients for whom the diagnosis remains elusive. In such circumstances, 
consideration should be given to the potential harm of over-investiga-
tion and the alternative approaches required to manage medically unex-
plained symptoms. Further detail can be found on p. 1256.
Chest pain
Chest pain is a common symptom in patients presenting to hospital. The 
differential diagnosis is wide (Box 9.2), and a detailed history and thor-
ough clinical examination are paramount to ensure that the subsequent 
investigative pathway is appropriate.
Presentation
Chest ‘pain’ is clearly a subjective phenomenon and may be described 
by patients in a variety of different ways. Whether the patient describes 
‘pain’, ‘discomfort’ or ‘pressure’ in the chest, there are some key fea-
tures that must be elicited from the history.
Site and radiation
Pain secondary to myocardial ischaemia is typically located in the centre 
of the chest. It may radiate to the neck, jaw and upper or even lower 
arms. Occasionally, it may be experienced only at the sites of radiation or 
in the back. The pain of myocarditis or pericarditis is characteristically felt 
retrosternally, to the left of the sternum, or in the left or right shoulder. The 
severe pain of aortic dissection is typically central with radiation through 
to the back. Central chest pain may also occur with tumours affecting the 
mediastinum, oesophageal disease (p. 806) or disease of the thoracic 
aorta (p. 342). Pain situated over the left anterior chest and radiating 
laterally is unlikely to be due to cardiac ischaemia and may have many 
causes, including pleural or lung disorders, musculoskeletal problems or 
anxiety. Rarely, sharp, left-sided chest pain that is suggestive of a mus-
culoskeletal problem may be a feature of mitral valve prolapse (p. 455).
Characteristics
Pleurisy, a sharp or ‘catching’ chest pain aggravated by deep breathing 
or coughing, is indicative of respiratory pathology, particularly pulmonary 
infection or infarction. However, the pain associated with myocarditis 
or pericarditis is often also described as ‘sharp’ and may ‘catch’ dur-
ing inspiration, coughing or lying at. It typically varies in intensity with 
movement and the phase of respiration. A malignant tumour invading 
the chest wall or ribs can cause gnawing, continuous local pain. The 
pain of myocardial ischaemia is typically dull, constricting, choking or 
‘heavy’, and is usually described as squeezing, crushing, burning or ach-
ing. Patients often emphasise that it is a discomfort rather than a pain. 
Angina occurs during (not after) exertion and is promptly relieved (in less 
than 5 minutes) by rest. It may also be precipitated or exacerbated by 
emotion but tends to occur more readily during exertion, after a large 
meal or in a cold wind. In crescendo or unstable angina, similar pain may 
be precipitated by minimal exertion or at rest. The increase in venous 
return or preload induced by lying down may also be sufcient to provoke 
pain in vulnerable patients (decubitus angina). Patients with reversible 
airways obstruction, such as asthma, may also describe exertional chest 
tightness that is relieved by rest. This may be difcult to distinguish from 
myocardial ischaemia. Bronchospasm may be associated with wheeze, 
atopy and cough (p. 489). Musculoskeletal chest pain is variable in site 
and intensity but does not usually fall into any of the patterns described 
above. The pain may vary with posture or movement of the upper body, 
or be associated with a specic movement (bending, stretching, turning). 
Many minor soft tissue injuries are related to everyday activities, such as 
driving, manual work and sport.
Onset
The pain associated with myocardial infarction (MI) typically takes sev-
eral minutes or even longer to develop to its maximal intensity; similarly, 
angina builds up gradually in proportion to the intensity of exertion. Pain 
that occurs after, rather than during, exertion is usually musculoskele-
tal or psychological in origin. The pain of aortic dissection (severe and 
‘tearing’), massive pulmonary embolism (PE) or pneumothorax is usually 
very sudden in onset. Other causes of chest pain tend to develop more 
gradually, over hours or even days.
Associated features
The pain of MI, massive PE or aortic dissection is often accompanied by 
autonomic disturbance, including sweating, nausea and vomiting. Some 
patients describe a feeling of impending death, referred to as ‘angor 
animi’. Breathlessness, due to pulmonary congestion arising from transient 
ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction, is often a prominent feature of myo-
cardial ischaemia. Breathlessness may also accompany any of the res-
piratory causes of chest pain and can be associated with cough, wheeze 
or other respiratory symptoms. Patients with myocarditis or pericarditis 
may describe a prodromal viral illness. Gastrointestinal disorders, such as 
gastro-oesophageal reux or peptic ulceration, may present with chest 
pain that is hard to distinguish from myocardial ischaemia; it may even be 
precipitated by exercise and be relieved by nitrates. However, it is usually 
possible to elicit a history relating chest pain to supine posture or eating, 
drinking or oesophageal reux. The pain of gastro-oesophageal reux often 
radiates to the interscapular region and dysphagia may be present. Severe 
chest pain arising after retching or vomiting, or following oesophageal 
instrumentation, should raise the possibility of oesophageal perforation.
Anxiety-induced chest pain may be associated with breathlessness 
(without hypoxaemia), throat tightness, perioral tingling and other evi-
dence of emotional distress. It is important to remember, however, that 
chest pain itself can be an extremely frightening experience, and so psy-
chological and organic features often coexist. Anxiety may amplify the 
effects of organic disease and a confusing clinical picture may result.
9.2 Differential diagnosis of chest pain
Central
Cardiac
 Myocardial ischaemia (angina)
 Myocardial infarction
 Myocarditis
 Pericarditis
 Mitral valve prolapse syndrome
Aortic
 Aortic dissection
 Aortic aneurysm
Oesophageal
 Oesophagitis
 Oesophageal spasm
 Mallory–Weiss syndrome
 Oesophageal perforation (Boerhaave 
syndrome)
Pulmonary embolus
Mediastinal
 Malignancy
Anxiety/emotion1
Peripheral
Lungs/pleura
 Pulmonary infarct
 Pneumonia
 Pneumothorax
 Malignancy
 Tuberculosis
 Connective tissue disorders
Musculoskeletal2
 Osteoarthritis
 Rib fracture/injury
 Acute vertebral fracture
 Costochondritis (Tietze syndrome)
 Intercostal muscle injury
 Epidemic myalgia (Bornholm disease)
Neurological
 Prolapsed intervertebral disc
 Herpes zoster
1May also cause peripheral chest pain. 2Can sometimes cause central chest pain.

[[p212]]
180    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
A detailed and clear history is key to narrowing the differential diagno-
sis of chest pain. Figure 9.1 shows how certain features of the history, 
particularly when combined, can tip the balance of evidence towards or 
away from ischaemic cardiac chest pain.
Clinical assessment
Cardiorespiratory examination may detect clinical signs that help guide 
ongoing investigation. Patients with a history compatible with myocardial 
ischaemia should have a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed 
while clinical examination proceeds. Ongoing chest pain with clinical fea-
tures of shock or pulmonary oedema, or ECG evidence of ventricular 
arrhythmia or complete heart block, should prompt urgent cardiology 
review and referral to a higher level of care.
Chest pain that is accompanied by clinical evidence of increased intra-
cardiac pressure (especially a raised jugular venous pressure) increases 
the likelihood of myocardial ischaemia or massive PE. The legs should be 
examined for clinical evidence of deep vein thrombosis.
A large pneumothorax should be evident on clinical examination, with 
absent breath sounds and a hyper-resonant percussion note on the 
affected side. Other unilateral chest signs, such as bronchial breathing 
or crackles, are most likely to indicate a respiratory tract infection, and a 
chest X-ray should be expedited.
Pericarditis may be accompanied by a pericardial friction rub. In aortic 
dissection, syncope or neurological decit may occur. Examination may 
reveal asymmetrical pulses, features of undiagnosed Marfan syndrome 
(p. 445) or a new early diastolic murmur representing aortic regurgitation.
Any disease process involving the pleura may restrict rib movement 
and a pleural rub may be audible on the affected side. Local tenderness 
of the chest wall is likely to indicate musculoskeletal pain but can also be 
found in pulmonary infarction.
Subdiaphragmatic inammatory pathology, such as a liver abscess, 
cholecystitis or ascending cholangitis, can mimic pneumonia by causing 
fever, pleuritic chest pain and a small sympathetic pleural effusion, usu-
ally on the right. Likewise, acute pancreatitis can present with thoracic 
symptoms, and an amylase or lipase level should be requested where 
appropriate. It is imperative that the abdomen is examined routinely in all 
patients presenting with pleuritic chest pain.
Initial investigations
Chest X-ray, ECG and biomarkers (e.g. troponin, D-dimer) play a piv-
otal role in the evaluation of chest pain. However, indiscriminate order-
ing of such investigations may result in diagnostic confusion and 
over-investigation. The choice of investigation(s) is intimately linked to the 
history and examination ndings. A chest X-ray and 12-lead ECG should 
be performed in the vast majority of patients presenting to hospital with 
chest pain. Pregnancy is not a contraindication to chest X-ray, but par-
ticular consideration should be given to whether the additional diagnostic 
information justies breast irradiation.
The chest X-ray may conrm the suspected diagnosis, particularly in 
the case of pneumonia. Small pneumothoraces are easily missed, as are 
rib fractures or small metastatic deposits, and all should be considered 
individually during chest X-ray review. A widened mediastinum suggests 
acute aortic dissection but a normal chest X-ray does not exclude the 
diagnosis. Provided it has been more than 1 hour since the onset of pain, 
chest X-ray in oesophageal rupture may reveal subcutaneous emphy-
sema, pneumomediastinum or a pleural effusion.
Patients with a history compatible with myocardial ischaemia require 
an urgent 12-lead ECG. Acute chest pain with ECG changes indicating 
a ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) suggests that the 
patient is likely to benet from immediate reperfusion therapy. Specic 
information relating to cocaine or amphetamine use should be sought, 
particularly in younger patients. In the context of a compatible history, 
an ECG showing ischaemic changes that do not meet STEMI criteria 
should prompt regular repeat ECGs and treatment for non-ST segment 
elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)/unstable angina. Measurement 
of serum troponin concentration on admission is often helpful in cases 
where there is diagnostic doubt, but a negative result should always 
prompt a repeat sample 6–12 hours after maximal pain. Acute coronary 
syndrome may be diagnosed with condence in patients with a convinc-
ing history of ischaemic pain (see Fig. 9.1) and either ECG evidence of 
ischaemia or an elevated serum troponin. If an elevated serum troponin is 
found in a patient who has an atypical history or is at low risk of ischae-
mic heart disease, then alternative causes of raised troponin should be 
considered (Box 9.3). Further management of acute coronary syndromes 
is discussed on page 432.
In the absence of convincing ECG evidence of myocardial ischaemia, 
other life-threatening causes of chest pain, such as aortic dissection, 
massive PE and oesophageal rupture, should be considered. Suspicion 
of aortic dissection (background of hypertension, trauma, pregnancy 
or previous aortic surgery) should prompt urgent thoracic computed 
tomography (CT) or transoesophageal echocardiography. An ECG in the 
context of massive PE most commonly reveals only a sinus tachycardia, 
but may show new right axis deviation, right bundle branch block or a 
dominant R wave in V1. The classical nding of S1Q3T3 (a deep S wave in 
Ischaemic
cardiac chest pain
Non-cardiac chest pain
Relieving factors
Respiratory, gastrointestinal,
locomotor or psychological
Rest
Quick response to nitrates
Precipitation
Spontaneous, not related to exertion,
provoked by posture, respiration or palpation
Precipitated by exertion
and/or emotion
Character
Tight, squeezing, choking
Radiation
Other or no radiation
Jaw/neck/shoulder/arm
(occasionally back)
Location
Peripheral, localised
Central, diffuse
Associated
features
Not relieved by rest
Variable or no response to nitrates
Breathlessness
Fig. 9.1 Identifying ischaemic cardiac pain: the ‘balance’ of evidence.

[[p213]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    181
9
lead I, with a Q wave and T wave inversion in lead III) is rare. If massive PE 
is suspected and the patient is haemodynamically unstable, a transthor-
acic echocardiogram, to seek evidence of right heart strain and exclude 
alternative diagnoses such as tamponade, is extremely useful.
If the patient is deemed to be at low risk of PE, a D-dimer test can 
be informative, as a negative result effectively excludes the diagnosis. 
The D-dimer test should be performed only if there is clinical suspicion 
of PE, as false-positive results can lead to unnecessary investigations. If 
the D-dimer is positive, there is high clinical suspicion, or there is other 
convincing evidence of PE (such as features of right heart strain on the 
ECG), prompt imaging should be arranged (p. 546 and Fig. 17.67).
Acute breathlessness
In acute breathlessness, the history, along with a rapid but careful exam-
ination, will usually suggest a diagnosis that can be conrmed by routine 
investigations including chest X-ray, 12-lead ECG and arterial blood gas 
(ABG) sampling.
Presentation
A key feature of the history is the speed of onset of breathlessness. Acute 
severe breathlessness (over minutes or hours) has a distinct differential 
diagnosis list to chronic exertional breathlessness. The presence of asso-
ciated cardiovascular (chest pain, palpitations, sweating and nausea) or 
respiratory (cough, wheeze, haemoptysis, stridor) symptoms can narrow 
the differential diagnosis yet further. A previous history of left ventricular 
dysfunction, asthma or exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is important. A high temperature, cough (productive or 
non-productive) and/or viral prodrome may indicate respiratory infection 
and, if so, relevant infection control precautions should be taken from ini-
tial assessment. In the severely ill patient, it may be necessary to obtain 
the history from accompanying witnesses. In children, the possibility of 
inhalation of a foreign body (Fig. 9.2) or acute epiglottitis should always be 
considered. There is often more than one underlying diagnosis; a thorough 
assessment should continue, even after a possible diagnosis has been 
reached, particularly if the severity of symptoms does not seem to be ade-
quately explained. The causes of acute severe breathlessness are covered 
here; chronic exertional dyspnoea is discussed further on page 489).
Clinical assessment
Airway obstruction, anaphylaxis and tension pneumothorax require 
immediate identication and treatment. If any of these is suspected, 
treatment should not be delayed while additional investigations are per-
formed, and anaesthetic support is likely to be required. In the absence of 
an immediately life-threatening cause, the following should be assessed 
and documented:
 level of consciousness
 degree of central cyanosis
 work of breathing (rate, depth, pattern, use of accessory muscles)
 adequacy of oxygenation (SpO2)
 ability to speak (in single words or sentences)
 cardiovascular status (heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure (BP) 
and peripheral perfusion).
Pulmonary oedema is suggested by a raised jugular venous pressure 
and bi-basal crackles or diffuse wheeze, while asthma or COPD is charac-
terised by wheeze and prolonged expiration. A hyper-resonant hemithorax 
with absent breath sounds raises the possibility of pneumothorax, while 
severe breathlessness with normal breath sounds may indicate PE. Leg 
swelling may suggest cardiac failure or, if asymmetrical, venous thrombosis.
The presence of wheeze is not always indicative of bronchospasm. In 
acute left heart failure, an increase in the left ventricular diastolic pressure 
causes the pressure in the left atrium, pulmonary veins and pulmonary 
capillaries to rise. When the hydrostatic pressure of the pulmonary capil-
laries exceeds the oncotic pressure of plasma (about 25–30 mmHg), uid 
moves from the capillaries into the interstitium. This stimulates respiration 
through a series of autonomic reexes, producing rapid, shallow respira-
tion, and congestion of the bronchial mucosa may cause wheeze (some-
times known as cardiac asthma). Sitting upright or standing may provide 
some relief by helping to reduce congestion at the apices of the lungs. 
The patient may be unable to speak and is typically distressed, agitated, 
sweaty and pale. Respiration is rapid, with recruitment of accessory 
muscles, coughing and wheezing. Sputum may be profuse, frothy and 
blood-streaked or pink. Extensive crepitations and rhonchi are usually 
audible in the chest and there may also be signs of right heart failure.
Any arrhythmia may cause breathlessness, but usually does so only 
if the heart is structurally abnormal, such as with the onset of atrial bril-
lation in a patient with mitral stenosis. In such cases, the classic mid-di-
astolic rumbling murmur may be heard. Patients sometimes describe 
chest tightness as ‘breathlessness’. However, myocardial ischaemia may 
also induce true breathlessness by provoking transient left ventricular 
dysfunction. When breathlessness is the dominant or sole feature of 
9.3 Causes of elevated serum troponin other than acute 
coronary syndrome
Cardiorespiratory causes
 Pulmonary embolism
 Acute pulmonary oedema
 Tachyarrhythmias
 Myocarditis/myopericarditis
 Aortic dissection
 Cardiac trauma
 Cardiac surgery/ablation
Non-cardiorespiratory causes
 Prolonged hypotension
 Severe sepsis
 Severe burns
 Stroke
 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
 End-stage renal failure
A
B
Fig. 9.2 Inhaled foreign body. 
covering mucous lm.

[[p214]]
182    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
myocardial ischaemia, it is known as ‘angina equivalent’. A history of 
chest tightness or close correlation with exercise should be sought.
Initial investigations
As shown in Box 9.4, amalgamation of a clear history and thorough 
clinical examination with chest X-ray, ECG and ABG ndings will usu-
ally indicate the primary cause of breathlessness. In cases of suspected 
infection, a viral throat swab should be obtained early in the course of 
the assessment; increasingly point-of-care testing of viral throat swabs is 
available, providing important and rapid diagnostic information. If avail-
able, sputum should be sent for culture. If bronchospasm is suspected, 
measurement of peak expiratory ow will assist in the assessment of 
severity and should be performed whenever possible.
An ABG will often provide additional information to SpO2 measure-
ment alone, particularly if there is clinical evidence (drowsiness, delirium, 
asterixis) or a strong likelihood of hypercapnia. An acute rise in PaCO2
will increase the HCO3  by only a small amount, resulting in inadequate 
buffering and acidaemia. Renal compensation and a large rise in HCO3
will take at least 12 hours. In acute type II respiratory failure (p. 496), the 
rate of rise of PaCO2 is a better indicator of severity than the absolute 
value. An ABG can also give a carboxyhaemoglobin level after smoke 
inhalation (although this can also be measured on a venous sample), and 
is central to the identication of metabolic acidosis or the diagnosis of 
psychogenic hyperventilation (see Box 9.4).
If pulmonary embolism is suspected, calculating pre-test probability 
(Ch. 1) is key. In a patient with a pre-test probability of less than 15%, 
the pulmonary embolism rule-out criteria (PERC) can rule out pulmonary 
embolism clinically, negating the need for further imaging, if none of the 
criteria listed in Box 9.5 is met. Further detail on the investigation and 
management of pulmonary embolus is given on page 546.
Procalcitonin (PCT) and N-terminal pro-hormone brain natriuretic pro-
tein (NT-proBNP) can be measured in venous blood. While these bio-
markers can give an indication of aetiology in shortness of breath, they 
are probably of more value in tracking clinical progression and response 
to treatment. Elevated PCT is a biomarker for bacterial infection and may 
be useful, in addition to clinical assessment, in helping decide the need 
for and duration of antibiotic therapy in patients with conrmed viral res-
piratory disease (such as COVID-19) who may have additional bacterial 
super-infection. Elevated NT-proBNP is suggestive of underlying left ven-
tricular failure (p. 393), although it can be elevated in other conditions 
such as renal failure, COPD, pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary 
embolism. Measurement of NT-proBNP may be considered if there is no 
clear-cut evidence of pulmonary oedema on a chest X-ray and can be 
particularly useful as a ‘rule-out’ test, as a normal NT-proBNP has high 
negative predictive value for heart failure. Individuals with suspected heart 
failure should undergo early echocardiography (p. 402).
CT imaging (with or without pulmonary angiography) is a useful 
investigation in many respiratory conditions as interstitial changes, 
tumours or consolidation may not be evident on chest X-ray. If breath-
lessness is suspected to be an ‘angina equivalent’, objective evidence 
9.5 PERC rule for pulmonary embolism
Rules out PE if none of the eight criteria is present and pre-test probability 
is less than or equal to 15% (1.8% was chosen as the point of equipoise 
between the benets and risks of further investigations for PE, and the benets 
and risks of not investigating further).
 Age ≥ 50
 Heart rate ≥ 100
 Oxygen saturation on room air < 95%
 Unilateral leg swelling
 Haemoptysis
 Recent surgery or trauma (≤ 4 weeks ago requiring hospitalisation)
 Prior venous thromboembolism (VTE)
 Hormone use (oral contraceptives), hormone replacement or oestrogenic 
hormone use in male or female patients
9.4 Clinical features in acute breathlessness
Condition
History
Signs
Chest X-ray
ABG
ECG
Pulmonary  
oedema
Chest pain, palpitations, 
orthopnoea, cardiac 
history*
Central cyanosis, ↑JVP, 
sweating, cool extremities, 
basal crackles*
Cardiomegaly,  
oedema/pleural  
effusions*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2
Sinus tachycardia, 
ischaemia*, arrhythmia
Massive  
pulmonary  
embolus
Risk factors, chest pain, 
pleurisy, syncope*, 
dizziness*
Central cyanosis, ↑JVP*, 
absence of signs in the 
lung*, shock (tachycardia, 
hypotension)
Often normal
Prominent hilar  
vessels, oligaemic  
lung elds*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2
Sinus tachycardia, 
RBBB, S1Q3T3
pattern↑T(V1–V4)
Acute severe  
asthma
History of asthma, 
asthma medications, 
wheeze*
Tachycardia, pulsus  
paradoxus, cyanosis (late), 
→JVP*, ↓peak ow,  
wheeze*
Hyperination only  
(unless complicated  
by pneumothorax)*
↓PaO2
Normal PaCO2
(↑PaCO2 in  
extremis)
Sinus tachycardia 
(bradycardia in 
extremis)
Acute  
exacerbation  
of COPD
Previous episodes*, 
smoker. If in type II 
respiratory failure, may 
be drowsy
Cyanosis, hyperination*, 
signs of CO2 retention (apping 
tremor, bounding pulses)*
Hyperination*, 
bullae, complicating 
pneumothorax
↓ or ↓↓PaO2
↑PaCO2 in type II failure  
± ↑H+, ↑HCO3  in  
chronic type II failure
Normal, or signs of right 
ventricular strain
Pneumonia/
lower 
respiratory tract 
infection
Prodromal illness*, 
fever*, rigors*, pleurisy*
Fever, delirium, pleural  
rub*, consolidation*, 
cyanosis (if severe)
Pneumonic  
consolidation*
↓PaO2
↓PaCO2 (↑ in extremis)
Tachycardia
Metabolic 
acidosis
Evidence of diabetes 
mellitus or renal 
disease, aspirin or 
ethylene glycol overdose
Fetor (ketones), hyperventilation 
without heart or lung signs*, 
dehydration*, air hunger
Normal
PaO2 normal
↓↓PaCO2, ↑H+
↓HCO3
Psychogenic
Previous episodes, 
digital or perioral 
dysaesthesia
No cyanosis, no heart or  
lung signs, carpopedal spasm
Normal
PaO2 normal*
↓↓PaCO2, ↓H+*
*Valuable discriminatory feature.
(ABG = arterial blood gas; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; JVP = jugular venous pressure; RBBB = right bundle branch block)

[[p215]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    183
9
of myocardial ischaemia from stress testing may help to establish the 
diagnosis, although coronary artery angiography (either by CT or car-
diac catheterisation) is often performed early in the investigation path-
way (p. 432).
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a potentially life-threatening, systemic allergic reaction 
characterised by a variable combination of circulatory collapse, bron-
chospasm, laryngeal stridor, angioedema and urticaria. The risk of death 
is increased in patients with pre-existing asthma, particularly if this is 
poorly controlled, and in situations where treatment with adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) is delayed.
Presentation
Anaphylaxis occurs when an allergen binds to and cross-links mem-
brane-bound IgE on mast cells in a susceptible individual, causing 
release of histamine, tryptase and other vasoactive mediators from mast 
cells. These mediators have a variety of effects, including vasodilatation, 
increased capillary permeability leading to hypotension, and broncho-
constriction. It can be difcult to distinguish IgE-mediated anaphylaxis 
clinically from non-specic degranulation of mast cells on exposure to 
drugs, chemicals or other triggers where IgE is not involved, previously 
known as anaphylactoid reactions.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of anaphylaxis are summarised in Figure 9.3. Several 
other conditions can mimic anaphylaxis and these are listed in Box 9.6
It is important to assess the severity of the reaction, and the time 
between allergen exposure and onset of symptoms provides a guide. 
Enquiry should be made about potential triggers. If a trigger is immedi-
ately obvious, a detailed history of the previous 24 hours may be helpful. 
The most common triggers of anaphylaxis are foods, latex, insect venom 
and drugs. A history of previous local allergic responses to the offending 
agent is common. The route of allergen exposure may inuence the prin-
cipal clinical features of a reaction; for example, if an allergen is inhaled, 
the major symptom is frequently wheezing. Features of anaphylaxis may 
overlap with the direct toxic effects of drugs and venoms (Chs 7 and 8). 
Potentiating factors, such as exercise alcohol or fatigue, can lower the 
threshold for an anaphylactic event. It is important to identify precipitating 
factors so that appropriate avoidance measures may be taken in the 
longer term.
Investigations and management
Measurement of serum mast cell tryptase concentrations is useful to 
conrm the diagnosis. It is important to measure tryptase in serial tests 
to demonstrate the temporal relationship to the triggering event. Specic 
IgE tests may be useful in conrming hypersensitivity and may be prefer-
able to skin-prick tests when investigating patients with a history of ana-
phylaxis. The cornerstone of management of a severe case is the early 
administration of adrenaline (epinephrine), which supports the cardiovas-
cular system, reduces bronchospasm and has some disease-modifying 
effects. Secondary management depends upon which organs are most 
affected. The emergency management of anaphylaxis is summarised in 
Box 9.7. If present, angioedema of the orofacial area requires careful 
observation and timely intervention, possibly with endotracheal intuba-
tion. The investigation and management of angioedema is discussed 
further on page 82.
Individuals who have recovered from an anaphylactic event should 
be referred for specialist assessment. The aims are to identify the trig-
ger, educate the patient regarding avoidance and management of sub-
sequent episodes, and to establish whether specic treatment, such 
as immunotherapy, is indicated. If the trigger factor cannot be identi-
ed or avoided, recurrence is common. Patients who have previously 
Itching of
palms, soles of feet
and genitalia 
Feeling of impending doom,
loss of consciousness
Conjunctival injection
Flushing
Sweating
Hypotension
Urticaria
Wheeze,
bronchoconstriction
Angioedema
of lips and mucous
membrane
Abdominal
pain
Diarrhoea
Cardiac
arrhythmias
Laryngeal obstruction
Stridor
Wasp sting
Fig. 9.3 Clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis. In this example, the response is to an insect sting containing venom to which the patient is allergic. This causes release of 
histamine and other vasoactive mediators, which lead to the characteristic features of anaphylaxis that are illustrated.
9.6 Differential diagnosis of anaphylaxis
Causes of hypotension
 Vasovagal syncope
 Cardiac arrhythmia
 Cardiogenic shock
Causes of respiratory distress
 Status asthmaticus
 Pulmonary embolus
Causes of laryngeal obstruction
 C1 inhibitor deciency
 Idiopathic angioedema
Causes of generalised ushing
 Systemic mastocytosis
 Carcinoid syndrome

[[p216]]
184    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
experienced an anaphylactic event should be prescribed self-injectable 
adrenaline (epinephrine) and they and their families or carers should be 
instructed in its use (Box 9.8). The use of a MedicAlert (or similar) brace-
let will increase the likelihood of the injector being administered in an 
emergency. There is an important role for a specialist dietitian when a 
food trigger is the suspected allergen. Allergy in adolescence requires 
additional consideration and management, as set out in Box 9.9
Syncope/presyncope
The term ‘syncope’ refers to sudden loss of consciousness due to 
reduced cerebral perfusion. ‘Presyncope’ refers to lightheadedness, in 
which the individual thinks he or she may ‘black out’. Dizziness and pre-
syncope are particularly common in old age (Box 9.10). Symptoms are 
disabling, undermine condence and independence, and can affect a 
person's ability to work or to drive.
There are three principal mechanisms that underlie recurrent presyn-
cope or syncope:
 cardiac syncope due to mechanical cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmia
 neurocardiogenic syncope (also known as vasovagal or reex syn-
cope), in which an abnormal autonomic reex causes bradycardia 
and/or hypotension
 postural hypotension, in which physiological peripheral vasocon-
striction on standing is impaired, leading to hypotension.
There are, however, other causes of loss of consciousness, and dif-
ferentiating syncope from seizure is a particular challenge. Psychogenic 
blackouts (also known as non-epileptic seizures or pseudoseizures) also 
need to be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Presentation
The history from the patient and a witness is the key to establishing a 
diagnosis. The terms used for describing the symptoms associated with 
syncope vary so much among patients that they should not be taken 
for granted. Some patients use the term ‘blackout’ to describe a purely 
visual symptom, rather than loss of consciousness. Some may under-
stand ‘dizziness’ to mean an abnormal perception of movement (vertigo), 
9.8 How to prescribe self-injectable adrenaline (epinephrine)
Prescription (normally initiated by an immunologist or allergist)
 Specify the brand of autoinjector, as they have different triggering mechanisms
 Prescribe two devices
Indications
 Anaphylaxis to allergens that are difcult to avoid:
Insect venom
Foods
 Idiopathic anaphylactic reactions
 History of severe localised reactions with high risk of future anaphylaxis:
Reaction to trace allergen
Likely repeated exposure to allergen
 History of severe localised reactions with high risk of adverse outcome:
Poorly controlled asthma
Lack of access to emergency care
Patient and family education
 Know when and how to use the device
 Carry the device at all times
 Seek medical assistance immediately after use
 Wear an alert bracelet or necklace
 Include the school in education for young patients
Other considerations
 Caution with β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) in anaphylactic patients 
as they may increase the severity of an anaphylactic reaction and reduce the 
response to adrenaline (epinephrine)
9.9 Allergy in adolescence
 Resolution of childhood allergy: most children affected by allergy to milk, 
egg, soybean or wheat will grow out of their food allergies by adolescence, but 
allergies to peanuts, tree nuts, sh and shellsh are frequently life-long.
 Risk-taking behaviour and fatal anaphylaxis: serious allergy is increasingly 
common in adolescents and this is the highest risk group for fatal, food-induced 
anaphylaxis. This is associated with increased risk-taking behaviour, and 
food-allergic adolescents are more likely than adults to eat unsafe foods, deny 
reaction symptoms and delay emergency treatment.
 Emotional impact of food allergies: some adolescents may neglect to carry 
a prescribed adrenaline (epinephrine) autoinjector because of the associated 
nuisance and/or stigma. Surveys of food-allergic teenagers reveal that many 
take risks because they feel socially isolated by their allergy.
9.10 Dizziness in old age
 Prevalence: common, affecting up to 30% of people aged > 65 years.
 Symptoms: most frequently described as a combination of unsteadiness and 
lightheadedness.
 Most common causes: postural hypotension and cardiovascular disease. Many 
patients have more than one underlying cause.
 Arrhythmia: can present with lightheadedness either at rest or on activity.
 Anxiety: frequently associated with dizziness but rarely the only cause.
 Falls: multidisciplinary workup is required if dizziness is associated with falls.
9.7 Emergency management of anaphylaxis
Treatment
Comment
Prevent further contact with allergen
Prevents ongoing mast cell activation
Ensure airway patency
Prevents hypoxia
Administer adrenaline (epinephrine) 
promptly:
0.3–0.5 mL 1 : 1000 solution IM 
in adults (0.3–0.5 mg)
Repeat at 5–10 min intervals if 
initial response is inadequate
Intramuscular route important 
because of peripheral 
vasoconstriction
Acts within minutes
Increases blood pressure
Reverses bronchospasm
Administer antihistamines:
Chlorphenamine 10 mg IM or slow 
IV injection
Blocks effect of histamine on target 
cells
Administer glucocorticoids:
Hydrocortisone 200 mg IV
Reduces cytokine release
Prevents rebound symptoms in 
severe cases
Provide supportive treatment:
Nebulised adrenaline 
(epinephrine) (e.g. 3 mg)
Nebulised β2-agonists (e.g. 
salbutamol 5 mg)
IV uids
Oxygen
Reduces airway oedema
Reverses bronchospasm
Restores plasma volume
Reverses hypoxia
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)
some will consider this a feeling of faintness, and others will regard it 
as unsteadiness. The clinician thus needs to elucidate the exact nature 
of the symptoms that the patient experiences. The potential differential 
diagnosis of syncope and presyncope, on the basis of the symptoms 
described, is shown in Figure 9.4.
The history should always be supplemented by a direct eye-witness 
account if available. Careful history with corroboration will usually establish 
whether there has been full consciousness, altered consciousness, vertigo, 
transient amnesia or something else. Attention should be paid to potential 
triggers (e.g. medication, micturition, exertion, prolonged standing), the 

[[p217]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    185
9
patient's appearance (e.g. colour, seizure activity), the duration of the epi-
sode, and the speed of recovery (Box 9.11). Cardiac syncope is usually 
sudden, but can be associated with premonitory lightheadedness, palpita-
tion or chest discomfort. The blackout is usually brief and recovery rapid. 
Exercise-induced syncope can be the presenting feature of a number of 
serious pathologies (such as hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy or 
exercise-induced arrhythmia) and always requires further investigation. 
Neurocardiogenic syncope will often be associated with a situational trig-
ger (such as pain or emotion), and the patient may experience ushing, 
nausea, malaise and clamminess for several minutes afterwards. Recovery 
is usually quick and without subsequent delirium, provided the patient 
has assumed a supine position. There is often some brief stiffening and 
limb-twitching, which requires differentiation from seizure-like movements. 
It is rare for syncope to cause injury or to cause amnesia after regaining 
awareness. Patients with seizures do not exhibit pallor, may have abnormal 
movements, usually take more than 5 minutes to recover and are often 
confused. Aspects of the history that can help to differentiate seizure from 
syncope are shown in Box 9.12
A diagnosis of psychogenic blackout (also known as non-epileptic 
seizure, pseudoseizure or psychogenic seizure) may be suggested by 
specic emotional triggers, dramatic movements or vocalisation, or by 
very prolonged duration (hours). A history of rotational vertigo is sug-
gestive of a labyrinthine or vestibular disorder (p. 1143). Postural hypo-
tension is normally obvious from the history, with presyncope or, less 
commonly, syncope occurring within a few seconds of standing. The 
history should include enquiry about predisposing medications (diuretics, 
vasodilators, antidepressants) and conditions (such as diabetes mellitus 
and Parkinson's disease).
Clinical assessment
Examination of the patient may be entirely normal, but may reveal clinical 
signs that favour one form of syncope. The systolic murmurs of aortic 
Labyrinthine dysfunction
 Infection
 Benign positional vertigo
 Ménière’s disease
 Ischaemia/infarction
 Trauma
 Other (e.g. drugs, otosclerosis)
Central vestibular dysfunction
 ‘Physiological’ (visual–
   vestibular mismatch)
 Demyelination
 Migraine
 Posterior fossa mass lesion
 Vertebro-basilar ischaemia
 Other (e.g. disorders of
   cranio-vertebral junction)
 Ataxia
 Weakness
 Loss of joint position sense
 Gait dyspraxia
 Joint disease
 Visual disturbance
 Fear of falling (Chs 26 and 28)
Impaired cerebral perfusion
Cardiac disease
 Arrhythmia
 Left ventricular dysfunction
 Aortic stenosis
 Hypertrophic obstructive
   cardiomyopathy
Other causes
 Vasovagal syncope
 Postural hypotension
 Micturition syncope
 Cough syncope
 Carotid sinus sensitivity
 Hypoglycaemia (Ch. 21)
 Anxiety*
 Hyperventilation
 Post-concussive syndrome
 Panic attack
 Non-epileptic attack
 Epileptic seizure
Presyncope
(reduced cerebral
perfusion)
Syncope
(loss of cerebral
perfusion)
Sensation of
movement?
(vertigo)
Loss of
balance?
Lightheaded?
Other
description
‘Funny turn’
or blackout
* Anxiety is the most
  common cause of
  dizziness in those
  under 65 years
Loss of
consciousness
(‘blackout’)
Fig. 9.4 The differential diagnosis of syncope and presyncope.

[[p218]]
186    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
to bradycardia, but the key to establishing a diagnosis is to obtain an 
ECG recording while symptoms are present. Since minor rhythm distur-
bances are common, especially in older adults, symptoms must occur 
at the same time as a recorded arrhythmia before a diagnosis can be 
made. Ambulatory ECG recordings are helpful only if symptoms occur 
several times per week. Patient-activated ECG recorders are useful for 
examining the rhythm in patients with recurrent dizziness, but are not 
helpful in assessing sudden blackouts. When these investigations fail to 
establish a cause in patients with presyncope or syncope, an implantable 
ECG recorder can be sited subcutaneously over the upper left chest. 
This device continuously records the cardiac rhythm and will activate 
automatically if extreme bradycardia or tachycardia occurs. The ECG 
memory can also be tagged by the patient, using a hand-held activator 
as a form of ‘symptom diary’. Stored ECGs can be accessed by the 
implanting centre, using a telemetry device in a clinic, or using a home 
monitoring system via an online link.
Head-up tilt-table testing is a provocation test used to establish the 
diagnosis of vasovagal syncope. It involves positioning the patient supine 
on a padded table that is then tilted to an angle of 60–70° for up to 
45minutes, while the ECG and BP responses are monitored. A pos-
itive test is characterised by bradycardia (cardio-inhibitory response) 
and/or hypotension (vasodepressor response), associated with typical 
symptoms.
Headache
Headache is common and causes considerable worry amongst both 
patients and clinicians, but rarely represents sinister disease. The causes 
may be divided into primary or secondary, with primary headache syn-
dromes being vastly more common (Box 9.13).
Presentation
The primary purpose of the history and clinical examination in patients 
presenting with headache is to identify the small minority of patients with 
serious underlying pathology. Key features of the history include the tem-
poral evolution of a headache; a headache that reached maximal inten-
sity immediately or within 5 minutes of onset requires rapid assessment 
for possible subarachnoid haemorrhage. Other ‘red ag’ symptoms are 
shown in Box 9.14
It is important to establish whether the headache comes and goes, 
with periods of no headache in between (usually migraine), or whether 
it is present all or almost all of the time. Associated features, such as 
preceding visual symptoms, nausea/vomiting or photophobia/phono-
phobia, may support a diagnosis of migraine but others, such as pro-
gressive focal symptoms or constitutional upset like weight loss, may 
suggest a more sinister cause. The headache of cerebral venous throm-
bosis may be ‘throbbing’ or ‘band-like’ and associated with nausea, 
vomiting or hemiparesis. Raised intracranial pressure (ICP) headache 
9.11 Typical features of cardiac syncope, neurocardiogenic 
syncope and seizures
Cardiac syncope
Neurocardiogenic 
syncope
Seizures
Premonitory 
symptoms
Often none
Lightheadedness
Palpitation
Chest pain
Breathlessness
Nausea
Lightheadedness
Sweating
Delirium
Hyperexcitability
Olfactory 
hallucinations
‘Aura’
Unconscious 
period
Extreme ‘death-
like’ pallor
Pallor
Prolonged 
(> 1 min) 
unconsciousness
Motor seizure 
activity*
Tongue-biting
Urinary 
incontinence
Recovery
Rapid (<  1 min)
Flushing
Rapid
Nausea
Lightheadedness
Prolonged 
delirium 
(> 5 mins)
Headache
Focal 
neurological 
signs
*N.B. Cardiac syncope can also cause convulsions by inducing cerebral anoxia.
9.12 How to differentiate seizures from syncope
Seizure
Syncope
Aura (e.g. olfactory)
+
−
Cyanosis
+
−
Lateral tongue-biting
+
−/+
Post-ictal delirium
+
−
Post-ictal amnesia
+
−
Post-ictal headache
+
−
Rapid recovery
−
+
9.13 Primary and secondary headache syndromes
Primary headache syndromes
 Migraine (with or without aura)
 Tension-type headache
 Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia (including cluster headache)
 Primary stabbing/coughing/exertional/sex-related headache
 Thunderclap headache
 New daily persistent headache syndrome
Secondary causes of headache
 Medication overuse headache (chronic daily headache)
 Intracranial bleeding (subdural haematoma, subarachnoid or intracerebral 
haemorrhage)
 Raised intracranial pressure (brain tumour, idiopathic intracranial hypertension)
 Infection (meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess)
 Inammatory disease (temporal arteritis, other vasculitis, arthritis)
 Referred pain from other structures (orbit, temporomandibular joint, neck)
stenosis or hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy are important nd-
ings, particularly if paired with a history of lightheadedness or syncope 
on exertion. BP taken when supine and then after 1 and 3 minutes of 
standing may, when combined with symptoms, provide robust evidence 
of symptomatic postural hypotension.
Clinical suspicion of hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome (sensitiv-
ity of carotid baroreceptors to external pressure such as a tight collar) 
should prompt monitoring of the ECG and BP during carotid sinus pres-
sure, provided there is no carotid bruit or history of cerebrovascular dis-
ease. A positive cardio-inhibitory response is dened as a sinus pause 
of 3 seconds or more; a positive vasodepressor response is dened as 
a fall in systolic BP of more than 50 mmHg. Carotid sinus pressure will 
produce positive ndings in about 10% of older adults, but fewer than 
25% of these experience spontaneous syncope. Symptoms should not, 
therefore, be attributed to hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome unless 
they are reproduced by carotid sinus pressure.
Initial investigations
A 12-lead ECG is essential in all patients presenting with syncope or 
presyncope. Lightheadedness may occur with many arrhythmias, but 
blackouts (Stokes–Adams attacks) are usually due to profound brady-
cardia or malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmias. The ECG may show 
evidence of conducting system disease (e.g. sinus bradycardia, atrioven-
tricular block, bundle branch block), which would predispose a patient 

[[p219]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    187
9
retro-orbital pain, clouding of the cornea, decreased visual acuity and, 
often, systemic upset. Temporal headaches in patients over 60 should 
prompt examination for enlarged or tender temporal arteries and palpa-
tion of temporal pulses (often absent in temporal arteritis). Visual acuity 
should be assessed promptly, as visual loss is an important complication 
of temporal arteritis.
Initial investigations
If there is any alteration of conscious level, focal neurological signs, 
new-onset seizures or a history of head injury, then CT scanning of the 
head is indicated. The urgency of scanning will depend on the clinical 
picture and trajectory but in many circumstances will be immediately 
9.14 ‘Red ag’ symptoms in headache
Symptom
Possible explanation
Sudden onset (maximal immediately 
or within 5 min)
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
Pituitary apoplexy
Meningitis
Focal neurological symptoms (other 
than for typically migrainous)
Intracranial mass lesion:
Vascular
Neoplastic
Infection
Constitutional symptoms:
Weight loss
General malaise
Pyrexia
Meningism
Rash
Meningitis
Encephalitis
Neoplasm (lymphoma or metastases)
Inammation (vasculitis)
Raised intracranial pressure (worse 
on waking/lying down, associated 
vomiting)
Intracranial mass lesion
New-onset aged > 60 years
Temporal arteritis
9.15 Identification of bacterial meningitis
In patients presenting with headache, identication of those with bacterial 
meningitis is a top priority to facilitate rapid antibiotic treatment. In almost all cases 
there will be one of the following features:
 meningism (neck stiffness, photophobia, positive Kernig's sign)
 fever > 38°C
 signs of shock (tachycardia, hypotension, elevated serum lactate)
 rash (not always petechial).
Hello, Mr XXX.
Can you open your
eyes, please?
Score best eyes/
motor/verbal response
Trapezius pinch
Score response looking
at arms for localisation/
flexion/abnormal flexion
Pressure on
supra-orbital ridge
Score response
Firm nail-bed
pressure
Score if withdrawal present
or any eye/verbal response
No response
No response
No response
Fig. 9.5 Assessment of the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score in an obtunded 
patient. Avoid using a sternal rub, as it causes bruising.
tends to be worse in the morning and when lying at or coughing, and 
associated with nausea and/or vomiting.
A description of neck stiffness along with headache and photophobia 
should raise the suspicion of meningitis (Box 9.15), although this may 
present in atypical ways in immunosuppressed, alcoholic or pregnant 
patients. The behaviour of the patient during headache is often instruc-
tive; migraine patients typically retire to bed to sleep in a dark room, 
whereas cluster headache often induces agitated and restless behaviour. 
The pain of a subarachnoid haemorrhage frequently causes signicant 
distress.
Headache duration is also important to elicit; headaches that have 
been present for months or years are almost never sinister, whereas 
new-onset headache, especially in older adults, is more of a concern. In 
a patient over 60 years with head pain localised to one or both temples, 
scalp tenderness or jaw claudication, temporal arteritis (Ch. 26) should 
be considered.
Clinical assessment
An assessment of conscious level (using the Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS); Fig. 9.5) should be performed early and constantly reassessed. 
A decreased conscious level suggests raised ICP and urgent CT scan-
ning (with airway protection if necessary) is indicated. A full neurological 
examination may provide clues as to the pathology involved; for example, 
brainstem signs in the context of acute-onset occipital headache may 
indicate vertebrobasilar dissection. Neurological signs may, however, 
be ‘falsely localising’, as in large subarachnoid haemorrhage or bacte-
rial meningitis. Care should be taken to examine for other evidence of 
meningitis such as a rash (not always petechial), fever or signs of shock.
Unilateral headache with agitation, ipsilateral lacrimation, facial sweat-
ing and conjunctival injection is typical of cluster headache. Conjunctival 
injection may also be seen in acute glaucoma, accompanied by peri- or 

[[p220]]
188    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
required. Intracranial haemorrhage or a space-occupying lesion with 
mass effect should prompt urgent neurosurgical referral. If bacterial men-
ingitis is suspected (see Box 9.15), cerebrospinal uid (CSF) analysis is 
required to make a denite diagnosis. Antibiotics should not be delayed 
for lumbar puncture (LP), which needs to be preceded by CT scanning 
only if raised ICP is suspected. In cases of thunderclap headache (peak 
intensity within 5 minutes and lasting over an hour), a normal CT scan 
should be followed by an LP performed more than 12 hours after head-
ache onset, to look for evidence of xanthochromia. A negative CT scan 
within 6 hours of headache onset has a high degree of sensitivity for 
detecting subarachnoid blood. In such cases, a discussion of risks and 
benets with the patient may conclude that an LP is not necessary to 
exclude subarachnoid haemorrhage, although a CT angiogram may be 
considered to exclude other pathology, such as arterial dissection. Many 
headaches require prompt involvement of specialists. Features of acute 
glaucoma, for example, require immediate ophthalmological review for 
measurement of intraocular pressures. Suspected temporal arteritis with 
an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of > 50 mm/hr should prompt 
immediate glucocorticoid therapy and rheumatological referral (see 
Ch. 26 for management). Features of raised ICP in the absence of a 
mass lesion on neuroimaging may indicate idiopathic intracranial hyper-
tension; CSF opening pressure is likely to be informative.
Unilateral leg swelling
Most leg swelling is caused by oedema, the accumulation of uid within 
the interstitial space. There are three explanatory mechanisms for devel-
opment of oedema, which are described in Box 9.16. Unilateral swelling 
usually indicates a localised pathology in either the venous or the lym-
phatic system, while bilateral oedema often represents generalised uid 
overload combined with the effects of gravity. However, all causes of 
unilateral leg swelling may present bilaterally, and generalised uid over-
load may present with asymmetrical (and therefore apparently unilateral) 
oedema. Fluid overload may be the result of cardiac failure, pulmonary 
hypertension (even in the absence of right ventricular failure), renal failure, 
hypoalbuminaemia or drugs (calcium channel blockers, glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids, non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
others); see Box 16.14 for other causes. The remainder of this section 
focuses on the causes of ‘unilateral’ oedema.
Presentation
Any patient who presents with unilateral leg swelling should be assessed 
with the possibility of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in mind. The pain and 
swelling of a DVT is often fairly gradual in onset, over hours or even days. 
Sudden-onset pain in the posterior aspect of the leg is more consistent 
with gastrocnemius muscle tear (which may be traumatic or spontane-
ous) or a ruptured Baker's cyst. Leg swelling and pain associated with 
paraesthesia or paresis, or in the context of lower limb injury or reduced 
conscious level, should always prompt concern regarding the possibility 
of compartment syndrome (Box 9.17).
Clinical assessment
Lower limb DVT characteristically starts in the distal veins, causing an 
increase in temperature of the limb and dilatation of the supercial veins. 
Often, however, symptoms and signs are minimal.
Cellulitis is usually characterised by erythema and skin warmth local-
ised to a well-demarcated area of the leg and may be associated with 
an obvious source of entry of infection (e.g. leg ulcer or insect bite). The 
patient may be febrile and systemically unwell. Supercial thrombophle-
bitis is more localised; erythema and tenderness occur along the course 
of a rm, palpable vein.
Examination of any patient presenting with leg swelling should include 
assessment for malignancy (evidence of weight loss, a palpable mass 
or lymphadenopathy). Malignancy is a risk factor for DVT, but pelvic or 
lower abdominal masses can also produce leg swelling by compress-
ing the pelvic veins or lymphatics. Early lymphoedema is indistinguish-
able from other causes of oedema. More chronic lymphoedema is rm 
and non-pitting, often with thickening of the overlying skin, which may 
develop a ‘cobblestone’ appearance.
Chronic venous insufciency is a cause of long-standing oedema 
that, particularly when combined with another cause of leg swelling, 
may acutely worsen. Characteristic skin changes (haemosiderin depo-
sition, hair loss, varicose eczema, ulceration) and prominent varicosities 
are common, and sometimes cause diagnostic confusion with cellulitis. 
See Box 9.17 for the examination ndings associated with compartment 
syndrome.
Initial investigations
Factors predisposing to venous thromboembolism are covered in detail 
in Chapter 25. Clinical criteria can be used to rank patients according to 
their likelihood of DVT, by using scoring systems that determine pre-test 
probability (see Ch. 1), such as the Wells score (Box 9.18). Figure 9.6
gives an algorithm for investigation of suspected DVT based on initial 
Wells score. In patients with a low (‘unlikely’) pre-test probability of DVT, 
D-dimer levels can be measured; if these are normal, further investiga-
tion for DVT is unnecessary. Further information on the interpretation of 
D-dimer is given in Box 9.19. In those with a moderate or high (‘likely’) 
probability of DVT or with elevated D-dimer levels, objective diagnosis of 
DVT should be obtained using appropriate imaging, usually a Doppler 
ultrasound scan. Therefore, in the same way as for pulmonary embo-
lus, the investigative pathway for DVT differs according to the pre-test 
probability of DVT. For low-probability DVT, the negative predictive value 
of the D-dimer test (the most important parameter in this context) is 
over 99%; if the test is negative, the clinician can discharge the patient 
with condence. In patients with a high probability of DVT, the negative 
predictive value of a D-dimer test falls to somewhere in the region of 
97%–98%. While this may initially appear to be a high gure, to discharge 
2 or 3 patients in every 100 incorrectly would generally be considered 
an unacceptable error rate. Hence, with the exception of pregnancy 
(Box 9.20), a combination of clinical probability and blood test results 
should be used in the diagnosis of DVT.
If cellulitis is suspected, serum inammatory markers, skin swabs 
and blood cultures should be sent, ideally before antibiotics are given. 
Ruptured Baker's cyst and calf muscle tear can both be readily diag-
nosed on ultrasound. If pelvic or lower abdominal malignancy is sus-
pected, a prostate-specic antigen (PSA) level should be measured in 
males and appropriate imaging with ultrasound (transabdominal or trans-
vaginal) or CT should be undertaken.
9.16 Mechanisms of oedema
There are three explanatory mechanisms for the development of oedema that may 
occur in isolation or combination:
 increased hydrostatic pressure in the venous system due to increased 
intravascular volume or venous obstruction
 decreased oncotic pressure secondary to a decrease in the plasma proteins 
that retain uid within the circulation
 obstruction to lymphatic drainage (‘lymphoedema’).
9.17 Identification of compartment syndrome
 Compartment syndrome classically occurs following extrinsic compression of 
a limb due to trauma or reduced conscious level (especially when caused by 
drugs or alcohol).
 It usually presents with a tense, rm and exquisitely painful limb.
 The pain is characteristically exacerbated by passive muscle stretching or 
squeezing the compartment.
 Altered sensation may be evident distally.
 Absent peripheral pulses are a late sign and their presence does not exclude 
the diagnosis.
 Clinical suspicion of compartment syndrome should prompt measurement of 
creatine kinase and urgent surgical review.

[[p221]]
Presenting problems in acute medicine    189
9
it becomes localised. Movement exacerbates the pain; abdominal 
rigidity and guarding occur.
 Perforation. When a viscus perforates, pain starts abruptly; it is 
severe and leads to generalised peritonitis.
 Obstruction. Pain is colicky, with spasms that cause the patient to 
writhe around and double up. Colicky pain that does not disappear 
between spasms suggests complicating inammation.
 Ischaemia. Signs are variable; pain may come on acutely or more 
gradually and the abdomen can be soft or rigid. A raised venous 
lactate is usually only a late sign once hepatic lactate clearance is 
overwhelmed (see Fig. 9.14).
Clinical assessment
If there are signs of peritonitis (guarding and rebound tenderness with 
rigidity), the patient should be resuscitated with titrated oxygen, intrave-
nous uids and antibiotics; urgent surgical input is required. In other cir-
cumstances, further investigations may be necessary, as detailed below 
(Fig. 9.7).
Initial investigations
Patients should have a full blood count, urea and electrolytes, glucose 
and amylase taken to look for evidence of dehydration, leucocytosis and 
9.18 Predicting the pre-test probability of deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) using the Wells score*
Clinical characteristic
Score
Previous documented DVT
1
Active cancer (patient receiving treatment for cancer within previous 
6 months or currently receiving palliative treatment)
1
Paralysis, paresis or recent plaster immobilisation of lower extremities
1
Recently bedridden for ≥ 3 days, or major surgery within previous 
12 weeks
1
Localised tenderness along distribution of deep venous system
1
Entire leg swollen
1
Calf swelling at least 3 cm larger than that on asymptomatic side 
(measured 10 cm below tibial tuberosity)
1
Pitting oedema conned to symptomatic leg
1
Collateral supercial veins (non-varicose)
1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT
–2
Clinical probability
Total 
score
DVT low probability
< 1
DVT moderate probability
1–2
DVT high probability
> 2
*A dichotomised revised Wells score, which classies patients as ‘unlikely’ or ‘likely’, may also 
be used.
From Wells PS. Evaluation of D-dimer in the diagnosis of suspected deep vein thrombosis. N 
Engl J Med 2003; 349:1227; copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.
Pre-test probability
(see Box 9.18)
Low
D-dimer ve
D-dimer +ve
+ve
+ve
ve
ve
Probability low,
or moderate
with ve D-dimer
Probability high,
or moderate
with +ve D-dimer
Repeat compression
ultrasound in 7 days
Treat
Exclude
Compression
ultrasound
Moderate 
or high
Fig. 9.6 Investigation of suspected deep vein thrombosis. Pre-test probability is 
calculated in Box 9.18. See also page 10.
9.19 D-dimer
 D-dimers are specic cross-linked brin degradation products which are small 
protein fragments present in blood after a blood clot is degraded by brinolysis.
 D-dimers are present in human blood when the coagulation system has 
been activated, usually because of the presence of thrombosis, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation or venom-induced consumptive coagulopathy.
 As the sensitivity of D-dimer decreases with time, it should not be used in the 
assessment of patients who present with symptoms for 7 days or more.
 D-dimer increases with age; for patients aged over 50 years with suspected 
venous thromboembolism (VTE), a cut-off equal to the patient’s age in years ×
10 µg/L (or × 0.056 nmol/L) has therefore been proposed.
 Although their safety is still being evaluated, age-adjusted D-dimers appear to 
decrease the false-positive rate without substantially increasing the false-
negative rate
9.20 Swollen legs in pregnancy
 Benign swollen legs: common in pregnancy; this is usually benign.
 DVT: pregnancy is a signicant risk factor; however
 D-dimer: should not be measured in pregnancy; it has not been validated in 
this group.
 Imaging: should be arranged on the basis of clinical suspicion alone, and the 
threshold for undertaking a denite diagnostic test should be low.
9.21 Causes of acute abdominal pain
Inflammation
 Appendicitis
 Diverticulitis
 Cholecystitis
 Pelvic inammatory disease
 Pancreatitis
 Pyelonephritis
 Intra-abdominal abscess
Perforation/rupture
 Peptic ulcer
 Diverticular disease
 Ovarian cyst
 Aortic aneurysm
Obstruction
 Intestinal obstruction
 Biliary colic
 Ureteric colic
Other (rare)
 See Box 23.22
Acute abdomen
The acute abdomen accounts for approximately 50% of all urgent admis-
sions to general surgical units, but a signicant proportion of patients 
present via acute medicine.
Presentation
The acute abdomen is a consequence of one or more of the following 
pathological processes (Box 9.21):
 Inammation. Pain develops gradually, usually over several hours. It 
is initially rather diffuse until the parietal peritoneum is involved, when 

[[p222]]
190    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Symptoms and signs
of peritonitis
Resuscitation
Pain
No clear evidence
of peritonitis
Blood tests
↑ Amylase/lipase
Acute
pancreatitis
Free air
Perforation
Dilated loops
of bowel
Intestinal
obstruction/ileus
Gallstones
and thickened
gallbladder wall
Cholecystitis
Pseudo-obstruction
CT scan
Pancreatitis
Abscess
Aortic aneurysm
Malignancy
Erect
chest X-ray
Abdominal
X-ray
Ultrasound
Contrast
radiology
Abnormality
detected
Abnormality
detected
Perforation
Inconclusive
investigations
No diagnosis
No free air
No abnormality
No abnormality
No abnormality
No abnormality
Symptoms persist
Symptoms
settle
Laparotomy
Laparoscopy
Observe
Fig. 9.7 Management of acute abdominal pain: an algorithm.
pancreatitis. Urinalysis is useful in suspected renal colic and pyelone-
phritis. An erect chest X-ray may show air under the diaphragm, sug-
gestive of perforation, and a plain abdominal lm may show evidence 
of obstruction or ileus (see Fig. 23.11). An abdominal ultrasound may 
help in identifying gallstones, renal stones, free uid or an intra-abdominal 
abscess. Abdominal CT scanning is the most useful investigation, and 
is essential in differentiating pseudo-obstruction and mechanical large 
bowel obstruction. Concerns regarding contrast-induced nephropathy 
should be secondary to the imperative to reach an early diagnosis. CT 
may also be useful to seek evidence of pancreatitis, retroperitoneal col-
lections or masses, including aortic aneurysm.
Diagnostic laparotomy should be considered when the diagnosis has 
not been revealed by other investigations. All patients must be carefully 
and regularly reassessed (every 2–4 hours) so that any change in condi-
tion that might alter both the suspected diagnosis and clinical decision 
can be observed and acted on early.
Management
The general approach is to close perforations, treat inammatory condi-
tions with antibiotics or resection, and relieve obstructions. Aspiration of 
gastric contents is a major risk in all acute abdominal conditions, espe-
cially intestinal obstruction. This occurs once the laryngeal reexes are 
overwhelmed by the volume of regurgitated material, and is particularly 
common in frailer individuals or where there is a coexisting reduction in 
conscious level. The placement of a large-bore nasogastric tube should 
therefore be considered whenever bowel obstruction is suspected. The 
speed of intervention and the necessity for surgery depend upon vari-
ous factors, of which the presence of peritonitis is the most pertinent. 
A treatment summary of some of the more common surgical conditions 
follows:
 Acute appendicitis: This should be treated by early surgery, since 
there is a risk of perforation and recurrent attacks with non-operative 
treatment. The appendix can be removed through a conventional 
right iliac fossa skin crease incision or by laparoscopic techniques.
 Acute cholecystitis: This can be successfully treated non-operatively 
but the high risk of recurrent attacks and the low morbidity of sur-
gery have made early laparoscopic cholecystectomy the treatment 
of choice unless there are other considerations (such as pregnancy).
 Acute diverticulitis: Conservative therapy is standard, but if perfora-
tion has occurred, resection is advisable. Depending on peritoneal 
contamination and the degree of shock (risk of anastomotic leak 
correlates with severity of shock), primary anastomosis is pref-
erable to a Hartmann's procedure (oversew of rectal stump and 
end-colostomy).
 Small bowel obstruction: If the cause is obvious and surgery inevita-
ble (such as with a strangulated hernia), an early operation is appro-
priate. If the suspected cause is adhesions from previous surgery, 
only those patients who do not resolve within the rst 48 hours or 
who develop signs of strangulation (colicky pain becoming constant, 
peritonitis, tachycardia, fever, leucocytosis) should have surgery.
 Large bowel obstruction: Pseudo-obstruction should be treated 
non-operatively. Some patients benet from colonoscopic decom-
pression, but mechanical obstruction merits resection, usually with a 
primary anastomosis. Differentiation between the two can be made 
by water-soluble contrast enema.

[[p223]]
Common presentations of deterioration    191
9
 Mesenteric ischaemia: This can be due to an arterial or venous throm-
bosis, or a structural abnormality of the gut such as a volvulus. Early 
surgery can be successful in revascularisation of the gut or removing 
ischaemic tissue, although acute mesenteric arterial thrombosis has a 
poor prognosis, especially when the diagnosis is delayed.
 Acute pancreatitis: CT scanning can be useful to rule out other 
pathologies that may be amenable to operative management (e.g. ret-
roperitoneal perforation), but is not essential in the early management 
of the disease. Management is usually conservative, and the majority 
of patients will improve. A minority will develop pancreatic necro-
sis that will require prolonged supportive care and organ support. 
Antibiotics are not usually indicated in the early phase of the disease.
 Perforated peptic ulcer: Surgical closure of the perforation is stand-
ard practice, but some patients without generalised peritonitis can 
be treated non-operatively once a water-soluble contrast meal has 
conrmed spontaneous sealing of the perforation. Adequate and 
aggressive resuscitation with intravenous uids, antibiotics and anal-
gesia is mandatory before surgery.
For a more detailed discussion of acute abdominal pain, the reader 
is referred to the companion volume of this text, Principles and Practice 
of Surgery
Identification and assessment of 
deterioration
Early warning scores and the role of the medical 
emergency team
There are many systems that have been developed with the aim of rapidly 
identifying and managing physiological deterioration. These are referred to 
as ‘rapid response systems’. One popular example of a rapid response 
system is a medical emergency team (MET). A MET system operates on 
the basis that when a patient meets certain physiological criteria, the team 
is alerted. The team is expected to make a rapid assessment and institute 
immediate management. This may include escalation to critical care or, fol-
lowing liaison with the parent clinical team, ongoing ward-based care.
The trigger for a ‘MET’ call may be a single parameter – such as a low 
BP or tachycardia – or may consist of a composite early warning score. 
Early warning score systems function by the observer allocating a value 
between 0 and 3 for abnormalities in respiratory rate, SpO2, tempera-
ture, BP, heart rate and neurological response (Fig. 9.8). The values are 
summed and the composite score gives an indication of the severity of 
physiological derangement. Early warning systems can be automated 
into an electronic format that calculates the score and even alerts the 
responsible clinician(s) by email or text message.
There are advantages and disadvantages to having a separate MET 
system, compared with allowing the responsible clinical team to manage 
deterioration, and to having a composite score or a single parameter 
detection system. These are outlined in Box 9.22
Immediate assessment of the deteriorating patient
An approach to assessment of the deteriorating patient can be summa-
rised by the mnemonic ‘C-A-B-C-D-E’.
C – Control of obvious problem
For example, if the patient has ventricular tachycardia on the monitor or 
signicant blood loss is apparent, immediate action is required.
A and B – Airway and breathing
If the patient is talking in full sentences, then the airway is clear and 
breathing is adequate. A rapid history should be obtained while the 
initial assessment is undertaken. Breathing should be assessed with a 
focused respiratory examination. Oxygen saturations and ABGs should 
be checked early (p. 194).
C – Circulation
A focused cardiovascular examination should include heart rate and 
rhythm, blood pressure, jugular venous pressure, evidence of bleeding, 
signs of shock and abnormal heart sounds. The carotid pulse should be 
palpated in the collapsed or unconscious patient, but peripheral pulses 
also should be checked in conscious patients. The radial, brachial, foot 
and femoral pulses may disappear as shock progresses, and this indi-
cates the severity of circulatory compromise.
D – Disability
Conscious level should be assessed using the GCS (see Fig. 9.5 and 
Box 9.29). A brief neurological examination looking for focal signs should 
be performed. Capillary blood glucose should always be measured to 
exclude hypoglycaemia or severe hyperglycaemia.
E – Exposure and evidence
‘Exposure’ indicates the need for targeted clinical examination of the 
remaining body systems, particularly the abdomen and lower limbs. 
‘Evidence’ may be gathered via a collateral history from other health-care 
professionals or family members, recent investigations, prescriptions or 
monitoring charts.
Selecting the appropriate location for ongoing 
management and anticipatory care planning
Two groups of patients frequently gain benet from admission to criti-
cal care: those with organ dysfunction severe enough to require organ 
support and those in whom the disease process is clearly setting them 
on a downward trajectory and in whom early, aggressive manage-
ment may alter the outcome. Whether an individual patient should be 
admitted to the intensive care or high-dependency unit (ICU/HDU) will 
depend on local arrangements. A useful tool to assist with the decision 
regarding location is the ‘level of care’ required (Box 9.23). Many inten-
sive care units are a mix of level 2 and level 3 beds, which streamlines 
the admission process. When a patient requires admission with a sus-
pected transmissible disease that poses a risk to other patients and 
staff, the patient should be admitted to an isolated room located within 
an appropriate area of the hospital that can provide an appropriate 
level of care.
Anticipatory care planning (ACP) refers to the process of decision-mak-
ing relating to treatments or support that would be appropriate if a patient’s 
condition was to deteriorate. Admission can be a valuable opportunity for 
discussion with the patient and family members/carers about the appro-
priate ‘ceiling of care’; for example, would resuscitation in the event of a 
cardiac arrest and/or admission to a critical care area be appropriate. Such 
discussions may result in the placement of a ‘do not resuscitate order’ 
and a decision that ‘ward-level’ care may be the ‘ceiling’ for that individual. 
It is important that discussions and decisions are clearly documented in 
the patient record. Further details of ACP decision-making are found on 
page 206.
Common presentations of deterioration
As patients become critically unwell, they usually manifest physiological 
derangement. The principle underpinning critical care is the simultane-
ous assessment of illness severity and the stabilisation of life-threatening 
physiological abnormalities. The goal is to prevent deterioration and 

[[p224]]
192    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Full Name
NEWS key
A+B
0
1
2
3
Date of Birth
A+B
C
C
D
E
SpO2 Scale 2
†
Oxygen saturation (%)
Date
Time
≥25
21–24
18–20
15–17
12–14
9–11
≤8
Date of Admission
3
2
1
1
1
2
2
3
1
2
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
1
1
3
3
3
2
1
3
3
3
3
≥25
21–24
18–20
15–17
12–14
9–11
≤8
≥97 on O2
95–96 on O2
93–94 on O2
≥93 on air
88–92
86–87
84–85
≤83%
≥220
201–219
181–200
161–180
141–160
121–140
111–120
101–110
91–100
81–90
71–80
61–70
51–60
≤50
≥131
121–130
111–120
101–110
91–100
81–90
71–80
61–70
51–60
41–50
31–40
≤30
≥131
121–130
111–120
101–110
91–100
81–90
71–80
61–70
51–60
41–50
31–40
≤30
≥220
201–219
181–200
161–180
141–160
121–140
111–120
101–110
91–100
81–90
71–80
61–70
51–60
≤50
≥97 on O2
95–96 on O2
93–94 on O2
≥93 on air
88–92
86–87
84–85
≤83%
≥96
94–95
92–93
Use Scale 2 if target
range is 88–92%,
e.g. in hypercapnic
respiratory failure
†ONLY use Scale 2
under the direction of
a qualified clinician
≤91
Alert
Confusion
V
P
U
Monitoring frequency
Escalation of care Y/N
Initials
Monitoring
Escalation
Initials
≥39.1
38.1–39.0
37.1–38.0
36.1–37.0
35.1–36.0
≤35.0
≥39.1
38.1–39.0
37.1–38.0
36.1–37.0
35.1–36.0
≤35.0
Alert
Confusion
V
P
U
A=Air
O2 L/min
Device
A=Air
O2 L/min
Device
≥96
94–95
92–93
≤91
Date
Time
A
Fig. 9.8 Identifying and responding to physiological deterioration.
= National Early Warning Score; V/P/U = 
(A and B) From Royal 
College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2: Standardising the assessment of acute-illness severity in the NHS. Updated report of a working party. London: 
RCP; December 2017.

[[p225]]
Common presentations of deterioration    193
9
 Inform registered nurse, who must assess the patient
 Registered nurse decides whether increased frequency
   of monitoring and/or escalation of care is required
 Continue routine NEWS monitoring
Minimum 12 hourly
0
Minimum 4–6 hourly
Total
1–4
 Registered nurse to inform medical team caring for the
   patient, who will review and decide whether escalation
   of care is necessary
Minimum 1 hourly
Frequency of monitoring
NEW score
3 in single parameter
 Registered nurse to immediately inform the medical team
   caring for the patient
 Registered nurse to request urgent assessment by a
   clinician or team with core competencies in the care of
   acutely ill patients
 Provide clinical care in an environment with monitoring
   facilities
Minimum 1 hourly
Total 5 or more
Urgent response
threshold
 Registered nurse to immediately inform the medical team
   caring for the patient – this should be at least at specialist
   registrar level
 Emergency assessment by a team with critical care
   competencies, including practitioner(s) with advanced
   airway management skills
 Consider transfer to a level 2 or 3 clinical care facility,
   i.e. higher-dependency unit or ICU
 Clinical care in an environment with monitoring facilities
Continuous monitoring
of vital signs
Total 7 or more
Emergency response
threshold
B
Fig. 9.8, cont’d
9.22 Advantages and disadvantages of different rapid response 
systems
System
Advantages
Disadvantages
Single parameter 
trigger
High sensitivity. Will 
probably pick up 
subclinical deterioration 
and allow optimisation
Low specicity. Much time 
will be spent with patients 
who are not deteriorating
Composite early 
warning scoring 
system, e.g. 
NEWS2
Combines good 
sensitivity with 
improved specicity
May miss single parameter 
deterioration that is still 
signicant, e.g. a drop of  
2 GCS points may not trigger 
an alert
MET system
Brings expertise in 
deteriorating patients 
immediately to the 
bedside
Expensive to have well-
trained individuals who are 
free from other clinical duties. 
May de-skill the ward-based 
teams in acute care. May 
not have expertise in highly 
specic areas of medicine
Clinical team 
review
Patient is seen by 
clinicians familiar 
with the patient and 
condition
Clinical team may be busy with 
other urgent duties. There may 
not be expertise in acute care 
within the ward-based team
(GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale; MET = Medical Emergency Team; NEWS2 = National Early 
Warning Score 2)
effect improvements, as the diagnosis is established and treatment of 
the underlying disease process is initiated.
It can be useful to consider the physiological changes as a starting 
point to help delineate urgent investigations and supportive treatment, 
which should proceed alongside the search for a denitive diagnosis.
Tachypnoea
Pathophysiology
A raised respiratory rate (tachypnoea) is the earliest and most sen-
sitive sign of clinical deterioration. Tachypnoea may be primary (i.e. 
a problem within the respiratory system) or secondary to pathol-
ogy elsewhere in the body. Cardiopulmonary causes of tachypnoea 
have been covered on page 179. Secondary tachypnoea is usually 
due to a metabolic acidosis, most commonly observed in the con-
text of sepsis, haemorrhage, ketoacidosis or visceral ischaemia. 
More detailed information on metabolic acidosis can be found on 
page 630.
Assessment and management
A simple assessment of a patient's clinical status and basic physi-
ology will usually indicate whether urgent intervention is required. In 
the examination, attention should be paid to the adequacy of chest 
expansion, air entry and the presence of added sounds such as 
wheeze.
Analysis of an arterial blood sample is especially helpful in nar-
rowing the differential diagnosis and confirming clinical suspicion of 
severity. The ‘base excess’ provides rapid quantification of the com-
ponent of disease that is metabolic in origin. A base excess lower 
than −2 mEq/L (or, put another way, a ‘base deficit’ of more than 
2 mEq/L) is likely to represent a metabolic acidosis. A simple rule 
of thumb is that a lactate of more than 4 mmol/L (36 mg/dL) or a 
base deficit of more than 10 mEq/L should cause concern and trigger 
escalation to a higher level of care. In addition to clinical examination, 
chest radiography and bedside ultrasound can help to distinguish 
the cause of poor air entry; consolidation and effusion can be readily 
identified and a significant pneumothorax can be excluded (as shown 
in Fig. 9.9).

[[p226]]
194    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
9.23 Levels of care and the corresponding admission criteria for intensive care unit (ICU) and high-dependency unit (HDU)
Level of care
Criteria
Appropriate location
3
Patients requiring/likely to require endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilatory support
Patients requiring support of two or more organ systems (e.g. inotropes and haemoltration)
Patients with chronic impairment of one or more organ systems (e.g. COPD or severe ischaemic heart disease) who 
require support for acute reversible failure of another organ
ICU
2
Patients requiring detailed observation or monitoring that cannot be provided at ward level:
Direct arterial BP monitoring
CVP monitoring
Fluid balance
Neurological observations, regular GCS recording
Patients requiring support for a single failing organ system, excluding invasive ventilatory support (IPPV):
Non-invasive respiratory support (p. 207)
Moderate inotropic or vasopressor support
Renal replacement therapy in an otherwise stable patient
Step-down from intensive care requiring additional monitoring or single organ support
HDU
1
Patients in whom frequent but intermittent observations and medical review are sufcient
General ward setting
(BP = blood pressure; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CVP =central venous pressure; GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale; IPPV = intermittent positive pressure ventilation)
Normal
(no pneumothorax)
Normal
(no pneumothorax)
1
5
6
2
7
3 4
B
D
C
A
E
Abnormal
(pneumothorax cannot
be excluded)
Abnormal
(pneumothorax cannot
be excluded)
Fig. 9.9 Using ultrasound to rule out an anterior pneumothorax.
M-mode ultrasound images. Key: (1) Intercostal muscle. (2) Rib. (3) Normal bright pleural line –‘shimmering appearance’ of sliding pleura. (4) Lung. (5) Absent ‘shimmering’ in 
pneumothorax and lung not visible. (6) Normal – ‘sea shore’ sign excludes pneumothorax at that location. The ‘sea shore’ is represented by the bright granular line with lung 
(sea) deeper to the bright line. (7) Absent granular pleural line and a repeating linear pattern or ‘barcode’ sign suggest the presence of pneumothorax.
Hypoxaemia
Pathophysiology
Low arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) is termed hypoxaemia. It is a 
common presenting feature of deterioration. Hypoxia is dened as an inade-
quate amount of oxygen in tissues (or the inability of cells to use the available 
oxygen for cellular respiration). Hypoxia may be due to hypoxaemia, or may 
be secondary to impaired cardiac output, the presence of inadequate or 
dysfunctional haemoglobin, or intracellular dysfunction (such as in cyanide 
poisoning, where oxygen utilisation at the cellular level is impaired).
Over 97% of oxygen carried in the blood is bound to haemoglobin. 
The haemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve delineates the relationship 
between the percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen (SO2) 
and the partial pressure (PO2) of oxygen in the blood. A shift in the curve 
will inuence the uptake and release of oxygen by the haemoglobin mol-
ecule. As capillary PCO2 rises, the curve moves to the right, increasing 
the ofoading of oxygen in the tissues (the Bohr effect). This increases 
capillary PO2 and hence cellular oxygen supply. Shifts of the oxyhae-
moglobin dissociation curve can have signicant implications in certain 
disease processes (Fig. 9.10).
Due to the shape of the curve, a small drop in arterial PO2 (PaO2) below 
8 kPa (60 mmHg) will cause a marked fall in SaO2.
Relative hypoxaemia refers to the comparison between the observed 
PaO2 and that which might be expected for a given fraction of inspired 
oxygen (FiO2). With the patient breathing air, PaO2 of 12–14 kPa 
(90–105 mmHg) would be expected; with the patient breathing 100% 
oxygen, a PaO2 of > 60 kPa (450 mmHg) would be normal.
Assessment and management
Oxygen therapy should be titrated to avoid hyperoxia (too high a PaO2; 
Box 9.24). Hyperoxia is theoretically harmful via a number of mecha-
nisms. This has a clinically signicant effect in patients with acute stroke, 
those with MI and those who chronically retain CO2. Adverse effects of 
hyperoxia include:
 free radical-induced tissue damage
 less efcient buffering of carbon dioxide by oxyhaemoglobin (com-
pared to deoxyhaemoglobin)
 less efcient ventilation–perfusion matching in lung units (due to loss 
of hypoxic vasoconstriction of under-ventilated lung units)
 decreased hypoxic respiratory drive in individuals with chronic 
hypercapnia.
When attempting to determine the cause of hypoxaemia, it is useful 
to consider whether the primary physiological mechanism is a type of 

[[p227]]
Common presentations of deterioration    195
9
conditions may present with a tachycardia that is accompanied by 
tachypnoea, peripheral vasodilatation and a raised temperature. Other 
organ dysfunction should be noted from a brief general examination and 
salient points from the history.
Assessment and management
The management of a tachycardic patient should focus on treating the 
cause. Treating the rate alone with beta-blockade in an unwell or dete-
riorating patient should be done only under specialist guidance, in con-
trolled conditions and when a clear evaluation of the risk–benet ratio has 
been undertaken.
The recognition and management of primary cardiac dysrhythmias are 
discussed on page 408. The most appropriate method of rate control in 
AF depends primarily on the degree of haemodynamic compromise. An 
intravenous loading dose of amiodarone is well tolerated and efcacious 
in the majority of critically ill patients with AF and a very rapid ventricular 
rate. There are thromboembolic concerns regarding chemical cardiover-
sion of AF of unknown duration. However, in deteriorating patients, the 
low incidence of embolic events makes this concern of secondary impor-
tance to achieving haemodynamic stability.
Digoxin continues to have a role in the treatment of AF in critically 
unwell but haemodynamically stable patients, when its inotropic proper-
ties can be helpful. Electrical cardioversion is reserved for dysrhythmias 
with extremely high heart rates, following failure of pharmacological man-
agement, and/or for those of ventricular origin. It is rarely successful in 
dysrhythmias secondary to systemic illness.
Hypotension
Pathophysiology
Low BP (hypotension) should always be dened in relation to a patient's 
usual BP. The calculation of mean arterial pressure (MAP) is shown in 
Box 9.26; it unies the systolic and diastolic BPs into a single reference 
value. A MAP of > 65 mmHg will maintain renal perfusion in the major-
ity of patients, although a MAP of up to 80 mmHg may be required in 
patients with chronic hypertension.
Assessment and management
The rst stage of assessment is to decide if the hypotension is physiolog-
ical or pathological. The MAP is useful as, despite low systolic pressures, 
it is rare to see a physiological MAP of < 65 mmHg. Urine output is par-
ticularly useful in the determination of the desirable MAP for an individual 
patient; oliguria suggests that measures to increase the MAP should be 
sought (p. 210). If the hypotension is pathological, an assessment of 
severity should look at whether it is causing physiological harm to the 
patient (i.e. the patient is shocked).
Shock
Shock means ‘circulatory failure’. It can be dened as a level of oxygen 
delivery (DO) that fails to meet the metabolic requirements of the tissues 
(Box 9.27). Hypotension is a common presentation of shock but the terms 
are not synonymous. Patients can be hypotensive but not shocked, and 
oxygen delivery can be critically low in the context of a ‘normal’ BP. Along 
with the signs of low cardiac output (Box 9.28), objective markers of inad-
equate tissue oxygen delivery, such as increasing base decit, elevated 
blood lactate and reduced urine output, can aid early identication. If 
shock is suspected, resuscitation should be commenced (p. 210).
Hypotensive patients who do not have any evidence of shock are still 
at signicant risk of organ dysfunction. Hypotension should serve as a 
‘red ag’ that there may be serious underlying pathology. Organ failure 
occurs despite normal or elevated oxygen delivery, so a full assessment 
of the patient is indicated. A review of the drug chart is essential, as many 
inpatients will be on antihypertensive medications that are contributing to 
hypotension. Non-cardiac medications may also have a negative inuence 
on BP; for example, some drugs used for urine outow tract obstruction, 
such as tamsulosin, have an α-adrenoceptor-blocking effect.
= 6.0 kPa
= 45 mmHg
PO2 (kPa or mmHg)
Haemoglobin saturation (SO2) %
= 4.1 kPa
= 31 mmHg
kPa
mmHg
P75
P50
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14
0
25
50
75
100
25
50
75
100
93
87
Fig. 9.10 The haemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve and the effect of CO2
on oxygen saturations. In pulmonary embolism, compensatory hyperventilation often 
occurs. PaCO2 decreases, shifting the oxyhaemoglobin saturation curve to the left 
(green line). Therefore, despite a low PaO2 (8 kPa/60 mmHg), the oxygen saturation 
reading is 93%.
9.24 Prescribing oxygen in critical illness
 Oxygen should be prescribed to achieve a target saturation of 94%–98% for 
most critically unwell patients.
 88%–92% is a more appropriate target range for those at risk of hypercapnic 
respiratory failure.
 In patients with acute myocardial infarction or stroke, do not start oxygen unless 
SpO2 is below 92%, as hyperoxia may be harmful.
shunt, or one of the many causes of ventilation–perfusion mismatch, 
such as alveolar or central hypoventilation (Fig. 9.11). A classication of 
common causes of hypoxaemia in hospitalised patients is shown in Box 
9.25. In reality, the observed physiological abnormality may represent 
a combination of inter-related processes, such as severe pulmonary 
oedema leading to exhaustion, which in turn causes hypoventilation.
Evaluation of risk factors, history and examination will help to differenti-
ate the likely aetiology and guide specic management. Further manage-
ment of respiratory failure is discussed on page 207.
Tachycardia
Pathophysiology
A heart rate of > 110 beats/min in an adult should always be consid-
ered abnormal and not attributed to anxiety until other causes have 
been excluded. Intrinsic cardiac causes (atrial brillation (AF), atrial ut-
ter, supraventricular tachycardia and ventricular dysrhythmias) are less 
common in the general inpatient population than secondary causes of 
tachycardia.
A cardiac monitor or 12-lead ECG early in the examination will help 
both determine severity (heart rate > 160 beats/min should prompt 
urgent escalation to a higher level of care) and narrow the differential diag-
nosis. AF with a rapid ventricular response should usually be regarded 
as secondary to another insult (most commonly, infection) until other 
diagnoses have been excluded. Hypovolaemia should not be missed. 
Concealed bleeding (e.g. into the pleura, gastrointestinal tract or retro-
peritoneum) may not be apparent initially and assessment of haemoglobin 
in an acute haemorrhage, when < 30 mL/kg of uid has been admin-
istered, can be misleadingly high. Sepsis and other hyper-metabolic 

[[p228]]
196    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Terminal bronchus
Alveolus
Alveolus filled with blood/secretions
or collapsed. Blood will pass this
alveolus without becoming oxygenated
Pulmonary
vein
SO2 98%
Pulmonary
artery
SO2 75%
Pulmonary vein
SO2 98%
SO2 75%
SO2 75%
SO2 98%
A
B
SO2 90%
SO2 75%
SO2 90%
Interstitium thickened by fluid,
inflammatory exudate or cells
SO2 75%
SO2 98%
C
D
SO2 75%
SO2 75%
SO2 94%
SO2 90%
↓[O2]
↑[CO2]
↓[O2]
↑[CO2]
↓[O2]
↓[CO2]
SO2 75%
SO2 90%
E
F
Fig. 9.11 Theoretical mechanisms of hypoxaemia.
inadequate transfer of oxygen from the alveolus to the blood, leading to shunting and arterial desaturation. Because minute volume is usually maintained, this causes type I 
ventilated relative to perfusion. Alveolar PO2 falls and PCO2
embolism. Pulmonary blood ow is diverted to other alveoli, causing them to be relatively over-perfused and thus reducing alveolar PO2. Minute volume is increased, so PCO2 is not 
elevated.
9.25 Common causes of hypoxaemia in hospitalised patients
Hypoxaemia due to shunt
 Lung collapse
 Consolidation/alveolar haemorrhage
 Interstitial oedema or interstitial inltration (e.g. brosis)
 Silent aspiration of gastric contents
Hypoxaemia due to ventilation–perfusion mismatch
 Pulmonary embolism
 Acute exacerbation of asthma
 COPD (with high minute volume)
Hypoxaemia from hypoventilation
 Effects of opiates
 Severe COPD (with low minute volume)
 Neuromuscular disease/general weakness from other illness
(COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
9.27 Oxygen content and delivery
 Oxygen content of blood = Haemoglobin concentration* × oxygen saturation ×
constant
 Cardiac output = Heart rate × stroke volume
 Stroke volume is dependent on cardiac lling (preload) and contractility.
 In shock, the most productive measures to improve oxygen delivery are 
optimising the haemoglobin level and the cardiac output.
*Oxygen is almost exclusively bound to haemoglobin; only tiny amounts are dissolved in blood 
at atmospheric pressure.
9.28 Hypotension in relation to cardiac output: clinical 
signs and possible causes
High cardiac output
Low cardiac output
Signs
Warm hands
Pulsatile head movement
High-volume/strong pulse
Low venous pressure
Cold/clammy peripheries
Peripheral cyanosis
Raised venous pressure  
(except in haemorrhage)
Causes
Sepsis
Allergy
Drug overdose (e.g. 
antihypertensive)
Acidosis (e.g. diabetic 
ketoacidosis)
Thyrotoxicosis
Beri-beri
Bleeding
Aortic stenosis and failed 
compensation
Dysrhythmia
Obstructive (pulmonary embolism/
tamponade/dynamic hyperination 
as in severe asthma)
Chronic heart failure
9.26 Calculation of mean arterial pressure (MAP)
MAP = Diastolic blood pressure + (systolic − diastolic)
At normal heart rates, the heart, on average, spends two-thirds of the cycle in 
diastole. The MAP reects this by weighting the value towards the diastolic blood 
pressure.
3

[[p229]]
Common presentations of deterioration    197
9
Hypertension
Pathophysiology
High BP (hypertension) is common and is usually benign in a critical 
care context. However, it can be the presenting feature of a number of 
serious disease processes. Furthermore, acute hypertension can result 
in an acute rise in vascular tone that increases left ventricular end-sys-
tolic pressure (afterload). The left ventricle may be unable to eject blood 
against the increased aortic pressure, and acute pulmonary oedema can 
result (referred to as ‘ash’ pulmonary oedema.)
Assessment and management
Before treating an acute rise in BP, it is worth considering a few important 
diagnoses that may impact on the immediate management:
 Intracranial event. Ischaemia of the brainstem (commonly via a pres-
sure effect) will cause acute increases in BP. A neurological examina-
tion and CT scan of the head should be considered.
 Fluid overload. Once the capacity of the venous blood reservoir 
becomes saturated, increases in uid volume will lead to increases 
in BP. This can occur in younger patients without the onset of 
peripheral oedema and originate from myocardial dysfunction or 
impaired renal clearance.
 Underlying medical problems. A brief search for a history of renal 
disease, spinal injury and less common metabolic causes such as 
phaeochromocytoma can be worthwhile. In women of child-bearing 
age, pregnancy-induced hypertension and pre-eclampsia must 
always be considered.
 Primary cardiac problems. Myocardial ischaemia, acute heart failure 
and aortic dissection can all present with hypertension.
 Drug-related problems. Most commonly, these involve a missed 
antihypertensive medication, but sympathomimetic drugs such as 
cocaine and amphetamines can be implicated.
The management of hypertension is discussed further on page 447.
Decreased conscious level
Assessment
A reduction in conscious level should prompt an urgent assessment of 
the patient, a search for the likely cause and an evaluation of the risk of 
airway loss. The GCS was developed to risk-stratify head injury, but it 
has become the most widely recognised assessment tool for conscious 
level (see Box 9.29 for a breakdown of GCS assessment, Box 9.30 for 
how to communicate the ndings and Fig. 9.5 for how to assess GCS). 
While disorders that affect language or limb function (e.g. left hemisphere 
stroke, locked-in syndrome) may reduce its usefulness, evaluation of the 
GCS usually provides helpful prognostic information, and serial record-
ings can plot improvement or deterioration. It is not possible to dene 
a total score below which a patient is unlikely to be able to protect the 
airway (from aspiration or obstruction), but a motor score of less than 5 
would suggest signicant risk.
Coma is dened as a persisting state of deep unconsciousness. In 
practice, this means a sustained GCS of 8 or less. There are many causes 
of coma (Box 9.31), including neurological (structural or non-structural 
brain disease) and non-neurological (e.g. type II respiratory failure) ones. 
The mode of onset of coma and any precipitating event is crucial to 
establishing the cause, and should be obtained from witnesses. Failure 
to obtain an adequate history for patients in coma is a common cause 
of diagnostic delay.
Once the patient is stable from a cardiorespiratory perspective, exam-
ination should include accurate assessment of conscious level and a 
thorough general medical examination, looking for clues such as needle 
tracks indicating drug abuse, rashes, fever and focal signs of infection, 
including neck stiffness or evidence of head injury. Focal neurological 
9.29 Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)*
Eye opening (E)
 Spontaneous
4
 To speech
3
 To pain
2
 Nil
1
Best motor response (M)
 Obeys commands
6
 Localises to painful stimulus
5
 Flexion to painful stimulus or withdraws  
hand from pain
4
 Abnormal exion (internal rotation of  
shoulder, exion of wrist)
3
 Extensor response (external rotation of  
shoulder, extension of wrist)
2
 Nil
1
Verbal response (V)
 Orientated
5
 Confused conversation
4
 Inappropriate words
3
 Incomprehensible sounds
2
 Nil
1
Coma score = E + M + V 
Always present GCS as breakdown, not a sum score (unless 3 or 15)
 Minimum sum
3
 Maximum sum
15
*Record the best score observed. When the patient is intubated, there can be no verbal 
response. The sufx ‘T’ should replace the verbal component of the score, and the remainder of 
the score is therefore a maximum of 10.
9.30 How to communicate conscious level to other 
health-care professionals
 It is best to state the physical response along with the numerical score.
 For example, ‘a patient who doesn’t open his eyes, withdraws to pain and 
makes groaning noises, having a GCS of E1, M4, V2, making a total of 7’ is 
preferable to ‘a male with a GCS of 7’.
9.31 Causes of coma
Metabolic disturbance
 Drug overdose
 Diabetes mellitus
Hypoglycaemia
Ketoacidosis
Hyperosmolar coma
 Hyponatraemia
 Uraemia
 Hepatic failure (hyperammonaemia)
 Inborn errors of metabolism causing 
hyperammonaemia
 Hyperammonaemia on refeeding 
following profound anorexia
 Respiratory failure
 Hypothermia
 Hypothyroidism
Trauma
 Cerebral contusion
 Extradural haematoma
 Subdural haematoma
 Diffuse axonal injury
Vascular disease
 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
 Brainstem infarction/haemorrhage
 Intracerebral haemorrhage
 Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
Infections
 Meningitis
 Encephalitis
 Cerebral abscess
 Systemic sepsis
Others
 Epilepsy
 Brain tumour
 Functional (‘pseudo-coma’)

[[p230]]
198    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
signs may suggest a structural explanation (stroke or tumour) or may 
be falsely localising (for example, 6th nerve palsy can occur as a con-
sequence of raised intracerebral pressure). It is vital to exclude non-
neurological causes of coma. Sodium and glucose should be measured 
urgently as part of the initial assessment, as acute hyponatraemia 
(Ch. 19) and hypoglycaemia (see Box 21.17) are easily corrected and 
can cause irreversible brain injury if missed.
Further investigations should be guided by the clinical presentation 
and examination ndings; a sudden onset suggests a vascular cause. 
An early CT scan of the brain may demonstrate any gross pathology 
but if a brainstem stroke is suspected (Fig. 9.12), a CT angiogram of the 
circle of Willis will provide more useful information, as a non-contrast CT 
is frequently negative in this context. If there are features suggestive of 
cerebral venous thrombosis, such as thrombophilia or sinus infection, a 
CT venogram should be performed. Meningitis or encephalitis may be 
suggested by the history, signs of infection or subtle radiological ndings. 
If these diagnoses are considered, it is best to commence treatment with 
broad-spectrum antibiotics and antivirals while awaiting more denitive 
diagnostic information.
Other drug, metabolic and hepatic causes of reduced conscious level 
are dealt with in the relevant chapters. An ammonia level (sent on ice) 
can narrow the differential diagnosis to a metabolic or hepatic cause if 
there is diagnostic doubt; levels > 140 µg/dL (100 µmol/L) are signicantly 
abnormal. Psychiatric conditions such as catatonic depression or neuro-
logical conditions such as the autoimmune encephalitides can cause a 
reduced level of consciousness, but they are diagnoses of exclusion and 
will require specialist input.
Management
Moving an unconscious patient into the recovery position is best for air-
way protection while preparations are made for escalation to a higher 
level of care. The decision regarding intubation for airway protection is 
always difcult. Length of stay in intensive care is signicantly reduced 
if there is no secondary organ dysfunction. Therefore, early intubation 
and the prevention of lung injury constitute the safer option if there is any 
doubt about a patient's ability to protect the airway from obstruction or 
aspiration.
Decreased urine output/deteriorating renal function
Assessment
A urine output of 0.5 mL/kg/hr is a commonly quoted, though arbitrary 
target. Although some patients can produce urine volumes below this 
level with no change in their renal biochemistry, such low volumes should 
alert the clinician to the possibility of suboptimal renal perfusion.
Oliguria in association with hypotension or an increase in serum cre-
atinine level (even if small) should prompt examination for the underlying 
cause. Pre-renal causes predominate in the general inpatient population, 
so optimising the MAP by administration of intravenous uids (and pos-
sibly vasopressors) is the rst priority. In the majority of inpatients there is 
no role for high volumes (i.e. > 30 mL/kg) of intravenous uid if the MAP 
is normal. Exceptions to this rule include patients with clinical dehydra-
tion or high uid losses such as in burns, diabetes emergencies (see 
Ch. 21) and diabetes insipidus (Ch. 20), where uid management should 
be guided by local protocols.
Diagnosis and management
Further assessment and management of oliguria are explained on page 
566. Two other important causes of renal failure in the inpatient popula-
tion are abdominal compartment syndrome and rhabdomyolysis.
Abdominal compartment syndrome
Abdominal compartment syndrome occurs when raised pressure within 
the abdomen reduces perfusion to the abdominal organs. It is most 
commonly seen in surgical patients, but can occur in medical conditions 
with extreme uid retention such as liver cirrhosis. When it is suspected, 
intra-abdominal pressure can be monitored via a pressure transducer 
connected to a urinary catheter (following instillation of 25 mL of 0.9% 
saline into the bladder). Values over 20 mmHg suggest abdominal com-
partment syndrome is present. Urgent measures should be taken to 
reduce the pressure, such as decompression of the stomach, bladder 
and peritoneum if ascites is present. If conservative measures fail, a lap-
arostomy can be considered.
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyolysis occurs when there is an injury to a large volume of 
skeletal muscle, usually because a single limb or muscle compartment 
has been ischaemic for a prolonged period. It can also occur following 
trauma and crush injury or after over-exertion of muscles. Over-exertion 
can occur after intense physical exercise or as part of a medical con-
dition that causes widespread muscular activity, such as malignant 
hyperpyrexia or neuroleptic malignant syndrome. A creatine kinase (CK) 
level of > 1000 U/L is highly suggestive, although it can rise to tens of 
thousands in severe cases. Management should focus on identication 
and correction of the underlying cause and support for multi-organ dys-
function. Forced alkaline diuresis (using intravenous bicarbonate infusion 
and furosemide) can be used to maintain a good ow of less acidic uid 
within the renal tubules and reduce myoglobin precipitation.
Disorders causing critical illness
Sepsis and the systemic inammatory response
Sepsis is one of the most common causes of multi-organ failure. Sepsis 
requires the presence of infection with a resultant systemic inamma-
tory state; organ dysfunction occurs from a combination of the two pro-
cesses. The denition of sepsis has undergone various iterations and 
B
A
Fig. 9.12 Hyperacute changes in conscious state are commonly of vascular 
origin. CT of the brain is unlikely to identify many vascular causes but a CT 
contrast CT of the head showing hyperdense thrombus in the basilar artery (arrow). 
demonstrating thrombosis in the basilar artery (arrow). This has better sensitivity for 
acute vascular occlusion.

[[p231]]
Disorders causing critical illness    199
9
there is still a lack of consensus as to the exact wording that best reects 
this complex, multisystem process (Box 9.32).
Aetiology and pathogenesis
To understand how an infection can lead to progressive multi-organ fail-
ure, it is essential to have a grasp of the pathophysiology.
Initiation of the inammatory response
The process begins with infection in one part of the body that triggers a 
localised inammatory response. Appropriate source control and a compe-
tent immune system will, in most cases, contain the infection at this stage. 
However, if certain factors are present, the infection may become systemic. 
The causative factors are not fully elucidated but probably include:
 a genetic predisposition to sepsis
 a large microbiological load
 high virulence of the organism
 delay in source control (either surgical or antimicrobial)
 resistance of the organism to treatment
 patient factors (immune status, nutrition, frailty).
Mediators are released from damaged cells (called ‘alarmins’) and these, 
coupled with direct stimulation of immune cells by the molecular patterns of 
the microorganism, trigger the inammatory response. An example of such 
direct stimulation is that of lipopolysaccharide, which is found on the surface 
of Gram-negative bacteria. It strongly stimulates an immune response and is 
commonly used in research settings to initiate a septic cascade.
Viral and fungal infections can cause a syndrome that is clinically 
indistinguishable from bacterial sepsis. Likewise, numerous non-infective 
processes, such as pancreatitis, burns, trauma, major surgery and drug 
reactions, can cause alarmins to be released and initiate the process of 
systemic inammation.
Propagation of the inammatory response
Once activated, immune cells such as macrophages release the inamma-
tory cytokines interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha, 
which, in turn, activate neutrophils. Activated neutrophils express adhesion 
factors and release various other inammatory and toxic substances; the 
net effects are vasodilatation (via activation of inducible nitric oxide syn-
thase enzymes) and damage to the endothelium. Neutrophils migrate into 
the interstitial space; uid and plasma proteins will also leak through the 
damaged endothelium, leading to oedema and intravascular uid depletion.
Activation of the coagulation system
Damaged endothelium triggers the coagulation cascade (via tissue fac-
tor, factor VII, and reduced activity of proteins C and S) and thrombus 
forms within the microvasculature. A vicious circle of endothelial injury, 
intravascular coagulation and microvascular occlusion develops, causing 
more tissue damage and further release of inammatory mediators. In 
severe sepsis, intravascular coagulation can become widespread. This 
is referred to as disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and usually 
heralds the onset of multi-organ failure. Specic aspects of the diagnosis 
and management of DIC are discussed on page 988.
Organ damage from sepsis
Any and all organs may be injured by severe sepsis. The pathological 
mechanisms are shown in Figure 9.13
Lactate physiology
Lactate is an excellent biomarker for the severity of sepsis. 
Hyperlactataemia (serum lactate > 2.4 mmol/L or  22 mg/dL) is used as 
a marker of severity. Figure 9.14 explains the physiology of hyperlac-
tataemia; it is caused by all types of shock and therefore is not specic 
to sepsis. A lactate level of >8 mmol/L (72 mg/dL) is associated with 
an extremely high mortality and should trigger immediate escalation. 
Measures to optimise oxygen delivery should be sought, and the ade-
quacy of resuscitation measured by lactate clearance.
The anti-inammatory cascade
As the inammatory state develops, a compensatory anti-inammatory 
system is activated involving the release of anti-inammatory cytokines 
such as IL-4 and IL-10 from immune cells. While such mechanisms are 
necessary to keep the inammatory response in check, they may lead to 
a period of immunosuppression after the initial septic episode. Patients 
9.32 Denitions of sepsis and septic shock*
Sepsis
Patients with suspected infection who have two or more of:
 Hypotension – systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg
 Altered mental status – Glasgow Coma Scale score ≤  14
 Tachypnoea – respiratory rate ≥  22 breaths/min
Sepsis can also be diagnosed by suspected infection and an increase of ≥  2 
points on the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (Box 9.55).
Septic shock
A subset of sepsis with underlying circulatory or cellular/metabolic abnormalities 
associated with a substantially increased mortality:
 Sepsis and both of (after uid resuscitation):
1. Persistent hypotension requiring vasopressors to maintain a MAP >  65 mmHg
2. Serum lactate > 2 mmol/L (18 mg/dL)
(MAP = mean arterial pressure) 
*From the Third International Consensus Denitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3).
Arterioles
M
A
C
R
O
V
A
S
C
U
L
A
R
Capillaries
Mitochondria
Neutrophil
Bacteria
Nucleus
Neutrophil
Arteriovenous
shunt
Venules
Microemboli
M
I
C
R
O
V
A
S
C
U
L
A
R
C
E
L
L
U
L
A
R
Fig. 9.13 Pathophysiology of organ damage in sepsis. Macrovascular. Severe 
hypovolaemia, vasodilatation or septic cardiomyopathy can reduce oxygen delivery, 
causing tissue hypoxia. Paradoxically, most patients with sepsis have an increased 
cardiac output and oxygen delivery. Microvascular. Tissue injury can occur from 
hypoxia secondary to microvascular injury and thrombosis. Damaged epithelium 
permits neutrophils, proteins and uid to leak out. Shunting. Organs fail in sepsis 
despite supranormal blood ow. It is likely that arteriovenous shunt pathways exist 
within vascular beds; these shunts open up in septic shock. Cellular. Cells are 
damaged by a number of mechanisms in sepsis: (1) direct injury by microorganisms; 
(2) injury from toxins produced by immune cells, e.g. oxygen free radicals; (3) 
mitochondrial injury causing cytopathic hypoxia – cells are unable to metabolise 
oxygen; (4) apoptosis – if the cell injury is sufcient, caspase enzymes are activated 
within the nucleus and programmed cell death occurs; (5) hypoxia from micro- and 
macrovascular pathology.

[[p232]]
200    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
recovering from severe sepsis are prone to developing secondary infec-
tions due to a combination of this immunosuppression and the presence 
of indwelling devices.
Management
The most important action is to consider sepsis as the cause of a 
patient's deterioration. Aligned to this is the requirement to consider 
other diagnoses that could be causing the presentation, such as haem-
orrhage, PE, anaphylaxis or a low cardiac output state.
Resuscitation in sepsis
General resuscitative measures are discussed on page 208. Early resus-
citation can be aided by following the requirements of the ‘Sepsis Six’ 
(Box 9.33). Red cell transfusion should be used to target a haemoglobin 
concentration of 70–90 g/L. Albumin 4% can be used as colloid solution 
and has the theoretical benet of remaining in the intravascular space for 
longer than crystalloid. Early intubation is recommended in severe cases 
to facilitate further management and reduce oxygen demand.
Appropriate antibiotics should be administered as early as possible 
(Box 9.34). Specic points in the history should be reviewed, such as 
underlying immune system status, risk factors for human immunode-
ciency virus (HIV) and contacts with highly transmissible infections such 
as tuberculosis, pertussis or COVID-19. Immunocompromised patients 
will be susceptible to a far broader spectrum of infectious microorgan-
isms (p. 268). The antibiotic choice will depend on local patterns of resist-
ance, patient risk factors and the likely source of infection. Information 
on likely organisms and appropriate antibiotics can be found on pages 
113 and 271). Microbiological samples (such as blood cultures, urine or 
CSF) should be taken, but this should not delay antibiotic administration, 
if obtaining samples is difcult.
Early source control
Source control requires an accurate diagnosis; urgent investigations 
should be performed as soon as physiological stability has been estab-
lished. A CT scan of the chest and abdomen with contrast is a high-yield 
test in this context. Specic actions may be required to control infec-
tion, such as drainage of an abscess or surgical débridement/resection 
of infected and/or necrotic tissue. Removal of potentially infected urine 
catheters or venous/arterial catheters should be promptly undertaken. 
Infected prosthetic devices, e.g. joint replacements, can be particularly 
challenging and require early specialist input.
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) for refractory hypotension
Central venous access should be established early in the resuscitation 
process and a noradrenaline infusion commenced. If there is severe 
hypotension, it is not necessary to wait until 30 mL/kg of uid has been 
administered before commencing noradrenaline; early vasopressor use 
Inadequate
oxygen
delivery
Tissue hypoxia
e.g. Ischaemic
gut
Shock
(from any cause)
Drugs
e.g. Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Salbutamol
Excess muscle
activity
e.g. Extreme
exercise
Seizure
Anaerobic
metabolism
Excess
production
Inadequate
clearance
β2-adrenoceptor
stimulation
High
lactate
Excess tissue
production
Hepatic
failure
Congenital enzyme
deficiencies (rare)
Other causes:
Metformin
Thiamin deficiency
Haematological malignancy
Drugs, e.g. antiretrovirals
Fig. 9.14 Physiology of hyperlactataemia.
9.33 The ‘Sepsis Six’*
 Deliver high-ow oxygen
 Take blood cultures
 Administer intravenous antibiotics
 Measure serum lactate and send full blood count
 Start intravenous uid replacement
 Commence accurate measurement of urine output
*International recommendations for the immediate management of suspected 
sepsis from the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (all to be delivered within 1 hr of the 
initial diagnosis of sepsis).
9.34 Early administration of antibiotics in suspected sepsis
 Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be administered as soon as possible after 
sepsis is suspected.
 Every hour of delayed treatment is associated with a 5%–10% increase in 
mortality.
9.35 Central and mixed venous oxygen saturations
 Saturation of venous blood is sampled from the right atrium or superior vena 
cava (central) or pulmonary artery (mixed venous).
 Both values reect the balance of supply and demand of oxygen to the tissues.
 Mixed venous oxygen saturation is a measure of whole-body supply and 
demand of oxygen; central venous oxygen saturation measures the supply 
and demand of oxygen from the upper body. Normal mixed venous oxygen 
saturation is 70%. Lower values than this suggest inadequate oxygen delivery.
 Central venous oxygen saturation is more variable, depending on whether the 
patient is awake or anaesthetised, but a value of 70% is considered normal.
 Where cytopathic hypoxia occurs, oxygen extraction is impaired and the central 
and mixed venous oxygen saturations may be > 80%. This is often a poor 
prognostic sign.
may improve the outcome from acute kidney injury. Measurement of cen-
tral and mixed venous oxygen saturations may provide additional prog-
nostic information (Box 9.35).
Other therapies for refractory hypotension
Refractory hypotension is due to either inadequate cardiac output or 
inadequate systemic vascular resistance (vasoplegia). When vaso plegia 
is suspected, it may be necessary to add vasopressin (antidiuretic hor-
mone, ADH). This is a potent vasoconstrictor that may be used to aug-
ment noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in achieving an acceptable MAP. 

[[p233]]
Disorders causing critical illness    201
9
Intravenous glucocorticoids are also commonly used in refractory hypo-
tension. There is little evidence that they improve the overall outcome, 
but they do lead to a more rapid reversal of the shocked state. There is a 
small increased risk of secondary infection following glucocorticoid use.
Septic cardiomyopathy
The myocardium can be affected by the septic process, presenting as 
either acute left or right ventricular dysfunction. A bedside echocardi-
ogram is particularly useful to conrm the diagnosis, as ECG changes 
are usually non-specic. Dobutamine or adrenaline (epinephrine) can be 
used to augment cardiac output, and intravenous calcium should be 
replaced if ionised calcium is low.
Other interventions such as intravenous bicarbonate in profound met-
abolic acidosis, high-volume haemoltration/haemodialysis and extra-
corporeal support are sometimes used, but currently lack evidence of 
benet.
Review of the underlying pathology
While sepsis is the most common cause of acute systemic inammation, 
up to 20% of patients initially treated for sepsis will have a non-infectious 
cause: that is, a sepsis mimic (Box 9.36). These conditions should be con-
sidered where the clinical picture is not typical, no source of sepsis can be 
found, or the inammatory response seems excessive in the context of 
local infection. Early reconsideration of the diagnosis of sepsis is crucial, as 
many of the ‘sepsis mimics’ offer a nite time window for specic interven-
tion, after which irreversible organ damage will have occurred.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Aetiology and pathogenesis
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a diffuse neutrophilic 
alveolitis caused by a range of conditions and characterised by bilateral 
radiographic inltrates and hypoxaemia (Box 9.37). Activated neutrophils 
are sequestered into the lungs and capillary permeability is increased, 
with damage to cells within the alveoli. The pathophysiology is part of the 
inammatory spectrum described in ‘Sepsis’ above, and the triggers are 
similar: infective and non-infective inammatory processes. These pro-
cesses result in exudation and accumulation of protein-rich cellular uid 
within alveoli and the formation of characteristic ‘hyaline membranes’. 
Local release of cytokines and chemokines by activated macrophages 
and neutrophils results in progressive recruitment of inammatory cells. 
Secondary effects include loss of surfactant and impaired surfactant pro-
duction. The net effect is alveolar collapse and reduced lung compliance, 
most marked in dependent regions of the lung (mainly dorsal in supine 
patients). The affected airspaces become uid-lled and can no longer 
contribute to ventilation, resulting in hypoxaemia (due to increased pul-
monary shunt) and hypercapnia (due to inadequate ventilation in some 
areas of the lung): that is, ventilation–perfusion mismatch.
Diagnosis and management
ARDS can be difcult to distinguish from uid overload or car-
diac failure. Classic chest X-ray and CT appearances are shown in 
Figures 9.15 and 9.16, respectively. Occasionally, conditions may 
present in a similar way to ARDS but respond to alternative treatments; 
an example of this might be a glucocorticoid-responsive interstitial 
pneumonia (p. 533). There is debate within the intensive care com-
munity as to whether severe COVID-19 pneumonitis causes ARDS. 
Clinically and pathologically COVID-19 does appear to be a separate 
entity in which glucocorticoids may be useful. However, glucocorticoids 
9.36 Sepsis mimics
 Pancreatitis
 Drug reactions – e.g. reactions to immunotherapy
 Widespread vasculitis – catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome, Goodpasture’s 
disease
 Autoimmune diseases – inammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus
 Malignancy – carcinoid syndrome
 Haematological conditions – haemophagocytic syndrome, diffuse lymphoma, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
9.37 Berlin denition of ARDS
 Onset within 1 week of a known clinical insult, or new or worsening respiratory 
symptoms
 Bilateral opacities on chest X-ray, not fully explained by effusions, lobar/lung 
collapse or nodules
 Respiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or uid overload. 
Objective assessment (e.g. by echocardiography) must exclude hydrostatic 
oedema if no risk factor is present
 Impaired oxygenation (see Box 9.38)
Fig. 9.15 Chest X-ray in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Note 
bilateral lung inltrates, pneumomediastinum, pneumothoraces with bilateral chest 
drains, surgical emphysema and fractures of the ribs, right clavicle and left scapula.
Fig. 9.16 CT scan of the thorax in a patient with severe ARDS. Note the 
pathology is mainly in the dorsal (dependent) parts of the lung.

[[p234]]
202    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
remain of unproven benet in ARDS from other causes. Safely reaching 
an accurate pathological diagnosis of respiratory failure is one of the 
key research areas within intensive care.
Management of ARDS is supportive, including use of lung-protective 
mechanical ventilation, inducing a negative uid balance and treating the 
underlying cause. Establishing the severity of ARDS (Box 9.38) is useful, 
as severe disease will require more proactive management such as prone 
positioning or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO; Fig. 9.24).
Acute circulatory failure (cardiogenic shock)
Denition and aetiology
Cardiogenic shock is dened as hypoperfusion due to inadequate car-
diac output or, more technically, a cardiac index of < 2.2 L/min/m2 (see 
Box 9.47). While cardiogenic shock is the nal common pathway of 
many disease processes (e.g. sepsis, anaphylaxis, haemorrhage), the 
important primary causes of acute heart failure or cardiogenic shock 
(Fig. 9.17) are described here.
Myocardial infarction
In the majority of cases, cardiogenic shock following acute MI is due to 
left ventricular dysfunction. However, it may also be due to infarction of 
the right ventricle, or a variety of mechanical complications, including 
tamponade (due to infarction and rupture of the free wall), an acquired 
ventricular septal defect (due to infarction and rupture of the septum) 
and acute mitral regurgitation (due to infarction or rupture of the papillary 
muscles).
Severe myocardial systolic dysfunction causes a fall in cardiac out-
put, BP and coronary perfusion pressure. Diastolic dysfunction causes 
a rise in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, pulmonary congestion 
and oedema, leading to hypoxaemia that worsens myocardial ischae-
mia. This is further exacerbated by peripheral vasoconstriction. These 
factors combine to create the ‘downward spiral’ of cardiogenic shock 
(Fig. 9.18). Hypotension, oliguria, delirium and cold, clammy peripheries 
are the manifestations of a low cardiac output, whereas breathlessness, 
hypoxaemia, cyanosis and inspiratory crackles at the lung bases are typ-
ical features of pulmonary oedema. If necessary, a Swan–Ganz catheter 
can be used to measure the pulmonary artery pressures and cardiac 
output (Fig. 9.25). These ndings can be used to categorise patients with 
acute MI into four haemodynamic subsets (Box 9.39) and titrate therapy 
accordingly.
In cardiogenic shock associated with acute MI, immediate percutane-
ous coronary intervention should be performed. The viable myocardium 
surrounding a fresh infarct may contract poorly for a few days and then 
recover. This phenomenon is known as myocardial stunning and means 
that acute heart failure should be treated intensively because overall car-
diac function may subsequently improve.
Acute massive pulmonary embolism
Massive PE may complicate leg or pelvic vein thrombosis and usually 
presents with sudden collapse. The clinical features and treatment are 
discussed on page 546. Bedside echocardiography may demonstrate a 
small, under-lled, vigorous left ventricle with a dilated right ventricle; it is 
sometimes possible to see thrombus in the right ventricular outow tract 
or main pulmonary artery. In practice, it can be difcult to distinguish 
massive PE from a right ventricular infarct on transthoracic echocardio-
gram. CT pulmonary angiography usually provides a denitive diagnosis.
Acute valvular pathology, aortic dissection and cardiac tamponade
These conditions should be considered in an undifferentiated presenta-
tion of shock. The diagnosis and management of these conditions is 
discussed in Chapter 16
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrest is the cessation of functional cardiac contraction and is 
the nal common pathway in death from any pathology. In the clinical 
context, cardiac arrest refers to the sudden loss of cardiac output that 
prompts an emergency response. Pathogenesis, prognosis and man-
agement of in-hospital and out-of-hospital cardiac arrest are subtly differ-
ent; however, the basic principles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
are to maintain forward ow of oxygenated blood, correct the causative 
factor and restore spontaneous circulation.
Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA)
This is the sudden and complete loss of cardiac output occurring in the 
community. The clinical diagnosis is based on the victim being uncon-
scious and pulseless; breathing may take some time to stop completely 
after cardiac arrest. Death is virtually inevitable, unless effective treatment 
is given promptly.
Pathogenesis
Cardiac arrest may be caused by ventricular brillation (Fig. 9.19), pulse-
less ventricular tachycardia (see Ch. 16), asystole or pulseless electrical 
activity. Myocardial ischaemia is the most common trigger of OHCA. This 
can be due to an acute infarct, acute on chronic coronary insufciency, 
post-infarct ventricular scarring or structural cardiac disease (cardiomy-
opathy, aortic stenosis). Ventricular brillation can occur in the absence 
of recognised structural abnormalities, e.g. congenital syndromes such 
as Brugada syndrome. Occasionally, sudden cardiac death can occur 
from an acute mechanical catastrophe such as cardiac rupture or aortic 
dissection. The causes are listed in Chapter 16, Box 16.7
Survivors of OHCA
The ‘Chain of Survival’ (Fig. 9.20) refers to the sequence of events that is 
necessary to maximise the chances of a cardiac arrest victim surviving. 
Survival is most likely if all links in the chain are strong: that is, if the arrest 
is witnessed, help is called immediately, basic life support is adminis-
tered by a trained individual, the emergency medical services respond 
promptly, and debrillation is achieved within a few minutes. CPR from 
bystanders, often assisted by ambulance service telephone dispatchers, 
is crucial. Good training in both basic and advanced life support is essen-
tial and should be maintained by regular refresher courses. Automated 
external debrillators (AEDs) are increasingly available in public places, 
particularly where trafc congestion may impede the response of emer-
gency services, and should be used as soon as possible. Designated 
individuals can respond to a cardiac arrest using basic life support and 
an automated external debrillator.
For OHCA, survival rates of approximately 10% have been reported 
internationally. When type I myocardial infarction Box 16.47 is the sus-
pected pathology, early coronary revascularisation should be consid-
ered. Those with reversible causes, such as exercise-induced ischaemia 
or aortic stenosis, should have the underlying cause treated if possible. 
Survivors of a ventricular tachycardia or ventricular brillation arrest, in 
whom no reversible cause can be identied, may be at risk of another 
episode and should be considered for an implantable cardiac debrillator 
(p. 418) and anti-arrhythmic drug therapy.
9.38 Determining the severity of ARDS
Severity of hypoxaemia is calculated using a Pa/FiO2 ratio. This is a number 
calculated by using the PaO2 from an arterial blood gas measurement divided by 
the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2, expressed as a fraction).
For example, a patient with a PaO2 of 10 kPa (75 mmHg) on 50% oxygen, i.e. 
FiO2 of 0.5, would have a Pa/FiO2 ratio of 20 kPa (150 mmHg). This would be dened 
as moderately severe ARDS, if the other Berlin criteria were met (see Box 9.37). All 
measurements should be taken on a minimum of 5 cmH2O of PEEP or CPAP.
 Mild: 40–26.6 kPa (300–200 mmHg)
 Moderate: 26.6–13.3 kPa (200–100 mmHg)
 Severe: ≤ 13.3 kPa (≤ 100 mmHg)
(CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; PEEP = positive end-expiratory pressure)

[[p235]]
Disorders causing critical illness    203
9
Aorta
Cardiac
tamponade
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Endocarditis
of mitral valve
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Right ventricular
infarct
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Pulmonary
embolism
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Aorta
Dysrhythmia caused by:
Left ventricular damage
Myocardial infarction
Myocarditis
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Ventricular
tachycardia
Aorta
PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Left ventricular
infarct
Fig. 9.17 Some common causes of cardiogenic shock. (LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)
Ventricular
dysfunction
Systolic Diastolic
↓ Cardiac
output
↓ Blood
pressure
↓ Coronary
perfusion
Further
ischaemia
↑ Left ventricular
diastolic pressure
↑ Pulmonary
congestion
Hypoxaemia
Fig. 9.18 The downward spiral of cardiogenic shock.
9.39 Acute myocardial infarction: haemodynamic subsets
Cardiac output
Pulmonary oedema
No
Yes
Normal
Good prognosis and requires 
no treatment for heart failure
Due to moderate left 
ventricular dysfunction. 
Treat with vasodilators 
and diuretics
Low
Due to right ventricular 
dysfunction or concomitant 
hypovolaemia. Give uid 
challenge and consider 
pulmonary artery catheter to 
guide therapy
Extensive myocardial 
infarction and poor 
prognosis. Consider 
intra-aortic balloon pump, 
vasodilators, diuretics and 
inotropes
In-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA)
Historically, outcomes from IHCA were extremely poor. However, with 
appropriate anticipatory care planning and prompt intervention of hospital 
resuscitation teams, outcomes can be signicantly better than for OHCA.
Pathogenesis
Although primary cardiac causes are the most common cause of IHCA, 
additional factors such as organ failure, sepsis or respiratory decom-
pensation are often more pertinent. Correction of hypoxaemia with early 
tracheal intubation and ventilation is therefore of higher importance in this 

[[p236]]
204    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
group than in OHCA, provided it can be achieved without interruption of 
chest compressions.
Clinical assessment and management
Basic life support
When a patient with suspected cardiac arrest is encountered, the ABCDE 
approach to management should be followed; this involves prompt 
assessment and restoration of the Airway, maintenance of ventilation 
using rescue Breathing (‘mouth-to-mouth’ breathing), and maintenance 
of the Circulation using chest compressions; Disability, in resuscitated 
patients, refers to assessment of neurological status, and Exposure entails 
removal of clothes to enable debrillation, auscultation of the chest and 
assessment for a rash caused by anaphylaxis, for injuries and so on 
(Fig. 9.21). The term basic life support (BLS) encompasses manoeuvres 
that aim to maintain a low level of circulation until more denitive treatment 
with advanced life support can be given. Chest compression-only (‘hands-
only’) CPR is easier for members of the public to learn and administer, and 
is now advocated in public education campaigns.
Advanced life support
Advanced life support (ALS) (Fig. 9.22) aims to restore normal cardiac 
rhythm by debrillation when the cause of cardiac arrest is a tachyarrhyth-
mia, or to restore cardiac output by correcting other reversible causes of 
cardiac arrest. The initial priority is to assess the patient's cardiac rhythm 
by attaching a debrillator or monitor. Once this has been done, treatment 
should be instituted based on the clinical ndings. Only a minority of patients 
will have a shockable rhythm at the commencement of resuscitation.
Ventricular brillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia should be 
treated with immediate debrillation. Debrillation is more likely to be 
effective if a biphasic shock debrillator is used, where the polarity of 
the shock is reversed midway through its delivery. Debrillation is usu-
ally administered using a 150 Joule biphasic shock, and CPR resumed 
immediately for 2 minutes without attempting to conrm restoration of a 
pulse, because restoration of mechanical cardiac output rarely occurs 
immediately after successful debrillation. If, after 2 minutes, a pulse is 
not restored, a further biphasic shock of 150–200 J should be given. 
Thereafter, additional biphasic shocks of 150–200 J are given every 
2minutes after each cycle of CPR. During resuscitation, adrenaline (epi-
nephrine, 1 mg IV) should be given every 3–5 minutes and consideration 
given to the use of intravenous amiodarone, especially if ventricular bril-
lation or ventricular tachycardia re-initiates after successful debrillation.
Ventricular brillation of low amplitude, or ‘ne VF’, may mimic asys-
tole. If asystole cannot be condently diagnosed, the patient should be 
treated for VF and debrillated. Bedside echocardiography can be a use-
ful clinical aid. The subcostal views can frequently be obtained without 
detriment to CPR quality, and can identify cardiac structural abnormali-
ties such as an enlarged right heart in pulmonary embolism, aortic steno-
sis or ongoing ne VF. Refractory VF can be amenable to supplementary 
drugs (e.g. lidocaine, magnesium, procainamide) or alternative ways of 
using the debrillator, e.g. antero-posterior pad placement.
If an electrical rhythm is observed that would be expected to produce a 
cardiac output, ‘pulseless electrical activity’ is present. Pulseless electrical 
activity should be treated by continuing CPR and adrenaline (epinephrine) 
administration while seeking causes. Asystole should be treated similarly 
although prolonged asystole has an extremely poor prognosis.
There are many potentially reversible causes of cardiac arrest; the 
main ones can be remembered as a list of four Hs and four Ts (see 
Fig. 9.22). In specialist centres and in appropriate candidates, the use 
of extracorporeal life support (has been used in cardiac arrest with good 
Fig. 9.19 Ventricular brillation. A bizarre chaotic rhythm, initiated in this case by 
two ventricular ectopic beats in rapid succession.
–
t
o
r
e
s
t
a
r
t
h
e
a
t
o
b
u
y
t
m
e
–
t
o
r
e
s
t
o
r
e
q
u
a
li
y
o
f
li
f
e
–
t
p
r
e
v
e
n
t
c
a
r
d
a
c
a
e
t
E
a
r
l
y
r
o
g
n
it
i
o
n
a
n
d
c
a
ll
f
o
r
h
l
E
a
rl
y
C
P
R
E
a
rl
y
d
e
f
i
b
ri
ll
a
ti
o
n
o
s
r
e
s
u
s
c
it
a
ti
o
n
c
a
r
Fig. 9.20 The Chain of Survival in cardiac arrest. (ALS = advanced life support; CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
 In-hospital resuscitation
 Collapsed / sick patient
 Shout for HELP and assess patient
 Signs of life?
 YES
 Assess ABCDE
Recognise and treat
Oxygen, monitoring,
IV access
 Call resuscitation
team if
appropriate
 Handover to
resuscitation
team
NO
 Call resuscitation
team
CPR 30:2
with oxygen and
airway adjuncts
 Apply pads/monitor
Attempt defibrillation
if appropriate
Advanced
life support
when resuscitation
team arrives
Fig. 9.21 Algorithm for adult basic life support. For further information, see 
www.resus.org.uk. (CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation) From Resuscitation 
Council (UK) guidelines: https://www.resus.org.uk/resuscitation-guidelines/
in-hospital-resuscitation/.

[[p237]]
Disorders causing critical illness    205
9
 Advanced life support
 Unresponsive and
not breathing normally?
 CPR 30:2
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Minimise interruptions
 Assess rhythm
 Call resuscitation team
Non-shockable
(PEA/Asystole)
Immediately resume
CPR for 2 mins
Minimise interruptions
Immediately resume
CPR for 2 mins
Minimise interruptions
Shockable
(VF/Pulseless VT)
Return of spontaneous
circulation
Immediate post-cardiac
arrest treatment
 Use ABCDE approach
 Aim for SaO2 of 94–98%
 Aim for normal PaCO2
 12-lead ECG
 Treat precipitating cause
 Targeted temperature
   management
During CPR
 Ensure high-quality chest compressions
 Minimise interruptions to compressions
 Give oxygen
 Use waveform capnography
 Perform continuous compressions when
   advanced airway in place
 Gain vascular access (intravenous or
   interosseous)
 Give adrenaline (epinephrine) every
3–5 min
 Give amiodarone after 3 shocks 
Treat reversible causes 
Hypoxia
Hypovolaemia
Hypo/hyperkalaemia/metabolic
Hypothermia/hyperthermia
Consider
 Ultrasound imaging
 Mechanical chest compressions to facilitate transfer/treatment
 Coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention
 Extracorporeal CPR
Thrombosis – coronary or pulmonary
Tension pneumothorax
Tamponade – cardiac
Toxins
1 shock
Minimise
interruptions
Fig. 9.22 Algorithm for adult advanced life support. For further information, see www.resus.org.uk. (CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation: PEA = pulseless 
electrical activity; VF = ventricular brillation; VT = ventricular tachycardia) From Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines: https://www.resus.org.uk/resuscitation-guidelines/
adult-advanced-life-support/
effect. However, this is not generally available outside of large urban 
centres. The use of automated chest compression devices is becoming 
more common and their use should be considered in patients in whom 
a prolonged resuscitation is expected (e.g. when thrombolytic has been 
administered or in profound hypothermia). Injuries from CPR are com-
mon; their management is summarised in the section on ‘Complications 
and outcomes of critical illness’.
Post cardiac arrest
The majority of cardiac arrest survivors will need a period of time in 
intensive care to achieve physiological stability, identify and manage the 
underlying cause of the arrest, and optimise neurological recovery.
Acute management
A MAP of > 70 mmHg should be maintained to optimise cerebral perfu-
sion. Shock is common following return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) 
and is caused by a combination of the underlying condition leading to the 
arrest, myocardial stunning and a post-arrest vasodilated state. Support 
with inotropes, vasopressors and occasionally mechanical support from 
an intra-aortic balloon pump or venous–arterial ECMO (Fig. 9.24) may be 
required. Specic cardiac interventions and their indications are described 
in Chapter 16. Other physiological targets are listed in Box 9.40
Prognosis
Predicting which patients will not recover from the brain injury sustained 
at the time of cardiac arrest is very difcult. Certain features suggest 
that the outcome will be poor: for example, the absence of pupillary and 
corneal reexes, absence of a motor response and persistent myoclonic 
jerking.
Tools to assist prognostication following cardiac arrest are shown in 
Box 9.41. The clinician should, where feasible, delay prognostication until 
a period of 72 hours of targeted temperature management has been com-
pleted. The bilateral absence of the ‘N20’ spike on the somatosensory 
evoked potential is the most specic test to predict irrecoverable brain 
injury. This test is performed by administering an electrical impulse over 
a peripheral nerve and recording the electrical impulses measured by the 
scalp electrodes overlying the part of the brain expected to receive the 

[[p238]]
206    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
sensory and emotional experience can be modied with high-quality care 
and analgesia, there is a strong case that it can only be morally ‘right’ 
to admit a patient to intensive care if ‘the ends justify the means’. There 
must be a realistic hope that the patient will regain a quality of life that 
would be worth the pain and suffering that he or she will experience in 
intensive care. Few patients are able to comprehend fully what it means 
to be critically ill, so the physician should guide the process of determin-
ing who should be admitted to intensive care.
Selecting the appropriate level of intervention for an individual patient 
can be very difcult. The decision-making process should involve an 
assessment of the likelihood of reversibility of the disease, the magni-
tude of the interventions required, the underlying level of frailty, and the 
personal beliefs and wishes of the patient (commonly expressed through 
their next of kin).
As technology and science have improved, conditions that were 
previously regarded as terminal can now be supported and life can be 
considerably prolonged (Box 9.42). There have been several prominent 
examples of individuals who have received intensive care, but where an 
onlooker might have considered treatment to be futile owing to frailty, 
comorbidity or profound neurological injury. Such cases will, in part, 
shape the views and expectations of society, and it is unlikely that mak-
ing decisions in this area will become any easier. Some suggested tech-
niques to aid decision-making are listed in Box 9.43
9.40Physiological targets following a return of spontaneous 
circulation (ROSC)
 Temperature management. Facilitate maintenance of temperature at 36°C 
and avoidance of pyrexia using a cooling blanket. This should be continued for 
72 hrs. Muscle relaxants may be required to prevent shivering.
 Blood pressure management. Aim for a MAP of at least 70 mmHg and a systolic 
blood pressure of > 120 mmHg.
 Glucose control. Control the glucose to 6–10 mmol/L (108–180 mg/dL).
 Normal CO2 (4.5–6 kPa, 33–45 mmHg) and oxygen saturation (94%–98%). 
Avoid both hypoxaemia and hyperoxia.
9.41 Prognostication after cardiac arrest: predictors of poor 
neurological recovery
Coexisting problems
 Multi-organ failure
 Signicant comorbidities
Clinical
 Persisting and generalised myoclonus
 Absence of pupillary or corneal reexes
 Poor motor response (absent or extensor response)
Biochemical
 Neuron-specic enolase > 33 µg/L
Imaging
 CT showing loss of grey–white differentiation
 Focal cause or consequence of cardiac arrest, e.g. subarachnoid haemorrhage
Electrophysiology
 EEG patterns may suggest brain injury, e.g. burst suppression
 Somatosensory evoked potentials – bilateral absence of the N20 spike (recorded 
from scalp electrodes from cutaneous electrical impulse over the median nerve)
impulse. Where this is not available, prognostication based on all other 
available information, along with the perceived wishes relating to the level 
of disability the individual would be prepared to accept, should allow a 
decision regarding ongoing treatment to be made. Where there is doubt, 
more time should be given to allow assessment of neurological recovery.
Other causes of multi-organ failure
As previously discussed, sepsis is the most common cause of multi- 
organ failure. However, multi-organ failure secondary to single organ dys-
function, such as cardiac failure, liver failure, renal failure or respiratory 
failure, is also common. The multisystem insult in these disease pro-
cesses goes beyond the direct biochemical damage and tissue hypoxia 
caused by the primary organ dysfunction. It probably reects cellular sig-
nalling pathways and the release of other systemic toxins by the failing 
organ, referred to as organ ‘crosstalk’.
Multi-organ failure can also be caused by a physiological insult that 
damages a wide variety of cells in different organs, including toxins from 
extrinsic sources such as envenomation and intrinsic sources such as 
myoglobin in rhabdomyolysis (p. 198). Multi-organ failure can also be 
caused by profound physical injury to cells from processes such as 
nuclear radiation, heat exposure or blast trauma.
Critical care medicine
Decisions around intensive care admission
Being a patient in intensive care is seldom a pleasant experience. The 
interventions are usually painful and the loss of liberties that are normally 
taken for granted can be devastating. While much of the unpleasant 
9.42 Critical illness in the context of congenital conditions
 Longer survival: there are many congenital conditions that would, in the past, 
have been fatal in childhood, but now patients survive into adulthood. Decision-
making can be difcult when the adolescent has impaired decision-making 
capacity.
 Parental views: in such circumstances, the views of the parent or legal 
guardian become paramount.
 Goals of care: often a detailed explanation of what is, and is not, achievable in 
intensive care allows the direction of care to be switched to palliative when life 
expectancy is poor and quality of life is severely impaired.
 Decision-making: such conversations may require input from experts in the 
patient's congenital condition(s), and advanced decision-making regarding ICU 
admission should be encouraged whenever patients and families feel able to 
discuss such issues.
9.43 Techniques to improve admission decision-making
 Always act in the best interests of the patient: external inuences are commonly 
present but these should be of only secondary importance.
 Maximise patient capacity: wherever possible, the patient should be involved in 
discussions of escalation and resuscitation status.
 Communicate openly and honestly with the next of kin: when communicating 
potential outcomes, it is best to use natural frequencies rather than 
percentages. For example, ‘If we had 100 patients with the same illness as your 
mother, only 10 would survive’ is easier for most people to understand than 
‘there is a 90% chance of death’.
 Reach mutual agreement with the next of kin: it is rare for there to be discord 
between clinicians and family, and in most cases the most appropriate course of 
action is clear.
 Seek additional opinions: other clinicians involved in the care of the patient will 
provide useful input. The premise should be to err on the side of escalation 
where the most appropriate course of action is unclear. Where there is an 
unresolvable difference in opinion, a mediation process or court ruling may 
be required to make the nal decision. Thankfully, this is a very infrequent 
occurrence.
 Plan ahead: advance planning in chronic, progressive disease can make the 
decision easier. Some health facilities use an escalation form, which species 
the interventions that should be offered or are acceptable to the patient. This 
can be useful as the binary decision of for/not for resuscitation fails to account 
for the array of interventions that can be performed before cardiac arrest 
occurs.

[[p239]]
Stabilisation and institution of organ support    207
9
Stabilisation and institution of organ support
In order to stabilise a critically unwell patient, the primary problem should 
be corrected as quickly as possible: for example, source control in sepsis 
and control of the bleeding point in haemorrhage. Immediate resuscita-
tion and prioritisation of the safety of the patient are clearly important, but 
there is only a limited role for ‘optimising’ the patient if such measures 
may signicantly delay a denitive treatment, such as laparotomy for a 
perforated viscus. In some cases, the denitive treatment is not readily 
apparent or treatments take time to have their full effect. In these cases, 
adequate organ support to stabilise the patient while the treatment is 
given becomes the main goal of care.
Respiratory support
Non-invasive respiratory support
Non-invasive respiratory support provides a bridge between simple oxy-
gen delivery devices and invasive ventilation. It can be used in patients 
who are in respiratory distress but do not have an indication for invasive 
ventilation, or in those who are not suitable for intubation and ventilation 
for chronic health reasons. Patients must be cooperative, able to protect 
their airway, and have the strength to breathe spontaneously and cough 
effectively. Clinicians should avoid using non-invasive respiratory support 
to prolong the dying process in irreversible conditions such as end-stage 
lung disease. Likewise, a failure to respond to treatment or further dete-
rioration should trigger a decision regarding intubation, as delayed inva-
sive ventilation in this context is associated with worse outcome.
High-ow nasal cannulae
High-ow nasal cannulae (HFNCs) are devices that provide very high gas 
ows of fully humidied oxygen and air. They offer distinct advantages 
over non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in selected patients, mainly those with 
type I respiratory failure (particularly pneumonia) who have not reached 
an indication for invasive ventilation. They allow patient comfort and 
increased expectoration while providing some degree of positive end-ex-
piratory pressure (PEEP) and a high oxygen concentration that can be 
titrated to the SO2
Continuous positive pressure ventilation
Continuous positive pressure ventilation therapy involves the application 
of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) throughout the patient's 
breathing cycle, typically 5–10 cmH2O. It helps to recruit collapsed alveoli 
and can enhance clearance of alveolar uid. It is particularly effective 
at treating pulmonary atelectasis (which may be post-operative) and 
pulmonary oedema. It can be delivered using a simpler device than NIV, 
may be better tolerated and avoids compounding the hypocapnia that 
sometimes occurs in type I respiratory failure.
Non-invasive ventilation or bi-level ventilation
NIV provides ventilatory support via a tight-tting nasal or facial mask. 
It can be delivered by using a simple bi-level ventilation (BiPAP) turbine 
ventilator, or an intensive care ventilator. These machines can deliver 
pressure at a higher level (approximately 15–25 cmH2O) for inspiration 
and a lower pressure (usually 4–10 cmH2O) to allow expiration. Ventilation 
can be spontaneous (triggered by a patient's breaths) or timed (occurring 
at a set frequency). Systems that synchronise with a patient's efforts are 
better tolerated and tend to be more effective in respiratory failure. Timed 
breaths are used for patients with central apnoea. NIV is the rst-line 
therapy in patients with type II respiratory failure secondary to an acute 
exacerbation of COPD because it reduces the work of breathing and 
ofoads the diaphragm, allowing it to recover strength. It is also useful in 
pulmonary oedema, obesity hypoventilation syndromes and some neu-
romuscular disorders. It should be initiated early, especially when severe 
respiratory acidosis secondary to hypercapnia is present. NIV can also 
be used to support selected patients with hypercapnia secondary to 
pneumonia, or during weaning from invasive ventilation, but its effective-
ness in these contexts is less certain; early intubation or re-intubation is 
probably more benecial.
Intubation and intermittent positive pressure 
ventilation
Taking control of the respiratory system in a critically ill patient is one of 
the most signicant and risky periods in a patient's journey. Critical inci-
dents are common because the patient is often deteriorating rapidly and is 
exhausted. The potential for cardiovascular collapse is further exacerbated 
by the negatively inotropic and vasodilating drugs used to induce anaes-
thesia, and the period of apnoea invoked to facilitate intubation (Box 9.44).
The main aims of intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) are 
to avoid critical hypoxaemia and hypercapnia while minimising damage 
to the alveoli and encouraging the patient to breathe spontaneously 
once it is safe to do so. The determination of what constitutes critical will 
depend on the status of each patient. For example, a patient with raised 
ICP will have a strong indication for normocapnia (because hypercapnia 
increases ICP). Unfortunately, achieving the minute volumes required to 
maintain normocapnia can be harmful to the lungs.
Ventilator modes
Following intubation, most patients have a period of paralysis from the 
muscle relaxation. Mandatory ventilation is, therefore, required for a var-
iable period, depending on the severity of the lung injury, the underlying 
disease process and the general condition of the patient. Mandatory 
ventilation means that the ventilator will deliver set parameters (either a 
set tidal volume or a set inspiratory pressure), regardless of patient effort. 
A physician can choose to support additional patient effort in between 
mandatory breaths with pressure support. This requires sufcient patient 
effort to ‘trigger’ the ventilator to deliver a synchronised breath, in time 
with the patient's own ventilation. Other parameters that should be con-
sidered when using mechanical ventilation are shown in Figure 9.23
As a patient's illness resolves, or if the lung injury necessitating intu-
bation is not severe, periods of spontaneous breathing with pressure 
support are commenced. While spontaneous breathing is preferable to 
mandatory ventilation modes, the shearing forces of patient effort can 
exacerbate lung injury in patients with severely damaged lungs. It is, 
therefore, important that a patient is permitted to breathe in a planned 
and controlled way.
Ventilator-induced lung injury
Every positive pressure breath causes cyclical ination of alveoli followed 
by deation. The resultant damage to alveoli occurs via several possible 
mechanisms:
 distending forces from the tidal volume, termed ‘volutrauma’
 the pressure used to inate the lung, referred to as ‘barotrauma’
9.44 Optimising safety during intubation
 Intervene early in the disease process (once it has become clear that the 
disease trajectory is downward).
 Use a stable anaesthetic technique: low doses of sedative agents and rapidly 
acting paralytic agents.
 Remember that intubation should be performed by the most experienced 
operator available.
 Use techniques to optimise oxygenation and ventilation in the period around 
intubation, e.g. keeping non-invasive ventilation in situ for pre-oxygenation, 
manual ventilation via facemask while awaiting neuro-muscular blockade, and 
using a video-laryngoscope in an anticipated difcult intubation.
 When the history and epidemiology suggests risk of an airborne communicable 
disease, intubation should be performed in an isolated room with adequate 
ventilation and with as few staff present as possible. Intubation is an aerosol-
generating procedure and all staff should wear appropriate personal protective 
equipment.

[[p240]]
208    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
 alveoli collapsing at the end of expiration, called ‘atelectotrauma’
 the release of inammatory cytokines in response to cyclical disten-
sion, called ‘biotrauma’.
The threshold of injurious ventilation is unique to each patient. 
Moderate ventilator pressures and volumes used to ventilate healthy 
lungs may not cause ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI), but the same 
settings may cause signicant VILI if delivered to a patient with lungs that 
are already damaged from another disease process.
Strategies that may reduce the incidence and severity of VILI include:
 Permissive hypercapnia. In the majority of patients who are ven-
tilated for respiratory failure, it is preferable to tolerate moderate 
degrees of hypercapnia rather than strive for normal blood gases at 
the expense of VILI. For example, in a patient with isolated respira-
tory failure, a physician may choose to tolerate a PaCO2 of up to 
10 kPa (75 mmHg), provided the H+ is < 63 nmol/L (pH > 7.2).
 ‘Open lung’ ventilation. Maintaining a positive pressure within the 
airways at the end of expiration prevents atelectotrauma. This can 
be facilitated by the use of low tidal volumes and higher levels of 
PEEP (see Fig. 9.23). Recruitment manoeuvres (occasional short 
periods of sustained high airway pressures to open up alveoli that 
have collapsed) can reduce the incidence of VILI in patients who do 
not have ARDS.
 Paralysis. When respiratory failure is severe, patient effort may 
worsen VILI. An infusion of muscle relaxant can be used to moder-
ate dyssynchrony with the ventilator.
Advanced respiratory support
Airway pressure release ventilation
Airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) is a mode of ventilation that 
lengthens the inspiratory time to the extreme, with a very short period of 
time for expiration. It relies on spontaneous movement of the diaphragm 
from patient effort to facilitate the mixing of gas within the respiratory 
system during the long period in full inspiration, followed by a very short 
period of low pressure to allow passive expiration. It has not, however, 
been demonstrated to be superior to conventional modes of ventilation, 
but may have a role in some patients with moderate to severe ARDS.
Prone positioning
In ARDS, the posterior parts of the lung lose airspaces due to atelectasis 
and inammatory exudate. By placing patients on their front, the pattern 
of uid distribution within the lung changes, and ventilation–perfusion 
matching is improved. This is used to enhance oxygenation in moderate 
to severe ARDS, and may have some disease-modifying effects as the 
dependent areas of the lung are changed periodically. Although there 
are risks associated with nursing a patient in the prone position, it is a 
widely used therapy. Patients are usually placed in the prone position for 
12–24hours and then rotated back to the supine position for a similar 
period. This cycle continues until there is evidence of resolving lung injury. 
Using prone positioning in the awake and cooperative patient on high-
ow oxygen or CPAP may be a useful technique in some patients.
Extracorporeal respiratory support
Sometimes, despite optimal invasive ventilation, it is not possible to 
maintain adequate oxygenation or prevent a profound respiratory aci-
dosis. When a patient has a reversible cause of respiratory failure (or is 
a potential lung transplant recipient) and facilities are available, extracor-
poreal respiratory support should be considered.
Venous–venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
In venous–venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VV ECMO), 
large-bore central venous cannulae are inserted into the superior vena 
cava (SVC) and/or the inferior vena cava (IVC) via the femoral or jugular 
Respiratory rate and minute volume
Depend on the minute volume required to
achieve the desired PCO2, and whether the
patient is breathing spontaneously.  Rates are
commonly 20–30 breaths/min
Ventilator mode
Mandatory, spontaneous,
or mandatory with the ability
to take spontaneous breaths
(as shown here)
FiO2
Fraction of inspired
oxygen. This is usually
titrated to oxygen
saturations targeting
92–95%
Tidal volume
Usual target is 6 mL/kg
of predicted body
weight (PBW)
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)
The pressure within the respiratory system during expiration,
commonly 5–15 cmH2O. Higher levels of PEEP often improve
oxygenation but put strain on the right heart (as it makes it
harder to pump blood through the pulmonary circulation)
Plateau pressure
Airway pressure during an
inspiratory hold. Keeping plateau
pressure as low as possible above
PEEP is the most protective
strategy for the lungs 
Pressure–time
graph
Volume–time
graph
Flow–time
graph
Fig. 9.23 Settings to be considered when commencing mechanical ventilation.

[[p241]]
Stabilisation and institution of organ support    209
9
veins, and advanced under ultrasound or uoroscopic guidance (Fig. 
9.24). Venous blood is then pumped through a membrane oxygenator. 
This device has thousands of tiny silicone tubes with air/oxygen gas on 
the other side of the tubes (the membrane). This facilitates the passage 
of oxygen into the blood and diffusion of carbon dioxide across the 
membrane, where it is removed by a constant ow of gas (sweep gas). 
The oxygenated blood is then returned to the right atrium, from where it 
ows through the lungs as it would in the physiological state. This means 
that even if the lungs are contributing no oxygenation or carbon dioxide 
removal, a patient can remain well oxygenated and normocapnic.
Gas out
Membrane
oxygenator
Controller
console
RPM
4000
Pressures
Saturations
Flow
Oxygenated blood returned
to vein (VV) or artery (VA)
Venous blood from patient
(usually inferior vena cava)
Centrifugal pump
Venous ‘return’ cannula
Superior vena cava
Right atrium now full
of oxygenated blood
Tricuspid valve
Right ventricle
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery
Access ECMO cannula
Femoral vein
Skin puncture site
in proximal thigh
From ECMO
circuit
To ECMO circuit
Venous
‘return’
cannula
Venous
‘access’
cannula
Gas in
A
B
Pulmonary vein (left)
Pulmonary vein (right)
Right atrium
Proximal aorta
Mitral valve
Aortic valve
Left ventricle
Blood from
ECMO circuit
Blood from ‘normal’
circulation (native
circulation)
Where the two circulations meet depends on the
native cardiac output; if very low, they will meet very
proximally/at the aortic valve
Oxygenated blood at
high pressure will flow
proximally up the aorta
to perfuse organs
Blood will also
flow distally to
perfuse the legs
Arterial ‘return’ cannula
Arterial
‘return’
cannula
To ECMO circuit
From ECMO circuit
Venous
‘access’
cannula
C
Fig. 9.24 Principles of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). 

[[p242]]
210    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal
In some patients it is possible to maintain oxygenation but there is 
refractory hypercapnia. There are devices available that can remove 
carbon dioxide using a much lower blood ow rate than VV ECMO. 
Consequently, smaller venous cannulae, similar to those used in renal 
dialysis, can be sufcient to have a ‘CO2 dialysis’ effect. This can be 
useful in patients in whom normocapnia is essential (such as those 
with a raised ICP), or those with refractory hypercapnia and adequate 
oxygenation. In addition, extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal can be 
used to reduce the required minute volume, which is a benecial strat-
egy for protecting the lungs against VILI or facilitating early extubation.
Cardiovascular support
Initial resuscitation
A brief assessment can usually yield enough information to determine 
whether a patient is at signicant risk of an imminent cardiac arrest. If the 
patient is obtunded and there is no palpable radial or brachial pulse, then 
treatment should proceed as described on page 204.
In a peri-arrest situation, a single dose of intramuscular adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) 0.5 mg (0.5 mL of 1 : 1000) can be life-saving. If expertise is avail-
able, a small dose of intravenous adrenaline (epinephrine) can delay cardiac 
arrest long enough to identify the cause of shock and institute other sup-
portive measures; a suggested dose would be 50 µg (0.5 mL of 1 : 10 000). 
If haemorrhage is considered a possibility, a ‘major haemorrhage’ alert 
should be activated, facilitating rapid access to large volumes of blood and 
blood products. A classication of shock is shown in Box 9.45
Venous access for the administration of drugs and uids is vital 
but often difcult in critically unwell patients. Wide-bore cannulae are 
required for rapid uid administration. In extremis, the external jugu-
lar vein can be cannulated; it is often prominent in low cardiac output 
states and readily visible on the lateral aspect of the neck. Occluding 
the vein distally with nger pressure makes it easier to cannulate, but 
care must be taken to remain high in the neck to avoid causing a pneu-
mothorax. Intra-osseous or central venous access can be established 
if there are no visible peripheral veins. Ultrasound can provide assis-
tance for rapid and safe venous cannulation. Rapid infusion devices are 
widely available and should be used for the delivery of warmed, air-free 
uid and blood products.
Fluid and vasopressor use
Resuscitation of the shocked patient should usually include a 10 mL/kg 
uid challenge. Using colloid or crystalloid is acceptable; starch solutions 
are associated with additional renal dysfunction and should be avoided. 
The uid challenge can be repeated if shock persists, to a maximum 
total of 30 mL/kg of uid. However, commencing vasopressor therapy 
early in resuscitation is better than delaying until a large volume of uid 
has been given. Amongst other benecial effects, vasopressors induce 
venoconstriction, reducing the capacitance of the circulation and effec-
tively mobilising more uid into the circulation.
If a patient remains shocked after 30 mL/kg of uid has been admin-
istered, a re-evaluation of the likely cause is required, looking particu-
larly for concealed haemorrhage or an obstructive pathology. A bedside 
echocardiogram is especially useful at this stage to evaluate cardiac 
output and exclude tamponade. Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) should 
be commenced as the rst-line vasoactive agent in most cases, unless 
there is a strong indication to use a pure inotropic or chronotropic agent: 
for example, in cardiogenic shock or shock associated with bradycardia. 
If there is evidence of low cardiac output, adrenaline (epinephrine) or 
dobutamine should be commenced. Both agents are equally effective, 
but dobutamine causes more vasodilatation and additional noradrenaline 
may be required to maintain an adequate MAP. Vasopressin is added if 
hypotension persists despite high doses of noradrenaline and cardiac 
output is thought to be adequate.
In extreme situations it is acceptable to start infusions of inotropes 
through a well-sited, large-bore peripheral cannula, although central 
venous access and an arterial line (for monitoring) should be inserted as 
soon as possible. The actions of commonly used vasoactive drugs are 
summarised in Box 9.46
Advanced haemodynamic monitoring
There are many different devices available to estimate cardiac output. 
Such devices employ a variety of mechanisms, including the Doppler 
effect of moving blood, changes in electrical impedance of the thorax, 
or the dilution of either an indicator substance or heat (thermodilution). 
The information is processed within the equipment, and often integrated 
with additional data, such as the arterial pressure waveform, to give an 
estimate of cardiac output and stroke volume.
When the aetiology of shock is straightforward and the patient is 
responding as predicted to treatment, the value of devices that estimate 
cardiac output is limited. Portable echocardiography has the advantage 
of giving qualitative information – for example, demonstrating aortic ste-
nosis or a regional wall motion abnormality – as well as quantitative infor-
mation on stroke volume, but it requires technical expertise.
Pulmonary artery (PA) catheters, sometimes referred to as Swan–
Ganz catheters (Fig. 9.25), are invasive but provide useful information 
on pulmonary pressures, cardiac output, mixed venous oxygen satu-
rations (see Box 9.35) and, by extrapolation, whether the cause of the 
shock is vasodilatation or pump failure. They can be helpful in complex 
cases, such as shock after cardiac surgery, or in patients with suspected 
9.45 Categories of shock
Category
Description
Hypovolaemic
Can be haemorrhagic or non-haemorrhagic in 
conditions such as hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 
state (p. 723) and burns
Cardiogenic
See page 202
Obstructive
Obstruction to blood ow around the circulation, e.g. 
major pulmonary embolism, cardiac tamponade, 
tension pneumothorax
Septic
See page 198
Anaphylactic
Inappropriate vasodilatation triggered by an allergen 
(e.g. bee sting), often associated with endothelial 
disruption and capillary leak (p. 183)
Neurogenic
Caused by major brain or spinal injury, which disrupts 
brainstem and neurogenic vasomotor control. High 
cervical cord trauma may result in disruption of the 
sympathetic outow tracts, leading to inappropriate 
bradycardia and hypotension. Guillain–Barré 
syndrome (p. 1192) can involve the autonomic 
nervous system, resulting in periods of severe hypo- 
or hypertension
Others
e.g. Drug-related such as calcium channel blocker 
overdose; Addisonian crisis
9.46 Actions of commonly used vasoactive agents
Drug
Action
Vasoconstrictor
Inotrope
Chronotrope
Adrenaline 
(epinephrine)
++
+++
++
Noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine)
++++
+
+
Dobutamine
++++
+++
Vasopressin
+++++
No action
– (reex 
bradycardia)

[[p243]]
Stabilisation and institution of organ support    211
9
pulmonary hypertension (Box 9.47). However, PA catheters are associ-
ated with some rare but serious complications, including lung infarction, 
PA rupture and thrombosis of the catheter itself. Such complications 
occur infrequently in centres that use PA catheters regularly; it should be 
stressed that a lack of familiarity within the wider clinical team is a relative 
contraindication to their use.
Mechanical cardiovascular support
When shock is so severe that it is not possible to maintain sufcient 
organ perfusion with uids and inotropic support, it is sometimes nec-
essary to use an internal device to augment or replace the inadequate 
native cardiac output.
Intra-aortic balloon pump
An intra-aortic balloon counter-pulsation device is a long tube that is usu-
ally inserted into the femoral artery and fed proximally into the thoracic 
aorta. The basic principle is that a helium-lled balloon is able to inate 
and deate rapidly in time with the cardiac cycle. It is inated in diastole, 
thus augmenting forward ow of blood to the abdominal organs and 
improving diastolic pressure proximal to the balloon, thereby optimising 
coronary perfusion. While the principle is appealing, and an intra-aortic 
balloon pump (IABP) is often effective in achieving predetermined phys-
iological goals, this does not translate into improved survival in cardio-
genic shock. There are risks associated with thrombosis formation on 
the balloon, mesenteric ischaemia and femoral artery pseudo-aneurysm 
following removal of the device.
Venous–arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Venous–arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) 
can be life-saving in profound cardiogenic shock and has even been 
used effectively in refractory cardiac arrest. The circuit and princi-
ples are very similar to those described in ‘VV ECMO’ above (see 
Fig. 9.24) with one important difference: oxygenated blood is returned 
to the arterial system (rather than into the right atrium). This means 
that the pump needs to generate sufcient pressure to allow blood to 
ow through the systemic circulation. The sites of venous and arte-
rial access can be either central (via a thoracotomy or sternotomy) 
30
20
10
0
mmHg
Right
ventricular
pressure
Wedge
(left atrial)
pressure
Balloon
inflated
Balloon
Right atrial
pressure
Pulmonary
artery
pressure
A
B
Aorta
RA
RV
LV
LA
Pulmonary
artery
Fig. 9.25 A pulmonary artery (Swan–Ganz) catheter.
The catheter is inserted via an internal jugular, subclavian or femoral vein and advanced through the right heart until the tip lies in the pulmonary artery. When the balloon is 
then ow past the balloon, so the tip of the catheter will now record the pressure transmitted from the pulmonary veins and left atrium (known as the pulmonary artery capillary 
wedge pressure), which provides an indirect measure of the left atrial pressure. (LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)
9.47 Interpreting haemodynamic data
Variable
Units
Reference range
Interpretation
Cardiac output (CO)
L/min
4–8 L/min
Low cardiac output suggests pump failure
Cardiac index (CI)
Cardiac output referenced to the size of 
the patient
L/min/m2
2.5–4 L/min/m2
More useful than raw cardiac output alone, especially in smaller 
patients
Central venous pressure (CVP)
mmHg
0–6 mmHg
Reects right atrial pressure – a non-specic measurement of right 
ventricular (RV) function and volume status
Low levels suggest good RV function or hypovolaemia
Pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PA 
systolic)
mmHg
15–30 mmHg
Difcult to interpret in isolation
Low levels suggest vasodilatation, hypovolaemia or right heart failure 
High levels are seen in many pathologies, e.g. left heart failure, primary 
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), uid overload
Pulmonary artery diastolic pressure (PA 
diastolic)
mmHg
5–15 mmHg
As with PA systolic pressure, difcult to interpret in isolation
Pulmonary artery capillary wedge 
pressure (PACWP)
mmHg
2–10 mmHg (should be 
within a few mmHg of 
PA diastolic)
Reasonable indication of left atrial pressure – raised in left heart failure 
and uid overload 
Measurement is associated with injury to PA so should only be taken 
occasionally
Transpulmonary gradient (PA diastolic – 
PACWP)
mmHg
1–5 mmHg
A high gradient suggests the pathology is in the pulmonary arteries, e.g. 
primary PAH

[[p244]]
212    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
or peripheral via cannulae in the IVC/SVC and the femoral/subclavian 
artery. If the return cannula is peripherally sited (e.g. in the femoral 
artery), blood will ow back up the aorta from distal to proximal and 
perfuse the organs.
The outcome depends on the avoidance of complications (primarily, 
bleeding at the cannula site, intracranial haematoma, air embolism, 
infection and thrombosis) and improvement of the underlying condition. 
Most causes of profound cardiogenic shock are unlikely to resolve, and 
the potential availability of a longer-term solution, such as cardiac trans-
plantation or insertion of a ventricular assist device, is a prerequisite for 
commencing VA ECMO in most centres.
Renal support
Renal replacement therapy (RRT) is explained in detail on page 593. The 
key points relating to RRT in an intensive care context are:
 Haemodynamic instability is common. Continuous therapies are 
widely believed to cause less haemodynamic instability than inter-
mittent dialysis. However, many units use intermittent dialysis with-
out signicant problems.
 Haemodialysis and haemoltration are equally good. Although there 
are theoretical benets to removing inammatory cytokines with 
haemoltration, this does not translate into improved survival.
 Anticoagulation is usually achieved using citrate or heparin. Citrate 
has a better prole for anticoagulating the extracorporeal circuit 
without inducing an increased bleeding risk, but may accumulate in 
patients with profound multi-organ failure.
 Most patients who survive intensive care will regain adequate renal 
function to live without long-term renal support.
 A thorough investigation for reversible causes of renal dysfunction 
should always be undertaken in conjunction with instigation of renal 
support (see Fig. 18.18).
 Shock appears to reverse more rapidly when renal support is insti-
tuted. Commencing renal support soon after a patient develops 
renal ‘injury’ (when serum creatinine is more than two times higher 
than baseline) is probably benecial in the context of septic shock.
Neurological support
A diverse range of neurological conditions require management in inten-
sive care. These include the various causes of coma, spinal cord injury, 
peripheral neuromuscular disease and prolonged seizures.
The goals of care in such cases are to:
 Protect the airway, if necessary by endotracheal intubation.
 Provide respiratory support to correct hypoxaemia and hypercapnia.
 Treat circulatory problems, e.g. neurogenic pulmonary oedema in 
subarachnoid haemorrhage, autonomic disturbances in Guillain–
Barré syndrome, and spinal shock following high spinal cord injuries.
 Manage acute brain injury with control of ICP.
 Manage status epilepticus using antiepileptic agents such as leveti-
racetam, phenytoin and benzodiazepines. In refractory cases an 
infusion of sodium thiopental or ketamine may be required.
The aim of management in acute brain injury is to optimise cerebral oxy-
gen delivery by maintaining normal arterial oxygen content and a cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP) of >  60 mmHg. Secondary insults to the brain, 
such as hypoxaemia, hyper/hypoglycaemia and prolonged seizures, must 
be avoided. ICP rises in acute brain injury as a result of haematoma, con-
tusions, oedema or ischaemic swelling. Raised ICP causes damage to the 
brain in two ways: direct damage to the brainstem and motor tracts as a 
result of downward pressure and herniation through the tentorium cerebelli 
and foramen magnum, and indirect damage by reducing CPP. Cerebral 
blood ow is dependent on an adequate CPP. The CPP is determined by 
the formula:
CPP = MAP − ICP
ICP can be measured by pressure transducers that are inserted 
directly into the brain tissue. The normal upper limit for ICP is 15 mmHg 
and an upper acceptable limit of 20 mmHg is usually adopted in inten-
sive care. Sustained pressures of > 30 mmHg are associated with a poor 
prognosis. Various strategies are used to control ICP: maintaining nor-
mocapnia, preventing any impedance to venous drainage from the head, 
giving osmotic agents such as mannitol and hypertonic saline, and using 
hypothermia and decompressive craniectomy. No single technique has 
been shown to improve outcome in severe intracranial hypertension.
CPP should be maintained above 60 mmHg by ensuring adequate 
uid replacement and, if necessary, by treating hypotension with a vaso-
pressor such as noradrenaline (norepinephrine). Complex neurological 
monitoring must be combined with frequent clinical assessment of GCS, 
pupillary response to light and focal neurological signs.
Daily clinical management in intensive care
Clinical review
In intensive care, detailed clinical examination should be performed daily 
to identify changes to a patient's condition and review the latest diagnos-
tic information. Further focused clinical reviews are usually incorporated 
into twice-daily ward rounds. Each ward round offers an ideal opportunity 
to monitor and document adherence with relevant care bundles. A care 
bundle is a group of interventions that, when implemented concurrently, 
have provided evidence of clinical benet. The mnemonic ‘FAST HUG’ 
provides a useful checklist of interventions that reduce intensive care 
complications: feeding/fluids, analgesia, sedation, thromboprophylaxis, 
head of bed elevation (to reduce the incidence of passive aspiration), 
ulcer prophylaxis and glucose control.
Other key aspects of the daily review are outlined on page 176. The 
over-arching aim of the review is to identify the issues that are imped-
ing recovery from critical illness, and make alterations to address 
them. In addition, specic and realistic goals for each relevant organ 
system should be dened, facilitating the autonomous titration of 
therapy by the bedside critical care nurse. An example of daily goals 
may be: ‘Titrate the noradrenaline (norepinephrine) to achieve a MAP 
of 65 mmHg, aim for a negative uid balance, titrate FiO2 to achieve 
oxygen saturations of 92%–95% and titrate sedation to a RASS score 
of 0 to −1’ (see Box 9.49).
Infection surveillance
Infection surveillance is an important part of the daily review as nosoco-
mial infection is common in critically ill patients. Trends in temperature, 
heart/respiratory rate and secretion load can all be early indicators of ven-
tilator-associated pneumonia (VAP). Likewise leucocytosis and a raised 
C-reactive protein are measured frequently, but are not specic enough 
to guide therapy alone. Procalcitonin (PCT) is increasingly used to give 
more specic information on bacterial infection. A rapidly reducing trend 
can allow for a shortening of antibiotic courses (reducing the likelihood of 
generating resistant organisms) and a persistently low PCT in a shocked 
patient can alert the clinician to the possibility of an aetiology other than 
sepsis. Severe viral and fungal infections, e.g. COVID-19, can cause an 
elevated PCT and occasionally sepsis can develop before the PCT has 
risen, so as with all investigations the result should be used as adjunct to 
clinical assessment.
Sedation and analgesia
Most patients require some degree of sedation and analgesia to ensure 
comfort, relieve anxiety and tolerate mechanical ventilation. Some con-
ditions, such as critically high ICP or critical hypoxaemia, require deep 
sedation to reduce tissue oxygen requirements and protect the brain 
from the peaks in ICP associated with coughing or gagging. For the 

[[p245]]
Daily clinical management in intensive care    213
9
majority of patients, however, optimal sedation is an awake and lucid 
patient who is comfortable and able to tolerate an endotracheal tube 
(termed ‘tube tolerance’).
Over-sedation is associated with longer ICU stays, a higher preva-
lence of delirium, prolonged requirement for mechanical ventilation, and 
an increased incidence of ICU-acquired infection. Box 9.48 compares 
the various agents used for sedation in intensive care. The key princi-
ples are that the patient should primarily receive analgesia, rather than 
anaesthesia, and caution should be used with drugs that accumulate in 
hepatic and renal dysfunction. Often a combination of drugs is used to 
achieve the optimal balance of sedation and analgesia.
Sedation is monitored via clinical sedation scales that record 
responses to voice and physical stimulation. The Richmond Agitation–
Sedation Scale (RASS) is the best-recognised tool (see Box 9.49 for 
details). Regular use of a scoring system to adjust sedation is associated 
with a shorter ICU stay. Many ICUs also have a daily ‘sedation break’, 
when all sedation is stopped in appropriate cases for a short period. This 
is commonly combined with a trial of spontaneous breathing aiming to 
shorten the duration of mechanical ventilation.
Delirium in intensive care
Delirium is discussed in Chapter 34. It is extremely common in criti-
cally ill patients and often becomes apparent as sedation is reduced. 
Hypoactive delirium is far more common than hyperactive delirium, but 
is easily missed unless routine screening is undertaken. A widely used 
bedside assessment is the CAM-ICU score. The patient is requested to 
squeeze the examiner's hand in response to instruction and questions, 
aiming to ascertain whether disordered thought or sensory inattention 
are present.
Delirium of any type is associated with poorer outcome. Management 
is focused on non-pharmacological interventions such as early mobili-
sation, reinstatement of day–night routine, noise reduction, cessation of 
drugs known to precipitate delirium, and treatment of potential underly-
ing causes such as thiamine replacement in patients at risk of Wernicke's 
encephalopathy. Patients with agitated delirium that is refractory to verbal 
de-escalation should initially be managed with small doses of parenteral 
antipsychotics, changed to the enteral route once control is established. 
Atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine and quetiapine can be more 
efcacious than traditional drugs such as haloperidol. Pharmacological 
interventions are not useful as prophylaxis or in hypoactive delirium. 
Additional information on diagnosis and management of delirium can be 
found on page 1304.
Weaning from respiratory support
As the condition that necessitated ventilation resolves, respiratory sup-
port is gradually reduced: the process of ‘weaning’ from ventilation. 
Some approaches to weaning are described below.
Spontaneous breathing trials
A spontaneous breathing trial involves the removal of all respiratory sup-
port followed by close observation of how long the patient is able to 
breathe unassisted. The technique is particularly effective when linked 
to a reduction in sedation. PEEP and pressure support are reduced to 
low levels, or patients are disconnected from the ventilator and breathe 
oxygen or humidied air through the endotracheal tube. Signs of fail-
ure include rapid shallow breathing, hypoxaemia, rising PaCO2, sweat-
ing and agitation. Patients who pass a spontaneous breathing trial are 
assessed for suitability of extubation (endotracheal tube removal).
Progressive reduction in pressure 
support ventilation
Progressive reduction in pressure support ventilation (PSV) is applied 
to each breath over a period of hours or days, according to patient 
response. Some ICU ventilators have software that allows the facility to 
wean the support provided automatically.
A useful tool to guide the weaning process is the rapid shallow breath-
ing index (RSBI). This composite score of a patient's spontaneous 
9.48 Properties of sedative and analgesic agents used in ICU
Drug
Mode of action
Advantages
Disadvantages
Propofol
Intravenous anaesthetic
Rapid onset and offset
Large cumulative doses can cause multi-organ failure, especially 
in children – the ‘propofol infusion syndrome’
Alfentanil
Potent opiate analgesic
Rapid onset and offset
High doses may be required
Agitation may persist
Morphine
Opioid
Analgesia
Active metabolites and accumulation cause slow offset
Midazolam
Benzodiazepine sedative
Can be used in children
Active metabolites and accumulation cause slow offset
Remifentanil
Very potent opiate
Analgesia and tube tolerance
Respiratory depression – extreme caution in non-intubated 
patients
Dexmedetomidine
α2-adrenergic agonist
Excellent tube tolerance
Less delirium
Can be used in awake patients
Cost and availability
9.49 Richmond Agitation–Sedation Scale (RASS)
Score
Term
Description
+4
Combative
Overtly combative, violent or 
immediate danger to staff
+3
Very agitated
Pulls on/removes tubes or catheters, 
or aggressive to staff
+2
Agitated
Frequent non-purposeful movement 
or patient–ventilator dyssynchrony
+1
Restless
Anxious or apprehensive but no 
aggressive or vigorous movements
  0
Alert and calm
1
Drowsy
Not fully alert but sustained 
awakening (> 10 secs) with eye 
opening/contact to voice
2
Light sedation
Brief awakening (< 10 secs) with eye 
contact to voice
3
Moderate sedation
Movement but no eye contact to 
voice
4
Deep sedation
Movement to physical stimulation 
but no response to voice
5
Unrousable
No response to voice or physical 
stimulation

[[p246]]
214    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
respiratory rate and tidal volume (respiratory rate divided by tidal volume 
in litres) gives a numerical indication of how difcult the patient is nding 
breathing at that particular level of support. A RSBI value of > 100 sug-
gests that a patient is working at a level that would be unsustainable for 
longer periods.
Extubation
It is not possible to predict whether a patient is ready to be extubated 
accurately; the timing relies heavily on clinical judgement. There are, 
however, some principles that can aid decision-making. Patients must 
have stable ABGs with resolution of hypoxaemia and hypercapnia 
despite minimal ventilator pressure support and a low FiO2. Conscious 
level must be adequate to protect the airway, comply with physiotherapy 
and cough. Furthermore, an assessment must be made as to whether 
the patient can sustain the required minute volume without ventilator 
support. This depends on the condition of patients' lungs, their strength 
and other factors affecting the PaCO2, such as temperature and meta-
bolic rate. Frequently it is not possible to meet all of these criteria and the 
decision to extubate relies on a balance of risks and benets. The need 
for re-intubation following extubation is associated with poorer outcome, 
but patients who are not given the opportunity to breathe without a ven-
tilator will also be at increased risk of ventilator-associated complications 
such as pneumonia and myopathy.
Tracheostomy
A tracheostomy is a percutaneous tube passed into the trachea (usu-
ally between the rst and second, or second and third tracheal rings) to 
facilitate longer-term ventilation. The advantages and disadvantages of 
tracheostomy insertion are listed in Box 9.50. When ventilation wean-
ing has been unsuccessful, a tracheostomy provides a bridge between 
intubation and extubation; the patient can have increasing periods free 
of ventilator support but easily have support reinstated. A tracheostomy 
can be inserted percutaneously, using a bronchoscope in the trachea 
for guidance, or surgically under direct vision. Occasionally, a patient 
will have a tracheostomy in situ following a laryngectomy. Such patients 
are important to identify, as emergency management in the event of a 
tracheostomy problem (blockage or displacement) must be through the 
tracheostomy site; access will not be possible via the upper airway.
Nutrition
It is crucial that critically ill patients receive adequate calories, protein and 
essential vitamins and minerals. Calculation of exact requirements is com-
plex and requires the expertise of a dietitian. It is, however, useful to make 
a rough estimation of requirements (see Ch. 22). Under-feeding leads 
to muscle wasting and delayed recovery, while over-feeding can lead to 
biliary stasis, jaundice and steatosis. Enteral feeding is preferred where 
possible because it avoids the infective complications of total parenteral 
nutrition (TPN) and helps to maintain gut integrity. However, TPN is rec-
ommended for patients who are likely to have a sustained period without 
effective enteral feeding, or who are already malnourished. Caution must 
be taken to avoid the consequences of refeeding syndrome (p. 768).
Other essential components of intensive care
Survival after critical illness depends, to a large extent, on the prevention 
of medical complications during recovery from the primary insult.
Thromboprophylaxis
DVT, venous catheter-related thrombosis and PE are common in critically 
ill patients. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) should be adminis-
tered to all patients, unless there is a contraindication. Often patients 
at highest risk of thrombosis, such as those with hepatic dysfunction or 
those who have suffered major trauma, have a relative contraindication 
to heparin. Such cases mandate daily evaluation of the risk–benet ratio, 
and LMWH should be administered as soon as it is deemed safe to do 
so. Mechanical thromboprophylaxis, such as intermittent calf compres-
sion devices, are useful adjuvants in high-risk patients.
Glucose control
Hyperglycaemia is harmful in critical illness and may occur in people with 
pre-existing diabetes or undiagnosed diabetes, following administration 
of high-dose glucocorticoids, or as a consequence of ‘stress hypergly-
caemia’. Hyperglycaemia is commonly managed by infusion of intrave-
nous insulin titrated against a ‘sliding scale’. Intensive management of 
hyperglycaemia with insulin can result in hypoglycaemia, which may also 
be harmful in critical illness. Therefore, a compromise is to titrate insulin 
to a blood glucose level of 6–10 mmol/L (108–180 mg/dL).
Blood transfusion
Many critically ill patients become anaemic due to reduced red cell pro-
duction and red cell loss through bleeding and blood sampling. However, 
red cell transfusion carries inherent risks of immunosuppression, uid 
overload, organ dysfunction from microemboli and transfusion reactions. 
In stable patients, a haemoglobin level of 70 g/L is a safe compromise 
between optimisation of oxygen delivery and the risks of transfusion. This 
transfusion threshold should be adjusted upwards for situations where 
oxygen delivery is critical, such as in patients with active myocardial 
ischaemia.
Peptic ulcer prophylaxis
Stress ulceration during critical illness is a serious complication. Proton 
pump inhibitors or histamine-2 receptor antagonists are effective at 
reducing the incidence of ulceration. There is, however, a suggestion 
that the use of these agents, particularly in conjunction with antibiot-
ics, may increase the incidence of nosocomial infection, especially 
with Clostridoides difcile (p. 311). It is therefore common practice to 
stop ulcer prophylaxis once consistent absorption of enteral feed is 
established.
Complications and outcomes of critical 
illness
The majority of patients will survive their episode of critical illness. While 
some will return to full, active lives, there are many who have ongoing 
physical, emotional and psychological problems.
9.50 Advantages and disadvantages of tracheostomy
Advantages
 Patient comfort
 Improved oral hygiene
 Access for tracheal toilet
 Ability to speak with cuff deated 
and a speaking valve attached
 Reduced equipment ‘dead space’ (the 
volume of tubing)
 Earlier weaning and ICU discharge
 Reduced sedation requirement
 Reduced vocal cord damage
Disadvantages
 Immediate complications: 
hypoxaemia, haemorrhage
 Tracheostomy site infection
 Tracheal damage; late stenosis

[[p247]]
Complications and outcomes of critical illness    215
9
Adverse neurological outcomes
Brain injury
Head injury, hypoxic–ischaemic injury and infective, inammatory and 
vascular pathologies can all irreversibly injure the brain. If treatment is 
unsuccessful, patients will either die or be left with a degree of disa-
bility. In the latter situation, the provision of ongoing organ support will 
depend on the severity of the injury, the prognosis, and the wishes of the 
patient (usually expressed via relatives). Brain death is a state in which 
cortical and brainstem function is irreversibly lost. Diagnostic criteria for 
brain death vary between countries (Box 9.51); if satised, these criteria 
allow physicians to withdraw active treatment and discuss the potential 
for organ donation. Diagnosing brain death is complex and should be 
done only by physicians with appropriate expertise, as clinical differentia-
tion from reduced consciousness can be challenging (Box 9.52). Where 
there is doubt – for example, in patients with coexisting spinal injury or 
localised brainstem pathology – additional investigations should be per-
formed, such as a brain perfusion scan.
The ‘locked-in’ syndrome occurs when a patient is paralysed but has 
preserved hemispheric function. This is usually caused by a lesion in the 
pons and is frequently of vascular origin. Communication can usually be 
maintained via vertical eye movements or blinking if these functions are 
preserved. The term ‘vegetative state’ implies some retention of brain-
stem function and minimal cortical function, with loss of awareness of the 
environment. In contrast, ‘minimally conscious state’ implies that there is 
some degree of awareness and intact brainstem function. Condent dis-
tinction between these states is important and requires careful assess-
ment, often over a period of time. Brain death is, by denition, irreversible 
but other states may offer hope for improvement.
ICU-acquired weakness
Weakness is common among survivors of critical illness. It is usually 
symmetrical, proximal and most marked in the lower limbs. Critical illness 
polyneuropathy and myopathy can occur simultaneously and, within the 
constraints of an altered sensorium, it can be impossible to distinguish 
the two conditions clinically. Risk factors for both processes include the 
severity of multi-organ failure, poor glycaemic control and the use of 
muscle relaxants and glucocorticoids.
Critical illness polyneuropathy
This is due to peripheral nerve axonal loss and characteristically pre-
sents as proximal muscle weakness with preserved sensation. It may 
also manifest as failure to wean from the ventilator secondary to res-
piratory muscle weakness. Electrophysiological studies of the affected 
nerves can be helpful, especially to rule out other potential causes such 
as Guillain–Barré syndrome. Conduction studies typically show reduced 
amplitude of transmitted voltage action potential with preserved velocity 
(compare with ndings in Guillain–Barré syndrome; pp. 1133 and 1192). 
There are no specic treatments aside from resolution of the underlying 
cause and rehabilitation. Weakness may persist long into the convales-
cence stage of illness. In some cases, the clinical picture may be more 
in keeping with individual nerve involvement. This may be due to local 
pressure effects or part of a generalised picture. Great care must be 
taken to avoid pressure on high-risk areas such as the neck of the bula 
where the common peroneal nerve navigates a supercial course. Nerve 
palsies such as foot drop can be permanent.
Critical illness myopathy
Although loss of muscle bulk is related to immobility and the catabolic 
state of critical illness, it is likely that microvascular and intracellular patho-
physiological processes are also involved in critical illness myopathy. 
These processes result in loss of actin myobrils and muscle weakness. 
Typically, the CK is normal or only mildly elevated. Like critical illness 
polyneuropathy, critical illness myopathy is usually a clinical diagnosis. 
Nerve conduction studies and electromyography may be suggestive 
of critical illness myopathy, and helpful in ruling out other pathology. A 
muscle biopsy is required to conrm the diagnosis (p. 1133), although 
it is seldom used in clinical practice as there are no specic treatment 
options. Biopsies typically show selective loss of the thick myobrils and 
muscle necrosis. Management is conservative and the prognosis is good 
in ICU survivors.
Airway complications
Prolonged instrumentation of the airway is occasionally associated with 
injuries that may have long-term consequences. Vocal cord oedema is 
common after intubation, especially in female patients. This may require 
urgent re-intubation, a short course of systemic steroids or the insertion 
of a tracheostomy to allow oedema to settle. Long-term vocal cord prob-
lems occur in a small number of ICU survivors. This may include vocal 
cord palsies or chronically increased vocal cord tone causing either a 
weak voice or stridor.
Both tracheal intubation and tracheostomy can cause damage to the 
trachea (either at the insertion point or from ischaemia at the level of the 
cuff). This may be associated with tracheal stenosis or a tracheoesopha-
geal stula. If any of these complications is suspected, referral to a throat 
specialist is recommended.
Micro- and macrovascular complications
Areas of tissue ischaemia can occur during an episode of critical illness. 
Causative mechanisms may include: micro-emboli; reduced tissue 
perfusion from vasoconstriction or poor cardiac output; pressure from 
positioning or medical devices such as those securing a tracheostomy; 
invasive arterial lines causing arterial thrombosis. Vascular surgical opin-
ion may be helpful in recommending specic treatments or management 
of necrotic tissue. Wherever possible, steps should be taken to reduce 
9.51 UK criteria for the diagnosis of brain death
Preconditions for considering a diagnosis of brain death
 The patient is deeply comatose:
a.  There must be no suspicion that coma is due to depressant drugs, such as 
narcotics, hypnotics, tranquillisers
b. Hypothermia has been excluded – rectal temperature must exceed 35°C
c.  There is no profound abnormality of serum electrolytes, acid–base balance or 
blood glucose concentrations, and any metabolic or endocrine cause of coma 
has been excluded
 The patient is maintained on a ventilator because spontaneous respiration 
has been inadequate or has ceased. Drugs, including neuromuscular blocking 
agents, must have been excluded as a cause of the respiratory failure
 The diagnosis of the disorder leading to brain death has been rmly established. 
There must be no doubt that the patient is suffering from irremediable structural 
brain damage
Tests for conrming brain death
 All brainstem reexes are absent:
a. The pupils are xed and unreactive to light
b. The corneal reexes are absent
c. The vestibulo-ocular reexes are absent – there is no eye movement 
 
following the injection of 20 mL of ice-cold water into each external 
 
auditory meatus in turn
distribution
e.  There is no gag reex and no reex response to a suction catheter in the 
trachea
 No respiratory movement occurs when the patient is disconnected from the 
ventilator for long enough to allow the carbon dioxide tension to rise above the 
threshold for stimulating respiration (PaCO2 must reach 6.7 kPa/50 mmHg)
The diagnosis of brain death should be made by two doctors of a specied status 
and experience. The tests are usually repeated after a short interval to allow blood 
gases to normalise before brain death is nally conrmed.

[[p248]]
216    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
the incidence of these complications, e.g. active pressure management. 
However, in critically unwell patients, peripheral ischaemia can occur 
despite optimal management.
Other complications
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation can frequently lead to damage to the integrity 
of the chest wall. This appears to be more common with the use of auto-
mated compression devices although it is possible this reects increased 
survivorship in this cohort. Anterior rib fractures and sternocostal dislocation 
are seen most commonly and this pattern of injury can lead to a ail segment 
of the chest wall, or a ail sternum. The segment moves independently from 
the rest of the chest; this is a problem when ventilation is spontaneous as the 
negative pressure draws the ail segment inwards. Simple rib fractures can 
usually be managed with analgesia but ail segments frequently benet from 
surgical xation (Fig. 9.26). The experience of critical illness and the neces-
sary invasive management can leave patients with profound psychological 
sequelae akin to the post-traumatic stress syndrome seen in many survi-
vors of conict. Specialist psychological help is required in managing these 
issues. Sometimes recovering patients benet from returning to the ICU to 
see the environment in a different way and gain a better understanding of the 
processes and procedures that haunt them.
Long-term physical consequences are also common. Many dis-
eases are not completely cured, but follow a relapsing–remitting course; 
patients who have been critically ill with sepsis are far more likely than 
others in the general population to suffer from it again. Intensive care 
follow-up clinics provide an excellent forum for addressing such issues, 
and for coordinating care involving a variety of medical specialties.
The older patient
Critically ill older patients present additional challenges following intensive 
care discharge (Box 9.53). As the ability to make a full recovery depends 
on frailty rather than chronological age, it can be helpful to use a validated 
frailty scoring system (p. 1300) to inform admission decision-making.
Rehabilitation medicine has much to offer survivors of critical illness, 
and an early referral is benecial when it is clear that a patient is likely to 
survive with signicant morbidity.
Withdrawal of active treatment and death in 
intensive care
Futility
The idea of futility is not new: Hippocrates stated that physicians should 
‘refuse to treat those who are overmastered by their disease, realising 
that in such cases medicine is powerless’. In intensive care, where the 
concept of futility is often used as a criterion to limit or withdraw life-sus-
taining treatment, it is helpful to have a working denition on which fami-
lies and physicians can agree. It is, therefore, reasonable to dene futility 
in such circumstances as the point at which recovery to a quality of life 
that the patient would nd acceptable has passed. The primary insult 
may be neurological (irreversible brain injury not meeting criteria for brain 
death), or multi-organ failure that is refractory to treatment.
Death
While most patients prefer to die at home, many spend their nal days 
in hospital. Chapter 8 details the medical, legal and ethical priorities that 
should guide patient management once the decision to withdraw active 
treatment has been made. The decision to shift the focus of care to pal-
liation should not change its intensity; it is the over-arching objective that 
changes. Only interventions that will improve the quality of a patient's 
remaining life should be offered. In the ICU, it is often appropriate to 
continue infusions of sedatives and analgesics, as reducing or stopping 
them may cause unnecessary pain and agitation. Measures that were 
instituted to prolong life should be withdrawn (usually including cessation 
of inotropes and extubation) to allow the patient to die peacefully with 
their family and friends present.
9.52 Classication of brain death and reduced conscious states
Diagnosis
Features
Investigation
Prognosis
Brain death
See Box 9.51
Often not required if cranial imaging 
shows compatible cause and patient 
meets clinical criteria
In diagnostic doubt: four-vessel 
angiogram (uoroscopic or CT) of 
cerebral vessels or isotope scan of 
brain to demonstrate absence of 
cerebral blood ow
Time of conrmed brain death is recorded 
as time of death
Potential to donate organs – donation after 
brain death (DBD) donor
Vegetative state (VS)
‘Persistent VS’ > 1 month
‘Permanent VS’ > 1 year
No reaction to verbal stimuli
Some reaction to noxious stimuli
Sleep–wake cycles (periods of eye opening)
Maintained respiratory drive
Intact brainstem reexes
Occasional automatic movements (yawning, 
swallowing)
Cranial imaging for primary cause
Maintained cortical blood ow
Poor. May be better with traumatic aetiology
Minimally conscious state
Some reaction to verbal stimuli
Some reaction to noxious stimuli
Spontaneous movements
Intact brainstem reexes
EEG demonstrates reactivity
Variable. Recovery of function more likely 
than in VS
Locked-in syndrome
Cortex is intact but bilateral motor tracts are 
damaged
Can be partial or complete, i.e. some 
response to verbal stimuli (e.g. vertical eye 
movements to communicate)
Variable brainstem reexes
No limb movement to noxious stimuli
Imaging for primary cause – 
commonly MRI or CT will show 
brainstem or pontine infarction
Variable and depends on cause – progress 
can continue over months to years

[[p249]]
Complications and outcomes of critical illness    217
9
Organ donation
Donation after brain death
The diagnosis of brain death is discussed on page 215. Once brain death 
has been conrmed, consideration should be given to organ donation, 
termed ‘donation after brain death’ (DBD). Time of death is recorded 
as the time when the rst series of brain death tests are undertaken, 
although the deceased patient continues to be ventilated. The practice 
of organ donation varies throughout the world but the principles remain 
the same.
Organ donation specialists are contacted and they begin the pro-
cess of establishing the suitability of any organs for transplantation and 
matching potential recipients. Many patients will have expressed their 
wishes through an organ donor registration scheme but agreement of 
family and next of kin is a moral (and sometimes legal) prerequisite. Once 
the organ retrieval theatre team have been assembled and all preliminary 
tests have been completed, the deceased patient is transferred to the 
operating theatre and the organs are sequentially removed.
Donation after cardiac death
If a patient does not meet brain death criteria but withdrawal of treat-
ment has been agreed, donation of organs with residual function may 
be appropriate. This is termed ‘donation after cardiac death’ (DCD). 
If the patient dies within a short period following the commencement 
of ‘warm ischaemic time’ (the time to asystole following the onset of 
physiological derangement after the withdrawal of active treatment), 
then DCD can proceed. The deceased patient is transferred to an 
operating theatre and the agreed organs (lungs, liver, kidney and pan-
creas and occasionally heart) are retrieved. As heart valves and cor-
neas can be retrieved later (within a longer time frame), tissue retrieval 
may occur in the mortuary.
Post-mortem examination or autopsy
There are several indications to request a post-mortem examination. A 
coroner (or legal equivalent) may initiate the process if a death is unex-
pected or violent, or has occurred under suspicious circumstances. The 
treating physician(s) may request one if they are unable to establish a 
cause of death or there is agreement that it may yield information of 
interest to the family or clinical team. The post-mortem diagnosis is 
occasionally at odds with the ante-mortem diagnosis and it is a very 
useful learning exercise to review the results with all those involved in the 
patient’s care.
Discharge from intensive care
Discharge is appropriate when the original indication for admission has 
resolved and the patient has sufcient physiological reserve to con-
tinue to recover without the facilities of intensive care. Many ICUs and 
HDUs function as combined units, allowing ‘step-down’ of patients to 
HDU care without changing the clinical team involved. Discharge from 
ICU is stressful for patients and families, and clear communication with 
the clinical team accepting responsibility is vital. Nursing ratios change 
from 1 : 1 (one nurse per patient) or 1 : 2 to much lower stafng levels. 
Discharges from ICU or HDU to standard wards should take place within 
normal working hours to ensure adequate medical and nursing support 
and detailed handover. Discharge outside normal working hours is asso-
ciated with higher ICU re-admission rates and increased mortality. The 
receiving team should be provided with a written summary, including the 
information listed in Box 9.54. The ICU team should remain available for 
advice; many ICU teams provide an outreach service to supply advice 
and facilitate continuity of care.
9.53 The critically ill older patient
 ICU demography: increasing numbers of critically ill older patients are admitted 
to the ICU; more than 50% of patients in many general ICUs are over 65 years 
old.
 Outcome: affected to some extent by age, as reected in APACHE II (see 
Box 9.55), but age should not be used as the sole criterion for withholding or 
withdrawing ICU support.
 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR): successful hospital discharge 
following in-hospital CPR is rare in patients over 70 years old in the presence of 
signicant chronic disease.
 Functional independence: tends to be lost during an ICU stay and prolonged 
rehabilitation may subsequently be necessary.
 Specic problems
Skin fragility and ulceration
Poor muscle strength: difculty weaning from ventilator and mobilising
Delirium: compounded by sedatives and analgesics
High prevalence of underlying nutritional deciency
PORTABLE
AP
ERECT
A
B
Fig. 9.26 Anterior chest wall injuries are common after CPR.
Images courtesy of Dr 
Jonathan Serhan

[[p250]]
218    ACUTE MEDICINE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS 
Critical care scoring systems
Admission and discharge criteria vary between ICUs, so it is important 
to dene the characteristics of the patients admitted in order to assess 
the effects of the care provided on the outcomes achieved. Two systems 
are widely used to measure severity of illness (see Box 9.55 for further 
details):
 APACHE II: Acute Physiology Assessment and Chronic Health 
Evaluation
 SOFA score: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment tool.
When combined with the admission diagnosis, scoring systems have 
been shown to correlate well with the risk of death in hospital. Such out-
come predictions are useful at a population level but lack the specicity 
to be of use in decision-making for individual patients.
Further information
Websites
criticalcarereviews.com Reviews and appraisal of ICU topics
emcrit.org Online podcasts and general information on emergency medicine and 
critical care
emcrit.org European Society of Intensive Care Medicine: guidelines, 
recommendations, consensus conference reports
lifeinthefastlane.com Information on a range of intensive care and emergency 
medicine topics
survivingsepsis.org Surviving Sepsis website
9.55 Comparison of APACHE II and SOFA scores
APACHE II score
 An assessment of admission characteristics (e.g. age and pre-existing organ 
dysfunction) and the maximum/minimum values of 12 routine physiological 
measurements during the rst 24 hours of admission (e.g. temperature, blood 
pressure, GCS) that reect the physiological impact of the illness
 Composite score out of 71
 Higher scores are given to patients with more serious underlying diagnoses, medical 
history or physiological instability; higher mortality correlates with higher scores
SOFA score
 A score of 1–4 is allocated to six organ systems (respiratory, cardiovascular, liver, 
renal, coagulation and neurological) to represent the degree of organ dysfunction, 
e.g. platelet count > 150 × 109/L scores 1 point, < 25 × 109/L scores 4 points
 Composite score out of 24
 Higher scores are associated with increased mortality
9.54 How to write an ICU discharge summary: information to 
be included
 Summary of diagnosis and progress in intensive care
 Current medications and changes to regular medications with justications
 Antibiotic regimen and suggested review dates
 Results of positive microbiological tests
 Positions of invasive devices and insertion dates
 Escalation plan in the event of deterioration
 Pending investigations and specialty consultations
 If the physiology remains abnormal due to chronic disease, rapid response 
triggers should be adjusted accordingly

[[p251]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 9.1. Regarding monitoring in the critical care area, which one of the 
following statements is true?
 A. The three-lead ECG does not accurately reect the ventricular 
rate
 B. Oxygen saturation readings are inaccurate in severe jaundice
 C. End-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) is a reliable reection of arte-
rial CO2 in critically ill patients
 D. The central venous pressure gives an estimate of left atrial 
pressure
 E. The pulse oximetry trace can suggest if peripheral perfusion is 
poor
Answer: E.
When perfusion is poor the saturation plethysmograph can become 
at as the pulsatile element of the blood plethysmography is lost. Modern 
SpO2 monitors can compensate for a degree of reduction in perfusion 
and are not affected by jaundice. The ECG trace reects ventricular rate. 
ETCO2 becomes less reective of arterial CO2 – as the efciency of the 
lungs decreases the larger the discrepancy. Central venous pressure 
gives an estimation of right atrial pressure.
 9.2. There are several proposed physiological mechanisms that cause 
hypoxaemia. Which of these disease–mechanism pairings is 
correct?
 A. Pulmonary embolism – shunt
 B. Opiate overdose – shunt
 C. Pulmonary oedema – V/Q mismatch
 D. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease – V/Q mismatch
 E. Lobar pneumonia – central hypoventilation
Answer: D.
COPD causes areas of hypoventilated lung; however, these areas may 
still have reasonable perfusion, i.e. V/Q mismatch. Pulmonary embolism 
likewise causes V/Q mismatch as unaffected lung units get relatively 
over-perfused. Opiate overdose causes central hypoventilation and lobar 
pneumonia typically causes shunt.
 9.3. A 50-year-old man sustains a cardiac arrest while out jogging. He 
is resuscitated by paramedics at the scene but has sustained a 
severe brain injury. Four months after the event he is examined 
and found to have normal brainstem reexes. He coughs 
spontaneously and swallows secretions, however, makes no sound 
other than occasional grunts. He has jerky eye movements and 
appears to follow people within the room but makes no movement 
to command and is unable to communicate. He will open his eyes 
to a loud noise and withdraws from a painful stimulus. Which of the 
following statements most accurately describes his condition?
 A. Locked-in syndrome
 B. Coma
 C. Permanent vegetative state
 D. Brain dead
 E. Minimally conscious state
Answer: E.
This patient has sustained a severe brain injury and is in a minimally 
conscious state. Prognosis is uncertain but after one year it becomes less 
likely that meaningful recovery will occur. Traumatic brain injury appears 
to recover to a certain extent more frequently than other aetiologies. The 
difference between a vegetative state and minimally conscious state 
is subtle and requires an expert in neuro-rehabilitation to differentiate 
accurately. The diagnosis of permanent vegetative state requires it to be 
ongoing for greater than one year (see Box 9.52).
 9.4. A 65-year-old woman is recovering from bacterial pneumonia in 
intensive care. She has failed extubation twice and a percutaneous 
tracheostomy is planned. When explaining the process of a 
tracheostomy to the next of kin, which of the following statements 
is true?
 A. A percutaneous tracheostomy is considerably safer than a 
surgical tracheostomy
 B. Infection at the tracheostomy site is extremely rare
 C. The patient will require moderate levels of sedation to tolerate 
the tracheostomy after the procedure
 D. Long-term complications such as tracheal stenosis are com-
parable to complication rates from prolonged oral-tracheal 
intubation
 E. The patient will not be able to talk or eat until the tracheostomy 
is removed
Answer: D.
Tracheostomy is frequently performed when a patient is unable to 
be successfully extubated and is a useful bridge to extubation allowing 
incremental reduction in support, cessation of sedation and, as weaning 
continues, the facility to talk (using a one-way valve on the breathing 
circuit and a deated tracheostomy cuff). Swallowing can be assessed 
and diet commenced if appropriate. Surgical and percutaneous trache-
ostomy both have similar complication rates (comparative studies are 
skewed by the population, i.e. surgical tracheostomy is often performed 
on more difcult anatomy). There are insufcient data to demonstrate 
that a tracheostomy is safer in the long term than a prolonged intubation 
and probably has a comparable complication rate, albeit with less laryn-
geal damage but more distal airway pathology.
 9.5. Severe lactic acidosis (> 10 mmol/L/ 90 mg/dL) is characteristic of 
the following scenarios except which?
 A. Sulphonylurea overdose
 B. Ingestion of anti-freeze (ethylene glycol)
 C. Metformin use with acute kidney injury
 D. Diarrhoea and vomiting in a patient with pyruvate decarboxy-
lase deciency
 E. Adrenaline (epinephrine) infusion for anaphylaxis
Answer: A.
Severe lactic acidosis regardless of cause is associated with a high 
mortality. Classic causes include metformin (overdose or accumulation), 
adrenaline infusion and certain enzyme deciencies. Ethylene glycol typ-
ically causes an erroneously elevated lactate on the blood gas analysis 
(less elevated on venous lactate – termed the ‘lactate gap’), however 
there is still frequently a coexisting genuine lactate acidosis. Profound 
hypoglycaemia is the usual presenting feature of sulphonylurea overdose.
 9.6. A 72-year-old woman with mild COPD is recovering after 
coronary artery bypass grafts. She has sustained a stroke during 
the operation and has a dense left hemiparesis. Today she has 
developed a high temperature and rigors. Which of the following 
statements is most accurate?
 A. Administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics and 50 mL/kg of 
uid in the rst 2 hours would be appropriate
 B. High-ow oxygen should be commenced to obtain a SpO2 of 
98%–100%

[[p252]]
 C. Three sets of peripheral cultures should be taken before com-
mencing antibiotics as endocarditis is a possibility
 D. A saturation target of 94%–98% is appropriate
 E. The lactate should be measured and if greater than 5 mmol/L, 
an infusion of sodium bicarbonate should be given
Answer: D.
The ‘Sepsis Six’ interventions are well recognised as the rst response 
to suspected sepsis (Box 9.33). Up to 30 mL/kg of uid may be appropri-
ate, a set of blood cultures should be drawn but three sets will likely delay 
the administration of antibiotics. Sodium bicarbonate is not usually given 
for a raised anion gap acidosis (such as lactic acidosis). Oxygen should 
be titrated to saturations of 92%–96%. Less than this reduces oxygen 
delivery and more than this exposes the patient to risks of hyperoxia 
(especially important following a stroke).
 9.7. A 65-year-old man with peripheral vascular disease is admitted to 
hospital with severe abdominal pain. He has lost 10 kg of weight 
in the past 2 months. The abdomen is soft but diffusely tender. 
He is febrile, tachycardic and hypotensive. The venous lactate is 
1.2 mmol/L (10 mg/dL) and the haemoglobin is 15 g/L, a creatinine 
of 212 µmol/L (2.4 mg/dL) from a baseline of 106 µmol/L (1.4 mg/dL). 
Which of the following statements is most correct?
 A. The normal lactate virtually excludes ischaemic gut as a 
diagnosis
 B. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given to treat for poten-
tial gut translocation of bacteria
 C. A non-contrast CT should be performed as there is an acute 
kidney injury
 D. The normal haemoglobin makes bleeding very unlikely to be the 
cause
 E. CT scan can wait until the following day to allow for resuscita-
tion and conservative management to improve his condition
Answer: B.
Ischaemic gut is certainly possible in this scenario (as is undiagnosed 
abdominal malignancy). Lactate may remain normal in gut ischaemia 
until the later stages as hepatic clearance becomes saturated. Risks of 
a delayed diagnosis are greater than those of renal injury from contrast. 
Contrast is essential in making diagnostic decisions from the CT abdo-
men; this patient warrants urgent investigation. Haemoglobin does not 
usually reduce signicantly in acute bleeding until the patient receives IV 
volume replacement so this could still be haemorrhage. Bacterial trans-
location and sepsis are common in the acute abdomen and broad-spec-
trum antibiotics should be administered early.
 9.8. A woman is undergoing brainstem death (BSD) testing following 
a massive intracranial haemorrhage. The CT head scan shows 
a large haemorrhage in the basal ganglia with extension into the 
lateral ventricles bilaterally, the 3rd and 4th ventricles, with marked 
hydrocephalus and early tentorial herniation. Which of the following 
statements is true?
 A. The absence of a doll’s head reex is part of the UK BSD 
criteria
 B. A temperature of 35.9°C precludes BSD testing at this time
 C. Peripheral movements on supra-orbital pressure are just a 
spinal reex and do not prevent a diagnosis of BSD to be made
 D. The presence of seizures at presentation does not preclude the 
performance of BSD testing
 E. At the end of the apnoea test, following the absence of all other 
brainstem reexes some very shallow breaths are noted. The 
patient can still be pronounced brain dead
Answer: D.
Brain death testing must leave no room for uncertainty; where uncer-
tainty exists the tests should be delayed, abandoned or auxiliary investi-
gations should be undertaken, such as a perfusion brain scan or levels of 
some longer-acting sedative drugs. In this case the only correct answer 
is that seizures on presentation do not preclude the diagnosis. Absence 
of doll’s head reex, although suggestive of a major brain injury, does not 
form part of the UK test. Peripheral movements occurring on supra-or-
bital pressure would suggest that brain death has not occurred although 
occasional spontaneous peripheral movements in isolation may be spi-
nal reexes (see Box 9.51).
 9.9. A 36-year-old woman presents one month post-partum. She has 
been referred into the medical unit with a severe headache and 
concerns that it could be a subarachnoid haemorrhage. The pain 
is mainly frontal, and described as a band across the front and top 
of her head. The pain came on acutely this morning but maximal 
intensity developed over the course of an hour. It did not have a 
postural element and has eased slightly with simple analgesia. On 
questioning she says it has been present on and off for the past 
three weeks. The CT brain has been reported as normal. She is 
apyrexial, does not look unwell, has no abnormal neurology and 
has normal inammatory markers although is still in quite some 
discomfort. Her blood pressure is 105/70 mmHg and heart rate is 
60. What is the most appropriate next investigation?
 A. Lumbar puncture and oligo-clonal bands
 B. Lumbar puncture and xanthochromia
 C. MRI brain
 D. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
 E. EEG
Answer: C.
This scenario could just be a tension-type headache as there are no 
adverse features. However, there is some increased risk of venous sinus 
thrombosis in the peri-partum period and the severity of the headache 
warrants further investigation. A subarachnoid haemorrhage is unlikely 
given the history and normal CT, and temporal arteritis is also unlikely. A 
CT angiogram/venogram to look for cerebral aneurysm or sinus throm-
bosis would be a reasonable next step but would expose the patient to 
additional radiation, so if an MRI is available that is the investigation of 
choice.

[[p253]]
Poisoning
10
SHL Thomas
Comprehensive evaluation of the poisoned patient 220
General approach to the poisoned patient 222
Triage and resuscitation 222
Clinical assessment and investigations 222
Psychiatric assessment 223
General management 223
Poisoning by specic pharmaceutical agents 224
Analgesics 224
Antidepressants 226
Cardiovascular medications 227
Iron 228
Antipsychotic drugs 228
Antidiabetic agents 228
Pharmaceutical agents less commonly taken in poisoning 228
Drugs of misuse 228
Depressants 229
Stimulants and entactogens 230
Hallucinogens 230
Dissociative drugs 231
Volatile substances 231
Body packers and body stuffers 231
Chemicals and pesticides 231
Carbon monoxide 231
Organophosphorus insecticides and nerve agents 232
Carbamate insecticides 233
Paraquat 233
Alcohols and glycols 233
Corrosive substances 234
Aluminium and zinc phosphide 234
Copper sulphate 235
Chemicals less commonly taken in poisoning 235
Chemical warfare agents 235
Environmental poisoning 236
Food-related poisoning 236
Plant poisoning 237

[[p254]]
220    POISONING
Comprehensive evaluation of the poisoned patient
Movement and muscles
Tone, fasciculations,
myoclonus, tremor,
paralysis, ataxia
Chest
Evidence of aspiration,
bronchoconstriction
Reflexes
Tendon reflexes, plantar
responses, inducible clonus
Eyes
Miosis or mydriasis,
diplopia or strabismus,
lacrimation
Skin
Temperature, cyanosis,
flushing, sweating,
blisters, pressure areas,
piloerection,
evidence of self-harm
Level of consciousness
Presence of seizures,
delirium, agitation
or psychosis
Psychiatric evaluation
Features of psychiatric illness,
mental capacity
Mouth
Dry mouth, excessive salivation
Airway, breathing, circulation
Respiration rate,
oxygen saturation,
pulse, BP,
dysrhythmias
Self-cutting
Needle tracks
Chemical burn
Pinpoint pupil
Injected conjunctiva
10
9
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
1
10
9
8
Abdomen
Hepatic or epigastric
tenderness, ileus,
palpable bladder
7
Insets (Self-cutting) From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C (eds). Macleod’s Clinical examination, 11th edn. Churchill Livingstone, 
Elsevier Ltd; 2005. (Chemical burn) www.rewiki.net. (Needle tracks) www.deep6inc.com. (Pinpoint pupil) http://drugrecognition.
com/images. (Injected conjunctiva) http://knol.google.com.
Taking a history in poisoning
 What toxin(s) have been taken and how much?
 What time were they taken and by what route?
 Have alcohol or other substances (including drugs of misuse) also  
been taken?
 Obtain details from witnesses (e.g. family, friends, ambulance personnel)  
of the circumstances of the overdose
 Assess immediate suicide risk in those with apparent self-harm  
(full psychiatric evaluation when patient has recovered physically)
 Assess capacity to make decisions about accepting or refusing  
treatment
 Establish past medical history, drug history and allergies, social and  
family history
 Record all information carefully 

[[p255]]
Comprehensive evaluation of the poisoned patient    221
10
Cerebellar signs
Some anticonvulsants, alcohol
Phenothiazines, haloperidol,
metoclopramide
Extrapyramidal signs
Any CNS depressant drug or agent
(N.B. consider methaemoglobinaemia
caused by dapsone, amyl nitrite etc.)
Cyanosis
Tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias: 
tricyclic antidepressants, theophylline,
digoxin, antihistamines
Bradycardia or bradyarrhythmias: 
digoxin, β-blockers, calcium channel
blockers, opioids, organophosphates
Heart rate
Needle tracks
Drugs of misuse: opioids etc.
Hyperthermia and sweating:
ecstasy, serotonin re-uptake inhibitors,
salicylates
Hypothermia: any CNS depressant
drug, opioids, chlorpromazine
Small: opioids, clonidine,
organophosphorus compounds
Large: tricyclic antidepressants,
amphetamines, cocaine
Reduced: opioids, benzodiazepines
Increased: salicylates
Paracetamol hepatotoxicity,
renal toxicity
Right upper quadrant /renal angle
tenderness
Epigastric tenderness
NSAIDs, salicylates
Rhabdomyolysis
 Amphetamines, caffeine
Hypotension: tricyclic
antidepressants, haloperidol
Hypertension: cocaine,
α-adrenoceptor agonists
Respiratory rate
Pupil size
Body temperature
Blood pressure
Clinical signs of poisoning by pharmaceutical agents and drugs of misuse.
Blood
Haemodialysis
Haemoperfusion
Kidneys
Urinary alkalinisation
Gastrointestinal tract
Multiple-dose activated charcoal
Enhancing elimination
Direct eye contact
Eye irrigation – remove contact lenses
Wash eyes thoroughly for at least 15
mins with normal saline or water
Remove particles from palpebral
fissures
If pain persists, insert fluorescein
drops and perform slit-lamp
examination for corneal damage
Skin contact (hazardous chemicals/
pesticides)
Remove clothing
Wash with copious amounts of soap
and water
Gastrointestinal decontamination
External decontamination
Gastrointestinal tract
Single-dose oral activated charcoal
Gastric lavage
Decontamination and enhanced elimination. One of the key aspects in the evaluation of a poisoned patient is deciding if decontamination 
and/or enhanced elimination is required.

[[p256]]
222    POISONING
Acute poisoning is common, accounting for about 1% of hospital admis-
sions in the UK. Common or otherwise important substances involved 
are shown in Box 10.1. In high-income countries, the most frequent 
cause is intentional drug overdose in the context of self-harm, often 
involving prescribed or ‘over-the-counter’ medicines. Accidental poison-
ing is also common, especially in children and older people (Box 10.2). 
Toxicity also results from alcohol or recreational substance use and fol-
lowing occupational or environmental exposure. Criminal poisoning may 
also occur, including drug-facilitated robbery or sexual assault. Poisoning 
is a major cause of death in young adults; most deaths occur before 
patients reach medical attention, while overall mortality is low (< 1%) in 
those admitted to hospital.
In low- and middle-income countries, the frequency of self-harm is 
more difcult to estimate. Because of their widespread availability and 
use, household and agricultural products, such as pesticides and her-
bicides, are common sources of poisoning and have a much higher 
case fatality. In China and South-east Asia, pesticides account for about 
300 000 suicides each year. Snake bite and other forms of envenomation 
are also important causes of morbidity and mortality internationally and 
are discussed in Chapter 11.
Triage and resuscitation
Patients who are seriously poisoned must be identied early so that 
appropriate management is not delayed. Triage involves:
 immediately assessing vital signs
 identifying the poison(s) involved and obtaining adequate information 
about them
 identifying patients at risk of further attempts at self-harm and 
removing any remaining hazards.
Those with possible external contamination with chemical or envi-
ronmental toxins should undergo appropriate decontamination (p. 221). 
Critically ill patients must be resuscitated (p. 176).
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is commonly employed to assess 
conscious level, although not specically validated in poisoning. The 
AVPU (alert/verbal/painful/unresponsive) scale is also a rapid and simple 
method. An electrocardiogram (ECG) should be performed and cardiac 
monitoring instituted in all patients with cardiovascular features or where 
exposure to potentially cardiotoxic substances is suspected. Patients 
who may need antidotes should be weighed if possible, so that appro-
priate weight-related doses can be prescribed.
Substances involved that are unlikely to be toxic in humans should be 
identied so that inappropriate admission and intervention are avoided 
(Box 10.3).
Clinical assessment and investigations
History and examination are described on page 220. Occasionally, patients 
may be unaware of or confused about what they have taken, or may exag-
gerate (or, less commonly, underestimate) the size of the overdose, but rarely 
mislead medical staff deliberately. Multiple drug exposure (including alcohol) 
is common in episodes of self-harm or recreational use. It is important to 
obtain information on all substances involved and consider the potential tox-
icity of the combinations that may be involved. In regions of the world where 
self-poisoning is illegal, patients may be reticent about giving a history.
Toxic causes of abnormal physical signs are shown on page 221. The 
patient may have a cluster of clinical features (‘toxidrome’) suggestive of 
poisoning with a particular drug type, such as the anticholinergic, sero-
toninergic (see Box 10.10), stimulant, sedative, opioid (see Box 10.12) 
and cholinergic (see Box 10.14) feature clusters. Poisoning is a com-
mon cause of coma, especially in younger people, but it is important to 
exclude other potential causes (see Box 9.31).
Urea, electrolytes and creatinine should be measured in all patients with 
suspected systemic poisoning. Arterial blood gases should be checked 
in those with signicant respiratory or circulatory compromise, or after 
poisoning with substances likely to affect acid–base status (Box10.4). 
Calculation of anion and osmolar gaps may help to inform diagnosis and 
management (Box 10.5). Potent oxidising agents may cause methaemo-
globinaemia, with consequent blue discoloration of skin and blood, and 
reduced tissue oxygen delivery (Fig. 10.1).
For some substances, management may be facilitated by measurement 
of the amount of toxin in the blood. Qualitative urine screens for potential 
toxins, including near-patient testing kits, have a limited clinical role.
10.3  Substances of very low toxicity
 Writing/educational materials, e.g. pencil lead, crayons, chalk
 Decorating products, e.g. emulsion paint, wallpaper paste
 Cleaning/bathroom products (except dishwasher tablets and liquid laundry 
detergent capsules, which can be corrosive)
 Pharmaceuticals: oral contraceptives, most antibiotics (but not tetracyclines or 
antituberculous drugs), vitamins B, C and E, prednisolone, emollients and other 
skin creams, baby lotion
 Miscellaneous: Plasticine, silica gel, most household plants, plant food, pet food, 
soil
10.1  Important substances involved in poisoning
In the UK
 Analgesics: paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
 Antidepressants: selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-
norepinephrine re-uptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and lithium
 Cardiovascular agents: β-blockers, calcium channel blockers and cardiac 
glycosides
 Drugs of misuse: depressants (e.g. opiates, benzodiazepines), stimulants and 
entactogens (e.g. amphetamines, MDMA, mephedrone, cocaine), hallucinogens 
(e.g. cannabis, synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists)
 Carbon monoxide
 Alcohol
In South and South-east Asia
 Organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides
 Aluminium and zinc phosphide
 Paraquat
 Oleander
 Corrosives
 Snake and insect venoms (Ch. 11)
(MDMA = 3,4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine, ecstasy)
10.2  Poisoning in old age
 Aetiology: may result from accidental poisoning (e.g. due to delirium or 
dementia) or drug toxicity as a consequence of impaired renal or hepatic 
function or drug interaction. Toxic prescription medicines are more likely to be 
available.
 Psychiatric illness: self-harm is less common than in younger adults, but more 
frequently associated with depression and other psychiatric illness, as well as 
chronic illness and pain. There is a higher risk of subsequent suicide.
 Severity of poisoning: increased morbidity and mortality result from reduced 
renal and hepatic function, lower functional reserve, increased sensitivity to 
sedative agents and frequent comorbidity.
General approach to the poisoned patient
A general approach is shown on pages 220–221. In many countries, 
poisons centres are available to provide advice on management of sus-
pected poisoning with specic substances and the use of antidotes. 
Information is also available online see ‘Further information’.

[[p257]]
General approach to the poisoned patient    223
10
General management
Patients presenting with eye/skin contamination should undergo local 
decontamination measures. These are described on page 221.
Gastrointestinal decontamination
Patients who have ingested toxins in potentially harmful amounts may 
be considered for gastrointestinal decontamination if poisoning has been 
recent. 
Activated charcoal
Given orally as a slurry, activated charcoal absorbs toxins in the 
bowel as a result of its large surface area. It can prevent absorption 
of an important proportion of the ingested dose of toxin, but efcacy 
decreases with time. Activated charcoal is most effective if given within 
1 hour of overdose, but may have useful efcacy later than this, for 
example if a sustained-release preparation has been taken or when 
gastric emptying is delayed. Use is ineffective for some toxins that do 
not bind to activated charcoal (Box 10.6). In patients with impaired 
swallowing or a reduced level of consciousness, activated charcoal 
given via a nasogastric tube carries a risk of aspiration pneumonitis, but 
this can be reduced (though not eliminated) by protecting the airway 
using a cuffed endotracheal tube.
Multiple doses of oral activated charcoal (50 g 6 times daily in an adult) 
may enhance the elimination of some substances at any time after poi-
soning (Box 10.7). This interrupts enterohepatic circulation or reduces 
the concentration of free drug in the gut lumen, to the extent that drug 
diffuses from the blood back into the bowel to be absorbed on to the 
charcoal (‘gastrointestinal dialysis’). A laxative is generally given with the 
charcoal to reduce the risk of constipation or intestinal obstruction by 
charcoal ‘briquette’ formation in the gut lumen.
Evidence suggests that single or multiple doses of activated charcoal do 
not improve clinical outcomes after poisoning with pesticides or oleander.
Gastric aspiration and lavage
Gastric aspiration and/or lavage is very infrequently indicated in acute poi-
soning, as it is no more effective than activated charcoal for most sub-
stances and complications are common, especially pulmonary aspiration. 
Causes
Non-toxic
 Congenital methaemoglobinaemias
Toxic (Oxidising agents)
 Organic nitrites
 Nitrates
 Benzocaine
 Dapsone
 Chloroquine
 Aniline dyes
 Chlorobenzene
 Naphthalene
 Copper sulphate
Consequences
 Haemoglobin–oxygen
   dissociation curve is shifted
   to the left (see Fig. 25.5)
 Oxygen delivery to tissues
   is reduced
 There is apparent ‘cyanosis’
 Breathlessness, fatigue,
   headache and chest pain
   occur
 Delirium, impaired
   consciousness and seizures
   may occur in severe cases
Treatment
 Methylthioninium chloride
   (‘methylene blue’) 1–2 mg/kg
   (intravenous) is given
 Reduces methaemoglobin
   (see below)
 Used for symptomatic
   patients with severe
   methaemoglobinaemia
   (e.g. >30%)
 Patients with anaemia or
   other comorbidities may
   need treatment at lower
   concentrations
Cytochrome b5
reductase
NADH
NAD
NADP*
NADPH
Methaemoglobin
reductase
Methylthioninium
chloride (reduced)
Methylthioninium
chloride (oxidised)
Methaemoglobin (Fe3+)
Haemoglobin (Fe2+)
Fig. 10.1 Methaemoglobinaemia. (NAD = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, H = hydrogen, P = phosphate)
10.5  Anion and osmolar gaps in poisoning
Anion gap
Osmolar gap
Calculation
[Na+ + K +] −  
[Cl + HCO3 ]
[Measured osmolality] − 
[(2 × Na) + Urea + Glucose]1
Reference range
12–16 mmol/L
<10
Common toxic causes 
of elevation2
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylates
Iron
Cyanide
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
1All units should be in mmol/L, except osmolality, which should be in mOsmol/kg. For non-SI 
units, the corresponding formula is [Measured osmolality (mOsmol/kg)] 
 [(2 × Na (mEq/L)) +
Urea/2.8 (mg/dL) + Glucose/18 (mg/dL)]. 2Box 19.19 gives non-toxic causes.
10.4  Causes of acidosis in the poisoned patient
Cause
Normal lactate*
High lactate
Toxic
Salicylates
Methanol
Ethylene glycol
Paraldehyde
Metformin
Iron
Cyanide
Sodium valproate
Carbon monoxide
Other
Renal failure
Ketoacidosis
Severe diarrhoea
Shock
*Unless circulatory shock is present, when it will be high in any case.
Psychiatric assessment
Patients presenting with drug overdose in the context of self-harm 
should undergo psychiatric evaluation prior to discharge by a health pro-
fessional with appropriate training (see p. 1243). This should occur after 
they have recovered from poisoning, unless there is an urgent issue, 
such as uncertainty about their capacity to decline medical treatment.

[[p258]]
224    POISONING
enough to cross the dialysis membrane (haemodialysis) or must bind 
to activated charcoal (haemoperfusion) (see Box 10.7). Haemodialysis 
can also correct acid–base and metabolic disturbances associated with 
poisoning.
Lipid emulsion therapy
Lipid emulsion therapy is increasingly used for poisoning with lipid- 
soluble agents. Evidence for efcacy is most compelling for local anaes-
thetics, especially bupivacaine. The treatment has also been used with 
anecdotal reports of success for poisoning with tricyclic antidepressants, 
calcium channel blockers and lipid-soluble β-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(β-blockers) such as propranolol. It involves intravenous administration 
of 20% lipid emulsion (e.g. Intralipid, suggested initial dose 1.5 mL/kg, 
followed by a continued infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min until there is clinical 
improvement). It is thought that lipid-soluble toxins partition into the intra-
venous lipid, reducing target tissue concentrations. The elevated myo-
cardial free fatty acid concentrations may also have benecial effects on 
myocardial metabolism and performance by counteracting the inhibition 
of myocardial fatty acid oxidation produced by some cardiotoxins, ena-
bling increased adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis and energy pro-
duction. Some animal studies have suggested efcacy and case reports 
of use in human poisoning have also been encouraging, with recovery of 
circulatory collapse reported in cases where other treatment modalities 
have been unsuccessful. No controlled trials of this technique have been 
performed, however, and efcacy remains uncertain, especially for sub-
stances other than local anaesthetics.
Supportive care
For most poisons, antidotes and methods to accelerate elimination are 
inappropriate, unavailable or incompletely effective. Outcome is depend-
ent on appropriate nursing and supportive care, and treatment of com-
plications (Box 10.8).
Antidotes
Antidotes are available for some poisons and work by a variety of mech-
anisms (Box 10.9). The use of some of these in the management of 
specic poisons is described below.
Poisoning by specic pharmaceutical agents
Analgesics
Paracetamol
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is the drug most commonly used in over-
dose in the UK. Toxicity is caused by an intermediate reactive metabolite 
that binds covalently to cellular proteins, causing cell death. This results 
in hepatic and occasionally renal failure. In therapeutic doses, the toxic 
metabolite is detoxied in reactions requiring glutathione, but in over-
dose, glutathione reserves become exhausted.
Management
Activated charcoal may be used in patients presenting within 1 hour. 
Antidotes for paracetamol act by replenishing hepatic glutathione, and 
acetylcysteine is the most commonly used. It should be administered 
to all patients with acute poisoning and paracetamol concentrations 
above a ‘treatment line’ provided on paracetamol poisoning nomograms 
(Fig. 10.2). The threshold used for these nomograms varies between 
countries, however, and local guidance should be followed. Liver and 
renal function, International Normalised Ratio (INR) and a venous bicar-
bonate should also be measured. Arterial blood gases and lactate 
should be assessed in patients with reduced bicarbonate or severe liver 
function abnormalities; metabolic acidosis indicates severe poisoning. 
10.6 Substances poorly adsorbed by activated charcoal
Medicines
 Iron
 Lithium
Chemicals
 Acids*
 Alkalis*
 Ethanol
 Ethylene glycol
 Mercury
 Methanol
 Petroleum distillates*
*Gastric lavage contraindicated.
10.7  Examples of poisons effectively eliminated by multiple 
doses of activated charcoal, haemodialysis or haemoperfusion
Multiple doses of activated charcoal
 Carbamazepine
 Dapsone
 Phenobarbital
 Quinine
 Theophylline
Haemodialysis
 Ethylene glycol
 Isopropanol
 Methanol
 Salicylates
 Sodium valproate
 Lithium
Haemoperfusion
 Theophylline
 Phenytoin
 Carbamazepine
 Phenobarbital
 Amobarbital
It is contraindicated if strong acids, alkalis or petroleum distillates have 
been ingested. Use may be justied for life-threatening overdoses of those 
substances that are not absorbed by activated charcoal (see Box 10.6).
Whole bowel irrigation
This involves the administration of large quantities of osmotically balanced 
polyethylene glycol and electrolyte solution (1–2 L/hr for an adult), usually 
by a nasogastric tube, until the rectal efuent is clear. It is occasionally 
indicated to enhance the elimination of ingested packets of illicit drugs 
or slow-release tablets such as iron and lithium that are not absorbed by 
activated charcoal. Contraindications include inadequate airway protec-
tion, haemodynamic instability, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, obstruc-
tion or ileus. Whole bowel irrigation may precipitate nausea and vomiting, 
abdominal pain and electrolyte disturbances.
Urinary alkalinisation
Urinary excretion of weak acids and bases is affected by urinary pH, which 
changes the extent to which they are ionised. Highly ionised molecules 
pass poorly through lipid membranes and therefore little tubular reab-
sorption occurs and urinary excretion is increased. If the urine is alkalinised 
(pH > 7.5) by the administration of sodium bicarbonate (e.g. 1.5 L of 1.26% 
sodium bicarbonate over 2 hrs), weak acids (e.g. salicylates, methotrexate) 
are highly ionised, resulting in enhanced urinary excretion.
Urinary alkalinisation is currently recommended for patients with clini-
cally signicant salicylate poisoning when the criteria for haemodialysis are 
not met (see below). It is also sometimes used for poisoning with metho-
trexate. Complications include alkalaemia, hypokalaemia and occasionally 
alkalotic tetany (Ch. 19). Hypocalcaemia may occur, but is rare.
Haemodialysis and haemoperfusion
These techniques can enhance the elimination of poisons that have a 
small volume of distribution and a long half-life after overdose; use is 
appropriate when poisoning is sufciently severe. The toxin must be small 

[[p259]]
Poisoning by specific pharmaceutical agents    225
10
10.9  Specic antidotes used to treat poisoning
Mechanism of action
Examples of antidote
Poisoning treated
Receptor antagonists 
(block actions of toxin)
Naloxone
Opioids
Flumazenil
Benzodiazepines
Atropine
Organophosphorus 
compounds
Carbamates
Effects on enzymes 
Correct functional 
deciencies
 
Glutathione
Acetylcysteine
Methionine
Paracetamol
 
Pyridoxine
Pyridoxine
Isoniazid
 
Vitamin K
Vitamin K
Warfarin
Alcohol dehydrogenase 
inhibitors (prevent formation 
of toxic metabolites)
Fomepizole
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Cholinesterase reactivators 
(restore cholinesterase 
function)
Pralidoxime
Obidoxime
Organophosphorus 
compounds
Hydrolysing enzymes
(metabolise toxin)
Glucarpidase
Methotrexate
Rhodanase enhancers
(enhance enzyme-related 
detoxication by donating 
sulphur)
Sodium thiosulphate
Cyanide
Binding agents (prevent 
toxicity by binding to toxin)
Chelating agents
Desferrioxamine
Iron
Hydroxocobalamin
Dicobalt edetate
Cyanide
DMSA
Sodium calcium 
edetate
Lead
Protamine
Heparins
Decoy receptor
Andexanet alfa,
Apixaban, rivaroxaban
Antibody fragments
Digoxin Fab fragments
Digoxin
Idarucizumab
Dabigatran etexilate
Reducing agents (convert 
methaemoglobin to 
haemoglobin)
Methylthioninium 
chloride
Aniline dyes, organic 
nitrites, phenacetin, 
sulphonamides
Oxidising agents
(convert haemoglobin to 
methaemoglobin, which 
has high afnity for binding 
cyanide)
Sodium nitrite
Cyanide
(DMSA = dimercaptosuccinic acid)
10.8 Complications of poisoning and their management
Complication
Examples of 
causative agents
Management
Coma
Sedative agents
Appropriate airway protection 
and ventilatory support
Oxygen saturation and blood gas 
monitoring
Pressure area and bladder care
Identication and treatment of 
aspiration pneumonia
Seizures
NSAIDs
Anticonvulsants
TCAs
Theophylline
Appropriate airway and 
ventilatory support
IV benzodiazepine (e.g. 
diazepam 10–20 mg or 
lorazepam 2–4 mg)
Correction of hypoxia, acid–base 
and metabolic abnormalities
Acute dystonias
Typical antipsychotics
Metoclopramide
Procyclidine, benzatropine or 
diazepam
Hypotension
Due to 
vasodilatation
Vasodilator 
antihypertensives
Anticholinergic agents
TCAs
IV uids
Vasopressors (rarely indicated; 
p. 210)
Due to myocardial 
suppression
β-blockers
Calcium channel 
blockers
TCAs
Optimisation of volume status
Inotropic agents (p. 210)
Ventricular tachycardia
Monomorphic, 
associated with 
QRS prolongation
Sodium channel 
blockers
Correction of electrolyte and 
acid–base abnormalities and 
hypoxia
Sodium bicarbonate (e.g. 50 mL 
8.4% solution, repeated if 
necessary)
Torsades 
de pointes, 
associated with 
QTc prolongation
Anti-arrhythmic drugs 
(quinidine, amiodarone, 
sotalol)
Antimalarials
Organophosphate 
insecticides
Antipsychotic agents
Antidepressants
Antibiotics 
(erythromycin)
Correction of electrolyte and 
acid–base abnormalities and 
hypoxia
Magnesium sulphate, 2 g IV 
(adults) over 1–2 mins, repeated 
if necessary
(IV = intravenous; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug; TCA = tricyclic antidepressant)
If multiple ingestions of paracetamol have taken place over several hours 
(‘staggered overdose’) or days (e.g. chronic therapeutic excess), acetyl-
cysteine may be indicated, but paracetamol treatment nomograms are 
not useful for assessing this; specic treatment recommendations are 
based on the reported dose ingested and vary between countries.
When indicated, acetylcysteine given intravenously (or orally in some 
countries) is highly efcacious if administered within 8 hours of overdose. 
However, efcacy declines thereafter, so administration should not be 
delayed to await a paracetamol blood concentration result in patients 
presenting after 8 hours. The antidote can be stopped if the paracetamol 
concentration is subsequently shown to be below the nomogram treat-
ment line. High-dose acetylcysteine regimens are increasingly used in 
patients with very large paracetamol overdoses.
Non-allergic anaphylactic (‘anaphylactoid’) reactions are the most 
important adverse effects of acetylcysteine and are caused by dose-re-
lated histamine release. Common features are itching and urticaria, and 
in severe cases, bronchospasm and hypotension. Most cases can be 
managed by temporary discontinuation of acetylcysteine and adminis-
tration of an antihistamine.
An alternative antidote is methionine 2.5 g orally (adult dose) every 
4 hours to a total of four doses, but this may be less effective, especially 
after delayed presentation. Liver transplantation should be considered 
for paracetamol poisoning with life-threatening liver failure (p. 872).
Salicylates (aspirin)
Clinical features
Salicylate overdose commonly causes nausea, vomiting, sweating, tin-
nitus and deafness. Direct stimulation of the respiratory centre produces 

[[p260]]
226    POISONING
hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis. Peripheral vasodilatation with 
bounding pulses and profuse sweating occurs in moderately severe 
cases. Serious poisoning is associated with metabolic acidosis, hypo-
prothrombinaemia, hyperglycaemia, hyperpyrexia, renal failure, pulmon-
ary oedema, shock and cerebral oedema. Agitation, delirium, coma and 
ts may occur, especially in children. Toxicity is enhanced by acidosis, 
which increases salicylate transfer across the blood–brain barrier.
Management
Activated charcoal should be administered if the patient presents suf-
ciently early. Multiple doses may enhance salicylate elimination, but are 
not routinely recommended.
The plasma salicylate concentration should be measured at least 2 
(symptomatic patients) or 4 hours (asymptomatic patients) after over-
dose and repeated in suspected serious poisoning, as concentrations 
may continue to rise for several hours. Clinical status, however, is more 
important than the salicylate concentration when assessing severity.
Dehydration should be corrected carefully because of the risk of pul-
monary oedema. Metabolic acidosis should be treated with intravenous 
sodium bicarbonate (8.4%), after plasma potassium has been corrected. 
Urinary alkalinisation is indicated for adults with salicylate concentrations 
above 500 mg/L.
Haemodialysis is very effective for removing salicylate and correct-
ing associated acid–base and uid balance abnormalities. It should be 
considered when serum concentrations are above 700 mg/L in adults 
with severe toxic features, or in renal failure, pulmonary oedema, coma, 
convulsions or refractory acidosis.
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Clinical features
Overdose of most non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) usu-
ally causes only minor abdominal discomfort, vomiting and/or diarrhoea, 
but convulsions can occur occasionally, especially with mefenamic acid. 
Coma, prolonged seizures, apnoea, liver dysfunction and renal failure 
may follow substantial overdose but are rare. Features of toxicity are 
unlikely to develop in patients who are asymptomatic more than 6 hours 
after overdose.
Management
Electrolytes, liver function tests and a full blood count should be checked 
in all but the most trivial cases. Activated charcoal may be given if the 
patient presents within 1 hour. Symptomatic treatment for nausea and 
gastrointestinal irritation may be needed.
Antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Overdose with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) carries a high morbidity 
and mortality because of their sodium channel-blocking, anticholinergic 
and α-adrenoceptor-blocking effects.
Clinical features
Anticholinergic effects are common (Box 10.10). Severe complications 
include convulsions, coma and arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, ven-
tricular brillation and, less commonly, heart block). Hypotension results from 
inappropriate vasodilatation or impaired myocardial contractility. Serious 
complications appear more common with dosulepin and amitriptyline.
Management
Activated charcoal should be administered if the patient presents within 1 
hour. A 12-lead ECG should be taken and continuous cardiac monitoring 
maintained for at least 6 hours. Prolongation of the QRS interval (espe-
cially if >0.16 secs) indicates severe sodium channel blockade and a high 
risk of arrhythmia (Fig. 10.3). QT interval prolongation may also occur. 
Arterial blood gases should be measured in suspected severe poisoning.
In patients with arrhythmias, signicant QRS or QT prolongation or aci-
dosis, intravenous sodium bicarbonate (50 mL of 8.4% solution) should 
be administered and repeated to correct pH. The correction of the acido-
sis and the increased extracellular sodium loading that improve sodium 
channel function and may bring about rapid improvement in ECG fea-
tures and arrhythmias. Hypoxia and electrolyte abnormalities should also 
be corrected. Anti-arrhythmic drugs should be given only on specialist 
10.10  Anticholinergic and serotonergic feature clusters
Anticholinergic
Serotonin syndrome
Common causes
Benzodiazepines
Antipsychotics
TCAs
Antihistamines
Scopolamine
Benzatropine
Belladonna
Some plants and mushrooms 
(see Box 10.18)
SSRIs
MAOIs
TCAs
Amphetamines
Tryptamines
Buspirone
Bupropion (especially 
in combination)
Clinical features
Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, hypertension
Tachycardia, hyper- or 
hypotension
Central nervous 
system
Delirium, hallucinations, 
sedation
Delirium, 
hallucinations, 
sedation, coma
Muscle
Myoclonus
Shivering, tremor, 
myoclonus, raised 
creatine kinase
Temperature
Fever
Fever
Eyes
Diplopia, mydriasis
Normal pupil size
Abdomen
Ileus, palpable bladder
Diarrhoea, vomiting
Mouth
Dry
Skin
Flushing, hot, dry
Flushing, sweating
Complications
Seizures
Seizures
Rhabdomyolysis
Renal failure
Metabolic acidosis
Coagulopathies
(MAOI = monoamine oxidase inhibitor; SSRI = selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor;  
TCA = tricyclic antidepressant)
0 0
2
4
6
8
10 12
Time since overdose (hr)
Treatment line
14 16 18 20 22 24
20
40
60
80
100
Paracetamol concentration (mg/L)
Too early to assess
120
140
160
180
200
Fig. 10.2 Paracetamol treatment nomogram (UK). Above the treatment line, 
benets of treatment outweigh risk. Below it, risks of treatment outweigh benets.

[[p261]]
Poisoning by specific pharmaceutical agents    227
10
advice. Prolonged seizures should be treated initially with intravenous 
benzodiazepines (see Box 10.8).
Selective serotonin and noradrenaline re-uptake 
inhibitors
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants (e.g. uox-
etine, paroxetine, uvoxamine, sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram) are 
commonly used to treat depression and are less toxic in overdose than 
TCAs. The related serotonin–noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitors (SNRIs), 
such as venlafaxine and duloxetine, are also commonly used and are 
more toxic than SSRIs in overdose. The pre-synaptic alpha2-antagonist 
mirtazapine, which increases central noradrenergic and serotinergic neu-
rotransmission, is also increasingly encountered in overdose.
Clinical features and management
Overdose of SSRIs may produce nausea and vomiting, tremor, insom-
nia and sinus tachycardia. Agitation, drowsiness and convulsions occur 
infrequently and may be delayed for several hours. Serotonin syndrome 
may occur (see Box 10.10), especially if SSRIs are taken in combina-
tion or with other serotonergic agents. Cardiac arrhythmias occur infre-
quently and most patients require supportive care only. The toxic effects 
of SNRIs are similar but tachycardia, hypertension or hypotension and 
ECG changes (QRS and QT prolongation) may be more prominent and 
hypoglycaemia can also arise. Mirtazapine has lower toxicity, but high 
doses may cause sedation, tachycardia and serotonin syndrome.
Lithium
Severe lithium toxicity is uncommon after intentional acute overdose, 
but is more often encountered in patients taking therapeutic doses as a 
result of interactions with drugs such as diuretics or NSAIDs or because 
of worsening renal function. Severe toxicity is more common after acute 
overdose in patients already taking chronic therapy (‘acute on chronic’ 
poisoning).
Clinical features
Nausea, diarrhoea, polyuria, dizziness and tremor may progress to 
muscular weakness, drowsiness, delirium, myoclonus, fasciculations, 
choreoathetosis and renal failure. Coma, seizures, ataxia, cardiac dys-
rhythmias such as heart block, blood pressure disturbances and renal 
failure may occur in severe poisoning.
Management
Activated charcoal is ineffective. Early gastric lavage is of theoretical ben-
et, but lithium tablets are likely to remain intact in the stomach and may 
be too large for aspiration via a lavage tube. Whole bowel irrigation is 
often used after substantial overdose, but efcacy is unproven.
Lithium concentrations should be measured immediately (symptomatic 
patients) or after at least 6 hours (asymptomatic patients) following acute 
overdose. The usual therapeutic range is 0.4–1.0 mmol/L. Adequate 
hydration should be maintained with intravenous uids. Seizures should 
be treated as in Box 10.8
Haemodialysis should be considered for severe toxicity associated 
with high lithium concentrations (e.g. >4.0 mmol/L after chronic or ‘acute 
on chronic’ poisoning, or >7.5 mmol/L after acute poisoning). Lithium 
concentrations are reduced substantially during dialysis, but rebound 
increases occur after discontinuation and multiple sessions are usually 
required.
Cardiovascular medications
Although not common, cardiovascular drug overdose is important 
because features of toxicity are often severe.
Beta-blockers
Major features of toxicity are bradycardia and hypotension; heart block, 
pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock occur in severe poisoning. 
Those with additional sodium channel-blocking effects (e.g. proprano-
lol, acebutolol, carvedilol) may cause seizures, delirium and coma, while 
sotalol, which also blocks potassium channels, may cause QTc prolon-
gation and torsades de pointes (see Box 10.8 and p. 418).
Management
Intravenous uids may reverse hypotension, but care is required to avoid 
pulmonary oedema. Bradycardia and hypotension may respond to high 
doses of atropine (up to 3 mg in an adult) or an infusion of isoproter-
enol. Glucagon (5–10 mg IV over 10 mins, then 50–150 microgram/kg/hr 
by infusion) counteracts β-blockade by stimulating intracellular cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production and is now more com-
monly used. In severe cases, ‘hyperinsulinaemia euglycaemic therapy’ 
has been used, as described under calcium channel blockers below. The 
efcacy of lipid emulsion therapy in severe poisoning with lipid-soluble 
β-blockers, such as propranolol, carvedilol and oxprenolol, is uncertain.
Calcium channel blockers
In therapeutic doses, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g. nifedip-
ine, amlodipine) cause vasodilatation, whereas diltiazem and verapamil have 
predominantly cardiac effects, including bradycardia and reduced myocar-
dial contractility. All L-type calcium channel blockers, however,  are highly 
toxic in overdose.
Clinical features
Hypotension due to vasodilatation or myocardial depression is common 
and bradycardias and heart block may also occur, especially with ver-
apamil and diltiazem. Gastrointestinal disturbances, delirium, metabolic 
acidosis, hyperglycaemia and hyperkalaemia may also be present.
Management
Hypotension should be corrected with intravenous uids, taking care to 
avoid pulmonary oedema. Persistent hypotension may respond to intra-
venous calcium gluconate (10 mg IV over 5 mins, repeated as required). 
Isoproterenol and glucagon may also be useful. Successful use of high-
dose intravenous insulin with glucose (10%–20% dextrose with insulin 
initially at 0.5–2.0 U/kg/hr, increasing to 5–10 U/kg/hr according to clinical 
response), so-called ‘hyperinsulinaemia euglycaemic therapy’, has been 
reported in patients unresponsive to other strategies. The mechanism of 
action remains to be fully elucidated, but in states of shock myocardial 
metabolism switches from use of free fatty acids to glucose. Calcium chan-
nel blocker poisoning is also associated with hypoinsulinaemia and insulin 
resistance, impeding glucose uptake by myocytes. High doses of insulin 
inhibit lipolysis and increase glucose uptake and the efciency of glucose 
utilisation. Cardiac pacing may be needed for severe unresponsive brady-
cardias or heart block. Lipid emulsion therapy has also been used in severe 
poisoning with apparent benet, although evidence is largely anecdotal.
Digoxin and oleander
Poisoning with digoxin (a cardiac glycoside; p. XXX) is usually accidental, 
arising from prescription of an excessive dose, impairment of renal func-
tion or drug interactions. In South Asia, deliberate self-poisoning with 
II
Fig. 10.3 ECG in severe tricyclic antidepressant poisoning. This rhythm strip 
shows a broad QRS complex due to impaired conduction.

[[p262]]
228    POISONING
the plant yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana), which contains cardiac 
glycosides, is common.
Clinical features
Cardiac effects include tachyarrhythmias (either atrial or ventricular) and 
bradycardias, with or without atrioventricular block. Ventricular bigem-
iny is common and atrial tachycardia with evidence of atrioventricular 
block is highly suggestive of the diagnosis. Severe poisoning is often 
associated with hyperkalaemia. Non-cardiac features include delirium, 
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and (rarely) altered colour vision. 
Digoxin poisoning can be conrmed by elevated plasma concentration 
(usual therapeutic range 1.3–2.5  mmol/L). After chronic exposure, con-
centrations >5  mmol/L suggest serious poisoning, although this may 
sometimes also occur with lower concentrations.
Management
Activated charcoal is commonly administered to patients present-
ing soon after acute ingestion, although evidence of benet is lacking. 
Urea, electrolytes and creatinine should be measured, a 12-lead ECG 
performed and cardiac monitoring instituted. Hypoxia, hypokalaemia 
(sometimes caused by concurrent diuretic use), hypomagnesaemia 
and acidosis increase the risk of arrhythmias and should be corrected. 
Signicant bradycardias may respond to atropine, although temporary 
pacing is sometimes needed. Ventricular arrhythmias may respond to 
intravenous magnesium (see Box 10.8). If available, digoxin-specic anti-
body fragments should be administered when there are severe refrac-
tory ventricular arrhythmias or bradycardias. These are effective for both 
digoxin and yellow oleander poisoning.
Iron
Overdose with iron can cause severe and sometimes fatal poisoning, 
with toxicity of individual iron preparations related to their elemental iron 
content.
Clinical features
Early features include gastrointestinal disturbance with the passage of 
grey or black stools, progressing to hyperglycaemia, leucocytosis, hae-
matemesis, rectal bleeding, drowsiness, convulsions, coma, metabolic 
acidosis and cardiovascular collapse in severe cases. Early symptoms 
may improve or resolve within 6–12 hours, but hepatocellular necrosis 
can develop 12–24 hours after overdose and occasionally progresses to 
hepatic failure. Gastrointestinal strictures are late complications.
Management
Activated charcoal is ineffective, but gastric lavage or whole bowel elim-
ination may be considered in patients presenting soon after substan-
tial overdose, although efcacy is unknown. Serum iron concentration 
should be measured at least 4 hours after overdose or earlier if there are 
features of toxicity. Desferrioxamine chelates iron and should be admin-
istered immediately in patients with severe features (e.g. coma, shock, 
metabolic acidosis, haemolysis), without waiting for serum iron concen-
trations, as well as symptomatic patients with high serum iron concen-
trations (e.g. >5  mg/L). Desferrioxamine may cause hypotension, allergic 
reactions and occasionally pulmonary oedema. Otherwise, treatment is 
supportive and directed at complications.
Antipsychotic drugs
Antipsychotic drugs (see Box 31.26) are often prescribed for patients at 
high risk of self-harm or suicide and are often taken in overdose.
Clinical features
Anticholinergic features (see Box 10.10) including drowsiness, tach-
ycardia and hypotension are common and convulsions may occur. 
Acute dystonias, including oculogyric crisis, torticollis and trismus, 
may occur after overdose with typical antipsychotics like haloperidol or 
chlorpromazine (Box 10.8). QT interval prolongation and torsades de 
pointes can occur with some typical (e.g. haloperidol) and atypical (e.g. 
quetiapine, amisulpride, ziprasidone) agents.
Management
Activated charcoal may be of benet if given early. Cardiac monitoring 
should be undertaken for at least 6 hours. Management is largely sup-
portive, with treatment directed at complications (see Box 10.8).
Antidiabetic agents
Overdose is uncommon, but toxic effects can be severe.
Clinical features
Sulphonylureas, meglitinides (e.g. nateglinide, repaglinide) and parenteral 
insulin cause hypoglycaemia when taken in overdose, although insulin is 
non-toxic if ingested by mouth. The duration of hypoglycaemia depends 
on the half-life or release characteristics of the preparation and may be 
prolonged over several days with long-acting agents such as glibencla-
mide, insulin degludec or insulin glargine.
Features of hypoglycaemia include nausea, agitation, sweating, 
aggression, delirium, tachycardia, hypothermia, drowsiness, convulsions 
and coma (p. 719). Permanent neurological damage can occur if hypo-
glycaemia is prolonged. Hypoglycaemia can be diagnosed using bed-
side glucose strips, but venous blood should also be sent for laboratory 
conrmation.
Metformin is uncommonly associated with hypoglycaemia. Its major 
toxic effect is lactic acidosis, which can have a high mortality, and is 
particularly common in older patients and those with renal or hepatic 
impairment, or when ethanol has been co-ingested. Other features of 
metformin overdose are nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, 
drowsiness, coma, hypotension and cardiovascular collapse.
There is limited experience of overdose involving thiazolidinediones 
(e.g. pioglitazone) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors (e.g. sit-
agliptin), but signicant hypoglycaemia is unlikely.
Management
Activated charcoal should be considered for recent substantial overdose. 
Venous blood glucose and urea and electrolytes should be measured 
and measurement repeated regularly. Hypoglycaemia should be cor-
rected using oral or intravenous glucose (50 mL of 50% dextrose); an 
infusion of 10%–20% dextrose may be required to prevent recurrence. 
Intramuscular glucagon can be used as an alternative, especially if intra-
venous access is unavailable. If the patient remains hypoglycaemic in 
spite of these measures, subcutaneous or intravenous octreotide may 
be used. Failure to regain consciousness within a few minutes of normal-
isation of the blood glucose can indicate that a central nervous system 
(CNS) depressant has also been ingested, the hypoglycaemia has been 
prolonged, or there is another cause of coma (e.g. cerebral haemorrhage 
or oedema).
Arterial blood gases and plasma lactate should be taken after metformin 
overdose; acidosis should be corrected with intravenous sodium bicarb-
onate (250 mL 1.26% solution or 50 mL 8.4% solution, repeated as neces-
sary). In severe cases, haemodialysis or haemodialtration is used.
Pharmaceutical agents less commonly taken in 
poisoning
An overview of the clinical features and management for drugs less com-
monly involved in poisoning is provided in Box 10.11.
Drugs of misuse
Drugs of misuse are common causes of toxicity causing presentation to 
hospitals. Management has recently become more complex because of 
the emergence of ‘new psychoactive substances’ (NPS). These are often 

[[p263]]
Drugs of misuse    229
10
chemically related to traditional drugs of misuse, but with structural mod-
ications made to evade legal control. The constituents of branded NPS 
products are often unknown and knowledge about the clinical features 
and management of NPS toxicity is limited.
Depressants
These produce CNS depression, including drowsiness, ataxia, delirium 
and coma, sometimes with respiratory depression, airway compromise, 
aspiration pneumonia and respiratory arrest (Box 10.12). Other compli-
cations of coma include pressure blisters or sores and rhabdomyolysis. 
Effects are potentiated by other CNS depressants, including alcohol.
Essential supportive care is detailed in Box 10.8. Antidotes are availa-
ble for some depressants.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam, lorazepam, midazolam) and related 
substances (e.g. zopiclone) are of low toxicity when taken alone in over-
dose, but can enhance CNS and respiratory depression when taken 
with other sedative agents, including alcohol or heroin. They are more 
hazardous in older people and those with chronic lung or neuromus-
cular disease (see Box 10.12). Dependency develops after chronic use 
over a few weeks and features of withdrawal commonly occur after rapid 
discontinuation of use. Highly potent novel benzodiazepines, such as 
etizolam, ualprazolam and ubromazolam, have recently been encoun-
tered, especially in counterfeit tablets purchased from dealers or via the 
internet; these can cause toxic effects after very low doses.
10.11  Clinical features and specic management of drugs less 
commonly involved in poisoning
Substance
Clinical features
Management
Anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine, 
phenytoin
Cerebellar signs
Convulsions
Cardiac arrhythmias
Coma
Multiple-dose activated 
charcoal (carbamazepine)
Sodium valproate
Coma
Metabolic acidosis
Hepatotoxicity
Haemodialysis for severe 
poisoning
L-carnitine may be useful 
for severe cases with 
hyperammonaemia or 
hepatotoxicity
Isoniazid
Peripheral neuropathy
Convulsions
Activated charcoal
IV pyridoxine
Theophylline
Cardiac arrhythmias
Convulsions
Coma
Multiple-dose activated 
charcoal
Antimalarial drugs
Chloroquine
Acidosis and 
hypokalaemia
Visual loss
Convulsions, coma
ECG changes and 
arrhythmias
Correction of pH (but not 
potassium)
Monitoring and treatment of 
cardiac rhythm
High-dose diazepam with 
mechanical ventilation
Quinine
Tremor, tinnitus, 
deafness, ataxia, 
convulsions, coma
Haemolysis
ECG changes and 
arrhythmias
Retinal toxicity
Correction of pH (but not 
potassium)
Monitoring and treatment of 
cardiac rhythm
Multiple-dose activated 
charcoal
No effective treatment for 
visual loss
10.12  Stimulant, sedative and opioid feature clusters
Stimulant
Sedative 
hypnotic
Opioid
Common 
causes
Amphetamines
MDMA (‘ecstasy’)
Ephedrine
Pseudoephedrine
Cocaine
Cannabis
Phencyclidine
Cathinones (e.g. 
mephedrone)
Benzylpiperazine
Benzodiazepines
Barbiturates
Ethanol
GHB
Heroin
Morphine
Methadone
Fentanyl and 
derivatives
Oxycodone
Dihydrocodeine
Codeine
Pethidine
Buprenorphine
Dextropropoxyphene
Tramadol
Clinical features
Respiratory
Tachypnoea
Reduced 
respiratory rate 
and ventilation1
Reduced respiratory 
rate and ventilation
Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, 
hypertension
Hypotension1
Hypotension, relative 
bradycardia
Central nervous 
system
Restlessness, 
anxiety, anorexia, 
insomnia
Delirium, 
hallucinations, 
slurred speech
Delirium, 
hallucinations, 
slurred speech
Hallucinations
Sedation, coma1
Sedation, coma2
Muscle
Tremor
Ataxia, reduced 
muscle tone
Ataxia, reduced 
muscle tone
Temperature
Fever
Hypothermia
Hypothermia
Eyes
Mydriasis
Diplopia, 
strabismus, 
nystagmus
Normal pupil size
Miosis
Abdomen
Abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea
–
Ileus
Mouth
Dry
–
–
Skin
Piloerection
Blisters, pressure 
sores
Needle tracks2
Complications
Seizures
Myocardial 
infarction
Dysrhythmias
Rhabdomyolysis
Renal failure
Intracerebral 
haemorrhage or 
infarction
Respiratory 
failure1
Aspiration
Respiratory failure2
Non-cardiogenic 
pulmonary oedema
Aspiration
1Especially barbiturates. 2Intravenous use.
(GHB = gamma hydroxybutyrate; MDMA = 3,4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine)
The specic benzodiazepine antagonist umazenil (0.5 mg IV, repeated 
if needed) increases conscious level in patients with benzodiazepine 
overdose, but carries a risk of seizures and is contraindicated in patients 
co-ingesting pro-convulsants (e.g. TCAs, cocaine) and in those with a 
history of epilepsy.
Opioids
Toxicity may result from misuse of illicit drugs such as heroin or from 
intentional or accidental overdose of medicinal opiates. In recent years, 
fentanyl and its analogues have increasingly been used to fortify heroin 
preparations in North America. These synthetic compounds are highly 
potent, their presence increases the risk of overdose and there has been 
a sharp increase in deaths related to opioid overdose in the United States 
and Canada.

[[p264]]
230    POISONING
Intravenous or smoked heroin gives a rapid, intensely pleasurable 
experience, often accompanied by heightened sexual arousal. Physical 
dependence occurs within a few weeks of regular high-dose use. 
Withdrawal can start within 12 hours, causing intense craving, rhinor-
rhoea, lacrimation, yawning, perspiration, shivering, piloerection, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea and abdominal cramps. Examination reveals tachycardia, 
hypertension, mydriasis and facial ushing.
Commonly encountered opioids and clinical features of poisoning 
are shown in Box 10.12. Needle tracks may be visible in intravenous 
users and there may be drug-related paraphernalia. Methadone may 
also cause QTc prolongation and torsades de pointes. Features of opioid 
poisoning can be prolonged for up to 48 hours after use of long-acting 
agents such as methadone or oxycodone.
Use of the specic opioid antagonist naloxone (0.4–2 mg IV in an 
adult, repeated if necessary) may obviate the need for intubation, 
although excessive doses may precipitate acute withdrawal in chronic 
opiate users and breakthrough pain in those receiving opioids for 
pain management. Repeated doses or an infusion are often required 
because the half-life of the antidote is short compared to that of most 
opiates, especially those with prolonged elimination. Patients should be 
monitored for at least 6 hours after the last naloxone dose. Rare com-
plications of naloxone therapy include ts, ventricular arrhythmias and 
pulmonary oedema.
Gamma hydroxybutyrate
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and the related compounds gamma 
butyrolactone (GBL), 1,4 butanediol, gamma-hydroxyvaleric acid (GHV) 
and gamma-valerolactone (GVL), are sedative substances with psyche-
delic and body-building effects. They are usually supplied as clear uids 
and have been administered surreptitiously to enable drug-facilitated 
sexual assaults or other crimes.
As well as sedative hypnotic features (see Box 10.12), toxicity may 
cause nausea, diarrhoea, vertigo, tremor, myoclonus, extrapyramidal 
signs, euphoria, bradycardia, convulsions, metabolic acidosis, hypo-
kalaemia and hyperglycaemia. Coma usually resolves abruptly within a 
few hours, but occasionally persists for several days. Dependence may 
develop in regular users, who experience severe, prolonged withdrawal 
effects if use is discontinued suddenly.
Management is largely supportive. All patients should be observed for a 
minimum of 2 hours and until symptoms resolve, with monitoring of blood 
pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and oxygenation. Withdrawal symp-
toms may require treatment with very high doses of benzodiazepine.
Stimulants and entactogens
These are sympathomimetic and serotonergic amines that have overlap-
ping clinical features, depending on the balance of their stimulant (see 
Box 10.12) and serotonergic (see Box 10.10) effects. As well as tra-
ditional drugs such as cocaine, amphetamines and ecstasy, the group 
includes many more recently emerging new psychoactive substances, 
including cathinones (e.g. mephedrone), piperazines (e.g. benzylpiper-
azine), piperadines (e.g. ethylphenidate), benzofurans (e.g. 5-aminopro-
pylbenzofuran) and NBOMe compounds (e.g. 25I-NBOMe).
Cocaine
Cocaine is available as a water-soluble hydrochloride salt powder suit-
able for nasal inhalation (‘snorting’), or as insoluble free-base (‘crack’ 
cocaine) ‘rocks’ that, unlike the hydrochloride salt, vaporise at high tem-
perature and can be smoked, giving a more rapid and intense effect.
Effects appear rapidly after inhalation and especially after smok-
ing. Sympathomimetic stimulant effects predominate (see Box 10.12). 
Serious complications usually occur within 3 hours of use and include 
coronary artery spasm, leading to myocardial ischaemia or infarction, 
hypotension and ventricular arrhythmias. Cocaine toxicity should be 
considered in younger adults presenting with ischaemic chest pain. 
Hyperpyrexia, rhabdomyolysis, acute renal failure and disseminated 
intravascular coagulation may occur.
A 12-lead ECG and ECG monitoring should be undertaken. ST segment 
elevation may occur in the absence of myocardial infarction and troponin 
T estimations are the most sensitive and specic markers of myocardial 
damage. Benzodiazepines and intravenous nitrates are useful for managing 
patients with chest pain or hypertension. Acidosis should be corrected and 
physical cooling measures used for hyperpyrexia. Beta-blockers may be 
contraindicated because of the risk of unopposed α-adrenoceptor stimu-
lation, but this is debated. Coronary angiography should be considered in 
patients with myocardial infarction or acute coronary syndromes.
Amphetamines and cathinones
Amphetamine-related compounds include amphetamine sulphate 
(‘speed’), methylamphetamine (‘crystal meth’) and 3,4-methylene- 
dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ‘ecstasy’). Synthetic cathinones include 
mephedrone, methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) and n-ethyl pentylone. 
Tolerance is common, leading regular users to seek ever-higher doses.
Toxic features usually appear within a few minutes of use and last 4–6 
hours, or substantially longer after a large overdose. Sympathomimetic 
stimulant and serotonergic effects are common (see Boxes 10.10 and 
10.12). Some users develop hyponatraemia as a result of excessive 
water-drinking or inappropriate vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) 
secretion. Muscle rigidity, pain and bruxism (clenching of the jaw), hyper-
pyrexia, rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis, acute renal failure, dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation, hepatocellular necrosis, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) and cardiovascular collapse have all been 
described following MDMA use. Cerebral infarction and haemorrhage 
have been reported, especially after intravenous amphetamine use.
Management is supportive and directed at complications (see Box 10.8).
Hallucinogens
Cannabis
Derived from the dried leaves and owers of Cannabis sativa, cannabis 
produces euphoria, perceptual alterations and conjunctival injection, fol-
lowed by enhanced appetite, relaxation and occasionally hypertension, 
tachycardia, slurred speech and ataxia. Effects occur 10–30 minutes after 
smoking or 1–3 hours after ingestion, and last 4–8 hours. Solutions are also 
available for ‘vaping’ using electronic cigarettes. High doses of cannabis 
may produce anxiety, delirium, hallucinations and psychosis, but serious 
acute toxicity is uncommon and supportive treatment is all that is required. 
Psychological dependence is common, but tolerance and withdrawal 
symptoms are unusual. Long-term use is thought to increase the lifetime 
risk of psychosis and a cannabis hyperemesis syndrome is also recog-
nised, involving episodes if vomiting that respond poorly to antiemetics, but 
improve on discontinuation of cannabis use.
Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists
Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists (SCRAs), sometimes referred to 
collectively as ‘spice’, have recently been in common use as legal alterna-
tives to cannabis. More than 150 different SCRAs have been encountered, 
with recently prevalent examples including MDMB-CHMICA, 5F-MDMB-
PINACA and AMB-FUBINACA. They are usually sprayed on to a herbal 
smoking mix and packaged as smoking products with appealing brand 
names. These may contain more than one SCRA and content may change 
with time. ‘Vaping’ of SCRA solutions has also been reported.
The toxic effects of SCRAs differ from those of cannabis, being gener-
ally more marked and including agitation, panic, delirium, hallucinations, 
tachycardia, ECG changes, hypertonia, dyspnoea and vomiting. Coma, 
respiratory acidosis, seizures, hypokalaemia and renal dysfunction may 
also occur. There is increasing evidence of pharmacological tolerance 
and dependence with SCRA use and features of withdrawal may occur 
after discontinuation. Treatment of intoxication is supportive.

[[p265]]
Chemicals and pesticides    231
10
Tryptamines
These are predominantly 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin; espe-
cially 5-HT2A) agonists with associated stimulant effects. Typical clinical 
features include hallucinations, agitation, delirium, hypertension, tachy-
cardia, sweating, anxiety and headache. Serotonin syndrome may occur 
(see Box 10.10), especially if tryptamines are used in combination with 
other serotonergic agents. Naturally occurring examples are psilocin 
and psilocybin, found in ‘magic mushrooms’, and dimethyltryptamine 
(DMT) in traditional ayahuasca brews. Synthetic tryptamines, such as 
alpha-methyltryptamine (AMT), have also been encountered.
D-Lysergic acid diethylamide
D-Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is a synthetic ergoline usually 
ingested as small squares of impregnated absorbent paper (often 
printed with a distinctive design) or as ‘microdots’. The drug causes 
perceptual effects, such as heightened visual awareness of colours or 
distortion of images. Hallucinations may be pleasurable or terrifying 
(‘bad trip’). Other features are delirium, agitation, aggression, dilated 
pupils, hypertension, pyrexia and metabolic acidosis. Psychosis may 
sometimes last several days.
Patients with psychotic reactions or CNS depression should be 
observed in hospital, preferably in a quiet, dimly lit room to minimise 
external stimulation. A benzodiazepine can be used for sedation if 
required, avoiding antipsychotics if possible because these may precipi-
tate cardiovascular collapse or convulsions.
Dissociative drugs
Ketamine, its N-ethyl derivative methoxetamine and phencyclidine (now 
rarely encountered) produce a sense of dissociation from reality, often 
associated with visual and auditory distortions. Memory loss, impaired 
consciousness, agitation, hallucinations, tremors and numbness may 
also occur. Long-term ketamine or methoxetamine use can cause severe 
chronic cystitis with dysuria, frequency, urgency, haematuria and inconti-
nence. These features are often severe, debilitating and difcult to treat. 
Management of acute intoxication is supportive.
Volatile substances
Inhalation of volatile nitrites (e.g. amyl nitrite, isobutyl nitrite), often sold in 
bottles or vials as ‘poppers’, is reported to produce a feeling of pleasure 
and warmth, relax the anal sphincter and prolong orgasm. These potent 
vasodilators commonly provoke headache, dizziness, hypotension and 
tachycardia. They also oxidise haemoglobin to produce methaemoglobi-
naemia, with resulting breathlessness and delirium. Severe methaemoglo-
binaemia is treated with methylthioninium chloride (‘methylene blue’, see 
Fig. 10.1) Regular use may also precipitate maculopathy with visual loss.
Several volatile solvents found in household products, such as pro-
pane, butane, toluene and trichloroethylene, have a mild euphoriant 
effect if inhaled. Serious toxic effects can occur, including reduced level 
of consciousness, seizures and cardiac arrhythmias; there is also a risk 
of asphyxia from some methods of inhalation.
Nitrous oxide is an anaesthetic gas, but small canisters of it are sold 
for the domestic production of whipped cream and the contents of these 
can be transferred to balloons for inhalation. The gas has euphoriant 
effects (‘laughing gas’), but hazards include asphyxia from inhalation 
without oxygen, or vitamin B12 inactivation from chronic use leading to 
megaloblastic anaemia, psychosis and other neurological sequelae.
Body packers and body stuffers
Body packers (‘mules’) attempt to smuggle illicit drugs (usually cocaine, 
heroin or amphetamines) by ingesting multiple small packages wrapped 
in several layers of clinglm or in condoms. Body stuffers are those who 
have ingested unpackaged or poorly wrapped substances, often to avoid 
arrest. Both groups are at risk of severe toxicity if the packages rupture. 
This is more likely for body stuffers, who may develop symptoms of poi-
soning within 8 hours of ingestion. The risk of poisoning depends on 
the quality of the wrapping, and the amount and type of drug ingested. 
Cocaine, for example, presents a much higher risk than heroin because 
of its high toxicity and lack of a specic antidote.
Patients suspected of body packing or stufng should be admitted for 
observation. A careful history taken in private is important, but for obvious 
reasons patients may withhold details of the drugs involved. Examination 
of the mouth, rectum and vagina as possible sites for concealed drugs 
should be arranged with patient consent, consistent with local laws. A 
urine toxicology screen performed at intervals may provide evidence of 
leakage, although positive results may reect earlier drug use. Packages 
may be visible on plain abdominal lms (Fig. 10.4), but ultrasound and 
computed tomography (CT) are more sensitive. One of these (preferably 
CT) should be performed in all suspected body packers.
Antimotility agents are often used by body packers to prevent prema-
ture passage of packages; it can take several days for packages to pass 
spontaneously, during which the carrier is at risk from package rupture. 
Whole bowel irrigation is commonly used to accelerate passage and 
is continued until all packages have passed. Surgery may be required 
when there is mechanical bowel obstruction or when evolving clinical 
features suggest package rupture, especially with cocaine.
Chemicals and pesticides
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colourless, odourless gas produced by faulty 
appliances burning organic fuels. It is also present in vehicle exhaust fumes 
and sometimes in smoke from house res or barbeques. It binds with hae-
moglobin (to form carboxyhaemoglobin) and cytochrome oxidase, reducing 
tissue oxygen delivery and inhibiting cellular respiration. CO is a common 
cause of death by poisoning and most patients die before reaching hospital.
Clinical features
Early features include headache, nausea, irritability, weakness and 
tachypnoea. The cause of these non-specic features may not be obvi-
ous if the exposure is occult, such as from a faulty domestic appliance. 
Subsequently, ataxia, nystagmus, drowsiness and hyper-reexia may 
develop, progressing to coma, convulsions, hypotension, respiratory 
Fig. 10.4 Abdominal X-ray of a body packer showing multiple drug-lled 
condoms.

[[p266]]
232    POISONING
depression, cardiovascular collapse and death. Myocardial ischaemia may 
result in arrhythmias or myocardial infarction. Cerebral oedema is common 
and rhabdomyolysis may cause myoglobinuria and renal failure. In those 
who recover from acute toxicity, longer-term neuropsychiatric effects are 
common, such as personality change, memory loss and concentration 
impairment. Extrapyramidal effects, urinary or faecal incontinence, and gait 
disturbance may also occur. Poisoning during pregnancy may cause fetal 
hypoxia and intrauterine death.
Management
Patients should be removed from exposure as soon as possible and 
resuscitated as necessary. A high concentration of oxygen should be 
administered via a tightly tting facemask; this reduces the half-life of 
carboxyhaemoglobin from 4–6 hours to about 40 minutes. Measurement 
of carboxyhaemoglobin is useful for conrming exposure; levels > 20% 
suggest signicant exposure, but do not correlate well with the severity 
of poisoning, partly because concentrations fall rapidly after removal of 
the patient from exposure, especially if supplemental oxygen has been 
given.
An ECG should be performed in all patients with acute CO poisoning, 
especially those with pre-existing heart disease. Arterial blood gas anal-
ysis should be checked in those with serious poisoning. Pulse oximetry 
may provide misleading oxygen saturation levels because the devices 
do not distinguish between carboxyhaemoglobin and oxyhaemoglobin. 
Excessive intravenous uid administration should be avoided, particu-
larly in the older patients, because of the risk of pulmonary and cerebral 
oedema. Convulsions should be controlled with diazepam.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is controversial. At 2.5 atmospheres, the 
half-life of carboxyhaemoglobin is reduced to about 20 minutes and the 
amount of oxygen dissolved in plasma is increased 10-fold, but system-
atic reviews have not consistently shown improved clinical outcomes. 
The logistical difculties of transporting sick patients to hyperbaric cham-
bers and managing them therein are substantial.
Organophosphorus insecticides and nerve agents
Organophosphorus (OP) compounds (Box 10.13) have been widely used 
as pesticides, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Case 
fatality following deliberate ingestion is high (5%–20%). Legal controls 
banning the most toxic examples have substantially reduced local rates 
of suicide, for example in Sri Lanka.
Nerve agents, developed for chemical warfare, are derived from OP 
insecticides and are much more toxic. They are commonly classied as 
G (originally synthesised in Germany) or V (‘venomous’) agents. The ‘G’ 
agents, such as tabun, sarin and soman, are volatile, absorbed by inha-
lation or via the skin, and dissipate rapidly after use. ‘V’ agents, such as 
VX, are contact poisons unless aerosolised and contaminate ground for 
weeks or months. Novichok agents, originally developed in the former 
Soviet Union, have also recently been encountered.
The toxicology and management of nerve agent and pesticide poi-
soning are similar.
Mechanism of toxicity
OP compounds inactivate acetylcholinesterase (AChE), resulting in the 
accumulation of acetylcholine (ACh) in cholinergic synapses (Fig. 10.5). 
Initially, spontaneous hydrolysis of the OP–enzyme complex allows reac-
tivation of the enzyme but, subsequently, loss of a chemical group from 
the OP–enzyme complex prevents further enzyme reactivation. After 
this process (termed ‘ageing’) has taken place, new enzyme needs to 
be synthesised before function can be restored. The rate of ‘ageing’ 
is an important determinant of toxicity and is more rapid with dimethyl 
(3.7 hours) than diethyl (31 hours) compounds (see Box 10.13) and 
especially rapid after exposure to nerve agents (soman in particular), 
which cause ‘ageing’ within minutes.
Clinical features and management
OP poisoning causes an acute cholinergic phase, which may occa-
sionally be followed by the ‘intermediate syndrome’ and organophos-
phate-induced delayed polyneuropathy (OPIDN). The onset, severity and 
duration depend on the route of exposure and agent involved.
Acute cholinergic syndrome
This usually starts within a few minutes of exposure and nicotinic or 
muscarinic features may be present (Box 10.14). Vomiting and profuse 
diarrhoea are typical following ingestion. Bronchoconstriction, bronchor-
rhoea and salivation may cause severe respiratory compromise. Excess 
sweating and miosis are characteristic and the presence of muscular 
fasciculations strongly suggests the diagnosis, although this feature is 
often absent, even in serious poisoning. Subsequently, generalised ac-
cid paralysis may develop and affect respiratory and ocular muscles, 
Acetylcholinesterase
enzyme
‘Ageing’: reactivation
not possible
Organophosphate
Enzyme–substrate
complex
Elimination of
‘leaving group’
Reactivation with oxime
Spontaneous 
reactivation
AChE–OH  +  X–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–O–X–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–O–P–OR1  + 
AChE–O–P–OR
O
OR2
OXIME
N–OH
O
O
AChE–OH + HO–P–OR1
O
OR2
AChE–OH + OXIME
O
OR2
N–P–OR1
 XH
Fig. 10.5 Mechanism of toxicity of organophosphorus compounds and 
treatment with oxime.
10.13  Organophosphorus compounds
Nerve agents
 G agents: sarin, tabun, soman
 V agents: VX,VE
 Novichok agents
Insecticides
Dimethyl compounds
 Dichlorvos
 Fenthion
 Malathion
 Methamidophos
Diethyl compounds
 Chlorpyrifos
 Diazinon
 Parathion-ethyl
 Quinalphos

[[p267]]
Chemicals and pesticides    233
10
resulting in respiratory failure. Ataxia, coma, convulsions, cardiac repo-
larisation abnormalities and torsades de pointes may occur.
Management
The airway should be cleared of excessive secretions, breathing and 
circulation assessed, high-ow oxygen administered and intravenous 
access obtained. Appropriate external decontamination is needed 
(p. 221). Gastric lavage or activated charcoal may be considered if the 
patient presents sufciently early. Seizures should be treated as described 
in Box 10.8. The ECG, oxygen saturation, blood gases, temperature, 
urea and electrolytes, amylase and glucose should be monitored closely.
Early use of sufcient doses of atropine is potentially life-saving in 
patients with severe toxicity. Atropine reverses ACh-induced broncho-
spasm, bronchorrhoea, bradycardia and hypotension. When the diag-
nosis is uncertain, a marked increase in heart rate associated with skin 
ushing after a 1 mg intravenous dose makes OP poisoning unlikely. In 
OP poisoning, atropine (2 mg IV) should be administered and this dose 
should be doubled every 5–10 minutes until clinical improvement occurs. 
Further bolus doses should be given until secretions are controlled, the 
skin is dry, blood pressure is adequate and heart rate is >80 bpm. Large 
doses may be needed, but excessive doses may cause anticholinergic 
effects (see Box 10.10).
In severe poisoning requiring atropine, an oxime (such as pralidoxime 
chloride or obidoxime) is generally recommended if available, although 
efcacy is debated. This may reverse or prevent muscle weakness, 
convulsions or coma, especially if given rapidly after exposure. Oximes 
reactivate AChE that has not undergone ‘ageing’ and are therefore less 
effective with dimethyl compounds and nerve agents, especially soman. 
Oximes may provoke hypotension, especially if administered rapidly.
Intravenous magnesium sulphate has been reported to increase sur-
vival in animals and in small human studies of OP poisoning; however, 
further clinical trial evidence is needed before this can be recommended 
routinely.
Ventilatory support should be instituted before the patient develops 
respiratory failure. Benzodiazepines may be used to treat agitation, fas-
ciculations and seizures and for sedation during mechanical ventilation.
Exposure is conrmed by measurement of plasma or red blood cell 
cholinesterase activity, but antidote use should not be delayed pending 
results. Plasma cholinesterase is reduced more rapidly, but is less spe-
cic than red cell cholinesterase. Values correlate poorly with the severity 
of clinical features, but are usually < 10% in severe poisoning, 20%–50% 
in moderate poisoning and > 50% in subclinical poisoning.
The acute cholinergic phase usually lasts 48–72 hours, with most 
patients requiring intensive cardiorespiratory support and monitoring. 
Cholinergic features may be prolonged over several weeks with some 
lipid-soluble agents.
Intermediate syndrome
About 20% of patients with OP poisoning develop weakness that 
spreads rapidly from the ocular muscles to those of the head and neck, 
proximal limbs and the muscles of respiration, resulting in ventilatory 
failure. This ‘intermediate syndrome’ generally develops 1–4 days after 
exposure, often after resolution of the acute cholinergic syndrome and 
may last 2–3 weeks. There is no specic treatment and supportive care 
is needed, including maintenance of airway and ventilation.
Organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy
Organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy (OPIDN) is a rare 
complication that usually occurs 2–3 weeks after acute exposure. It is a 
mixed sensory/motor polyneuropathy, affecting long myelinated neurons 
especially, and appears to result from inhibition of enzymes other than 
AChE. It is a feature of poisoning with some OPs such as triorthocresyl 
phosphate, but is less common with nerve agents. Early clinical features 
are muscle cramps followed by numbness and paraesthesiae, proceed-
ing to accid paralysis of the lower and subsequently the upper limbs, 
with foot and wrist drop and a high-stepping gait, progressing to para-
plegia. Sensory loss may also be present but is variable. Initially, tendon 
reexes are reduced or lost but mild spasticity may develop later.
There is no specic therapy for OPIDN. Regular physiotherapy may 
limit deformity caused by muscle wasting. Recovery is often incomplete 
and may be limited to the hands and feet, although substantial functional 
recovery after 1–2 years may occur, especially in younger patients.
Carbamate insecticides
Carbamate insecticides such as bendiocarb, carbofuran, carbaryl and 
methomyl inhibit a number of tissue esterases, including AChE. The 
mechanism, clinical features and management of toxicity are similar to 
those of OP compounds. However, clinical features are usually less severe 
and of shorter duration, because the carbamate–AChE complex disso-
ciates quickly, with a half-life of 30–40 minutes, and does not undergo 
ageing. Also, carbamates penetrate the CNS poorly. Intermediate syn-
drome and OPIDN are not common features of carbamate poisoning. In 
spite of this, case fatality can be high for some carbamates, depending 
on their formulation.
Atropine may be given intravenously as for OP poisoning (see above, 
this section) is unnecessary.
Paraquat
Paraquat is a herbicide that has been widely used across the world, 
although it has been banned in the European Union and some other 
countries for many years. It is highly toxic if ingested, with clinical features 
including oral burns, vomiting and diarrhoea, progressing to pneumoni-
tis, pulmonary brosis and multi-organ failure.
Exposure can be conrmed by a urinary dithionite test, while the 
plasma paraquat concentration gives an indication of prognosis. There 
is no specic antidote, but activated charcoal is commonly adminis-
tered. Immunosuppression with glucocorticoids and cyclophospha-
mide is sometimes used, but evidence for benet is weak. Irrespective 
of treatment, death is common and may occur within 24 hours with 
substantial poisoning or after 1–2 weeks with lower doses.
Alcohols and glycols
Ethanol (alcohol, ethyl alcohol) is commonly consumed in alcoholic bev-
erages but is also found in some cosmetics, perfumes and antiseptic 
hand gels. It may also be used as an industrial solvent or produced illic-
itly. It can also be used as an antidote in ethylene glycol or methanol 
10.14  Cholinergic features in poisoning*
Muscarinic
Nicotinic
Respiratory
Bronchorrhoea, 
bronchoconstriction
Reduced ventilation
Circulation
Bradycardia, 
hypotension
Tachycardia, 
hypertension
Higher mental function
Anxiety, delirium, psychosis
Muscle
–
Fasciculation, paralysis
Temperature
Fever
–
Eyes
Diplopia, miosis, 
lacrimation
Mydriasis
Abdomen
Vomiting, profuse 
diarrhoea
Mouth
Salivation
–
Skin
Sweating
–
Complications
Coma, seizures, respiratory depression
*Both muscarinic and nicotinic features occur in OP poisoning. Nicotinic features occur in 
nicotine poisoning and Black Widow spider bites. Cholinergic features are sometimes seen with 
some mushrooms.

[[p268]]
234    POISONING
poisoning (see below). The health effects of chronic alcohol use are 
described in Chapter 31
Acute alcohol consumption causes concentration-related toxicity, 
although it is unusual for ethanol toxicity alone to precipitate hospital 
admission. Severe and fatal toxicity, however, is more likely in children 
or when alcohol has been used with other sedative substances such 
as opioids or benzodiazepines. High concentrations of alcohol produce 
incoordination and slurred speech, and this may progress to uncon-
sciousness with respiratory depression, loss of airway reexes, hypoten-
sion, metabolic acidosis and occasionally hypothermia, hypoglycaemia 
and convulsions. Investigations should include measurement of blood 
alcohol concentration, arterial blood gases as well as full blood count, 
glucose, renal and hepatic function. Management involves protection of 
the airway, maintenance of ventilation and oxygenation, uid resuscita-
tion, correction of hypoglycaemia with glucose and treatment of convul-
sions. Thiamine should be administered if chronic excess alcohol use is 
suspected. Haemodialysis is effective for increasing alcohol clearance 
and should be considered in severe cases associated with very high eth-
anol concentrations.
Ethylene glycol (1,2-ethanediol) is found in antifreeze, brake uids 
and, in lower concentrations, windscreen washes. Methanol is pres-
ent in some antifreeze products and commercially available industrial 
solvents, and in low concentrations in some screen washes and meth-
ylated spirits. It may also be an adulterant of illicitly produced alcohol. 
Both are rapidly absorbed after ingestion. Methanol and ethylene glycol 
are not of high intrinsic toxicity, but are converted via alcohol dehydro-
genase to toxic metabolites that are largely responsible for their clinical 
effects (Fig. 10.6).
Early features of poisoning with either methanol or ethylene glycol 
include vomiting, ataxia, drowsiness, dysarthria and nystagmus. As toxic 
metabolites are formed, metabolic acidosis, tachypnoea, coma and sei-
zures may develop.
Toxic effects of ethylene glycol include ophthalmoplegia, cranial nerve 
palsies, hyporeexia and myoclonus. Renal pain and acute tubular necro-
sis occur because of renal calcium oxalate precipitation. Hypocalcaemia, 
hypomagnesaemia and hyperkalaemia are common.
Methanol poisoning causes headache, delirium and vertigo. Visual 
impairment and photophobia develop, associated with optic disc and 
retinal oedema and impaired pupil reexes. Blindness may be permanent, 
although some recovery may occur over several months. Pancreatitis 
and abnormal liver function have also been reported.
Urea and electrolytes, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, calcium, mag-
nesium, albumin, plasma osmolarity and arterial blood gases should be 
measured in all patients with suspected methanol or ethylene glycol tox-
icity. The osmolar and anion gaps should be calculated (see Box 10.5). 
Initially, poisoning is associated with an increased osmolar gap, but as 
toxic metabolites are produced an increased anion gap develops associ-
ated with metabolic acidosis. The diagnosis can be conrmed by meas-
urement of ethylene glycol or methanol concentrations, but assays are 
not widely available.
An antidote, ideally fomepizole or otherwise ethanol, should be admin-
istered to all patients with suspected signicant exposure while awaiting 
the results of laboratory investigations. These block alcohol dehydroge-
nase and delay the formation of toxic metabolites until the parent drug 
is eliminated in the urine or by dialysis. The antidote should be contin-
ued until ethylene glycol or methanol concentrations are undetectable. 
Metabolic acidosis should be corrected with sodium bicarbonate (e.g. 
250 mL of 1.26% solution, repeated as necessary). Convulsions should 
be treated with an intravenous benzodiazepine. In ethylene glycol poi-
soning, hypocalcaemia should be corrected only if there are severe ECG 
features or if seizures occur, as this may increase calcium oxalate crystal 
formation. In methanol poisoning, folinic acid should be administered to 
enhance the metabolism of the toxic metabolite, formic acid.
Haemodialysis or haemodialtration should be used in severe poison-
ing, especially if renal failure is present or there is visual loss in the context 
of methanol poisoning. It should be continued until acute toxic features 
are no longer present and ethylene glycol/methanol concentrations are 
undetectable.
Corrosive substances
Products containing acids (e.g. hydrochloric or sulphuric acid) or alkalis 
(e.g. sodium hydroxide, calcium carbonate) may be ingested accidentally 
or intentionally, causing gastrointestinal pain, ulceration and necrosis, 
with risk of perforation. Severity depends on the volume and pH of the 
substance ingested.
External decontamination (p. 221), if needed, should be performed 
after initial resuscitation. Gastric lavage should not be attempted and 
neutralising chemicals should not be administered after large ingestions 
because of the risk of tissue damage from heat release. Cardiorespiratory 
monitoring is necessary and full blood count, renal function, coagula-
tion and acid–base status should be assessed. An erect chest X-ray 
should be performed if perforation is suspected and may show features 
of mediastinitis or gas under the diaphragm. Strong analgesics should 
be administered for pain.
Severe abdominal or chest pain, abdominal distension, shock or aci-
dosis may indicate perforation and should prompt an urgent CT scan of 
chest and abdomen and surgical review. In the absence of perforation, 
drooling, dysphagia, stridor or oropharyngeal burns suggest possible 
severe oesophageal damage and early endoscopy by an experienced 
operator should be considered. Delayed endoscopy (e.g. after several 
days) may carry a higher risk of perforation.
Aluminium and zinc phosphide
These rodenticides and fumigants are a common means of self-poison-
ing in northern India. The mortality rate for aluminium phosphide inges-
tion has been estimated at 60%; zinc phosphide ingestion appears less 
toxic (mortality about 2%). When ingested, both compounds react with 
gastric acid to form phosphine, a potent pulmonary and gastrointestinal 
toxicant. Clinical features include severe gastrointestinal disturbances, 
chest tightness, cough and breathlessness progressing to ARDS and 
respiratory failure, tremor, paraesthesiae, convulsions, coma, tachy-
cardia, metabolic acidosis, electrolyte disturbances, hypoglycaemia, 
myocarditis, liver and renal failure, and leucopenia. Ingestion of a few 
tablets can be fatal.
Treatment is supportive and directed at correcting electrolyte abnor-
malities and treating complications; there is no specic antidote. Early 
gastric lavage is sometimes used, often with vegetable oil to reduce the 
release of toxic phosphine, but the benet is uncertain.
Ethanol or
fomepizole
Inhibits
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
Ethylene
glycol
Glycoaldehyde
Glycolic acid
Formaldehyde
Formic acid
TOXIC METABOLITES
Glyoxylic acid
Oxalic acid
Methanol
Fig. 10.6 Metabolism of methanol and ethylene glycol.

[[p269]]
Chemicals and pesticides    235
10
Copper sulphate
This is used as a fungicide. If ingested, clinical features of toxicity include 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, discoloured (blue/green) 
secretions, corrosive effects on the gastrointestinal tract, renal or liver 
failure, methaemoglobinaemia, haemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, convulsions 
and coma. Treatment is as for other corrosive substances (see above) 
and should address complications, including use of methylthioninium 
chloride for methaemoglobinaemia (see Fig. 10.1). Chelation therapy is 
unlikely to be benecial after acute exposure.
10.15  Clinical features and specic management of chemicals less commonly involved in poisoning
Substance
Clinical features
Management
Lead
Abdominal pain
Microcytic anaemia with basophilic stippling
Headache and encephalopathy
Motor neuropathy
Nephrotoxicity
Hypertension
Hypocalcaemia
Prevention of further exposure
Measurement of blood lead concentration, full blood 
count and blood lm, urea and electrolytes, liver function 
tests and calcium
Abdominal X-ray in children to detect pica
Bone X-ray for ‘lead lines’
Chelation therapy with DMSA or sodium calcium edetate
e.g. chronic occupational exposure, 
leaded paint, water contaminated by lead 
pipes, use of kohl cosmetics
Barium salts
GI upset, haematemesis, hypersalivation, perioral 
paraesthesia,
Cyanosis, bradycardia, chest pain, breathlessness.
Profound hypokalaemia
Abdominal X-ray to conrm ingestion of radio-opaque 
material.
Aggressive correction of hypokalaemia
Haemodialysis in severe cases (removes barium and may 
correct hypokalaemia)
Strychnine
Rapid onset of gastrointestinal symptoms
Agitation, sweating, tachycardia, chest pain,
Muscular stiffness and twitching, convulsions and 
respiratory arrest.
Supportive care including treatment of agitation and 
convulsions
Thallium
Gastrointestinal disturbances including bleeding
Subsequently pancreatitis, parotid swelling, confusion, 
peripheral neuropathy, alopecia, renal, liver, cardiac or 
bone marrow failure
Coma and death developing over 7–21 days.
Oral Prussian blue or repeated doses of activated 
charcoal (adsorb thallium in the gut). Supportive 
care including treatment of convulsions and cardiac 
complications
Petroleum distillates
Vomiting
Aspiration pneumonitis
Gastric lavage contraindicated
Activated charcoal ineffective
Oxygen and nebulised bronchodilators
Chest X-ray to assess pulmonary effects
e.g. white spirit, kerosene
Organochlorines
Nausea, vomiting
Agitation
Fasciculation
Paraesthesiae (face, extremities)
Convulsions
Coma
Respiratory depression
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hyperthermia
Rhabdomyolysis
Pulmonary oedema
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Activated charcoal (with nasogastric aspiration for liquid 
preparations) within 1 hr of ingestion
Cardiac monitoring
e.g. DDT, lindane, dieldrin, endosulfan
Pyrethroid insecticides
Skin contact: dermatitis, skin paraesthesiae. Systemic 
features may occur after substantial exposure
Eye contact: lacrimation, photophobia and oedema of the 
eyelids
Inhalation: dyspnoea, nausea, headaches
Ingestion: epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, 
hypersalivation, headache, coma, convulsions, pulmonary 
oedema
Symptomatic and supportive care
Washing contaminated skin makes irritation worse
Hyoscine (20 mg subcutaneously every 4 hrs) may be 
useful for severe hypersalivation
e.g. cypermethrin, permethrin, 
imiprothrin
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Abnormal bleeding (prolonged)
Monitor INR/prothrombin time
Vitamin K1 by slow IV injection if there is coagulopathy
Fresh frozen plasma or specic clotting factors for 
bleeding
e.g. brodifacoum, bromadialone and 
warfarin
(DMSA = dimercaptosuccinic acid; INR = International Normalised Ratio; IV = intravenous)
Chemicals less commonly taken in poisoning
An overview of the clinical features and management for chemicals less 
commonly involved in poisoning is provided in Box 10.15.
Chemical warfare agents
Some toxins have been developed for use as chemical warfare agents. 
These are summarised in Box 10.16.

[[p270]]
236    POISONING
10.16  Chemical warfare agents
Examples
Clinical effects
Antidotes*
Nerve agents
Tabun
Sarin
Soman
VX
Novichok agents
Eyes: miosis (sometimes 
painful)
GI tract: diarrhoea, vomiting, 
salivation
Respiratory: 
bronchoconstriction, 
respiratory paralysis/failure
Neurological: fasciculations, 
tremor, ataxia, convulsions, 
accid muscular paralysis
See also p. 232 and Box 10.13
Atropine
Oximes (e.g. 
pralidoxime, 
obidoxime)
(see Fig. 10.5)
Blistering agents
Nitrogen/sulphur
Mustard
Lewisite
Eyes: watering, 
blepharospasm, corneal 
ulceration
Skin: erythema, blistering
Respiratory: cough, 
hoarseness, dyspnoea, 
pneumonitis
None
Choking agents
Chlorine
Phosgene
Eyes: watering, 
blepharospasm, corneal 
ulceration
Respiratory: cough, 
hoarseness, dyspnoea, 
pneumonitis
None
Blood agents
Cyanide
Cardiovascular: dizziness, 
shock
Respiratory: dyspnoea, 
cyanosis
CNS: anxiety, headache, 
delirium, convulsions, coma, 
xed dilated pupils
Other: vomiting, lactic acidosis
Dicobalt edetate 
Hydroxocobalamin
Sodium nitrite
Sodium thiosulphate
*Appropriate resuscitation, decontamination and supportive care are essential after exposure 
to all chemical warfare agents. Use appropriate personal protective equipment.
10.17  Clinical features of chronic arsenic poisoning
Gastrointestinal tract
 Anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, diarrhoea, increased salivation, metallic taste
Neurological
 Peripheral neuropathy (sensory and motor) with muscle wasting and 
fasciculation, ataxia
Skin
 Hyperpigmentation, palmar and plantar keratosis, alopecia, multiple 
epitheliomas, Mee’s lines (transverse white lines on ngernails)
Eyes
 Conjunctivitis, corneal necrosis and ulceration
Bone marrow
 Aplastic anaemia
Other
 Low-grade fever, vasospasm and gangrene, jaundice, hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly
Increased risk of malignancy
 Lung, liver, bladder, kidney, larynx and lymphoid system
Environmental poisoning
Arsenism
Chronic arsenic exposure from drinking water has been reported in many 
countries, especially India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Thailand, Taiwan, China, 
Mexico and South America, where a large proportion of the drinking 
water (ground water) has a high arsenic content, placing large popu-
lations at risk. The World Health Organization (WHO) guideline value for 
arsenic content in tube well water is 10 µg/L.
Health effects associated with chronic exposure to arsenic in drinking 
water are shown in Box 10.17. In exposed individuals, high concentra-
tions of arsenic are present in bone, hair and nails. Specic treatments 
are of no benet in chronic arsenic toxicity and recovery from the periph-
eral neuropathy may never be complete, so the emphasis should be on 
prevention.
Fluorosis
Fluoride poisoning can result from exposure to excessive quantities of 
uoride (>10 ppm) in drinking water, industrial exposure to uoride dust 
or consumption of brick teas. Clinical features include yellow staining 
and pitting of permanent teeth, osteosclerosis, soft tissue calcication, 
deformities (e.g. kyphosis) and joint ankylosis. Changes in the bones of 
the thoracic cage may lead to rigidity that causes dyspnoea on exertion. 
Very high doses of uoride may cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomit-
ing, seizures and muscle spasm. In calcium-decient children, the toxic 
effects of uoride manifest even at marginally high exposures to uoride.
In endemic areas, such as Jordan, Turkey, Chile, India, Bangladesh, 
China and Tibet, uorosis is a major public health problem, especially 
in communities engaged in physically strenuous agricultural or indus-
trial activities. Dental uorosis is endemic in East Africa and some West 
African countries.
Food-related poisoning
Paralytic shellsh poisoning
Paralytic shellsh poisoning is caused by consumption of bivalve mol-
luscs (e.g. mussels, clams, oysters, cockles and scallops) contami-
nated with saxitoxins, which are concentrated in the shellsh as a result 
of constant ltration of toxic algae during algal blooms (e.g. ‘red tide’). 
Symptoms develop within 10–120 minutes of eating the contaminated 
shellsh and include gastrointestinal disturbances, paraesthesia around 
the mouth or in the extremities, ataxia, mental state changes and dys-
phagia. In severe cases, paralysis and respiratory failure can develop. 
There is no specic antidote and treatment is supportive. Most cases 
resolve over a few days.
Ciguatera poisoning
Ciguatera toxin and related toxins are produced by dinoagellate plank-
ton that adhere to algae and seaweed. These accumulate in the tropical 
herbivorous sh that feed on these and in their larger predators (e.g. 
snapper, barracuda), especially in the Pacic and Caribbean. Human 
exposure occurs through eating contaminated sh, even if well cooked. 
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal pain develop within a few 
hours, followed by paraesthesia, ataxia, blurred vision, ataxia and tremor. 
Convulsions and coma can occur, although death is uncommon. Fatigue 
and peripheral neuropathy can be long-term effects. There is no specic 
treatment. In the South Pacic and Caribbean, there are approximately 
50 000 cases per year, with a case fatality of 0.1%.

[[p271]]
10
Further information    237
Scombrotoxic sh poisoning
Under poor storage conditions, histidine in scombroid sh (e.g. tuna, 
mackerel, bonito, skipjack and the dark meat of canned sardines) may 
be converted by bacteria to histamine and other chemicals. Within min-
utes of consumption, ushing, burning, sweating, urticaria, pruritus, 
headache, colic, nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, bronchospasm and 
hypotension may occur. Management is with nebulised salbutamol, intra-
venous antihistamines and, occasionally, intravenous uid replacement.
Tetrodotoxin poisoning
The highly toxic tetrodotoxin is found in the skin and viscera of Puffer 
sh. Tetrodotoxin blocks voltage-gated sodium channels, inhibiting 
action potential generation and propagation. Clinical features include 
paraesthesiae, salivation, gastrointestinal disturbances, sweating, head-
ache, tachycardia, hypokalaemia, twitching or tremor, vertigo, dysphonia 
and dysphagia. In severe cases ataxia, paralysis and xed dilated pupils 
occur, mimicking brain death. Without appropriate ventilator support, 
respiratory paralysis can be fatal. Otherwise there is no specic treatment 
and management is supportive.
Plant poisoning
A substantial number of plants and fungi are potentially toxic if con-
sumed, with patterns of poisoning depending on their geographical dis-
tribution. Some toxic examples and the clinical features of toxicity are 
shown in Box 10.18
10.18  Some poisonous plants and fungi, with their clinical effects
Species (common name)
Toxins
Important features of toxicity
Plants
Abrus precatorius (jequirity bean)
Ricinus communis (castor oil plant)
Abrin
Ricin
Gastrointestinal effects, drowsiness, delirium, convulsions, multi-organ 
failure
Aconitum napellus (aconite, wolf’s bane, monkshood)
Aconitum ferox (Indian aconite, bikh)
Aconite
Gastrointestinal effects, paraesthesiae, convulsions, ventricular tachycardia
Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade)
Datura stramonium (Jimson weed, thorn apple)
Brugmansia spp. (angel’s trumpet)
Atropine, 
scopolamine, 
hyocyamine
Anticholinergic toxidrome (see Box 10.10)
Colchicum autumnale (autumn crocus)
Colchicine
Gastrointestinal effects, hypotension, cardiogenic shock
Conium maculatum (hemlock)
Toxic nicotinic 
alkaloids
Hypersalivation, gastrointestinal effects, followed by muscular paralysis
Digitalis purpurea (foxglove)
Nerium oleander (pink oleander)
Thevetia peruviana (yellow oleander)
Cardiac glycosides
Nausea, vomiting, bradycardia and heart block, supraventricular and 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias, visual disturbances, confusion (p. 224)
Laburnum anagyroides (laburnum)
Cytosine
Gastrointestinal effects; convulsions in severe cases
Taxus baccata (yew)
Taxane alkaloids
Hypotension, bradycardia, respiratory depression, convulsions, coma, 
arrhythmias
Fungi
Amanita phalloides (death cap mushroom)
Amatoxins
Gastrointestinal effects, progressing to liver failure
Cortinarius spp.
Orellanine
Gastrointestinal effects, fever, progressing to renal failure
Psilocybe semilanceata (‘magic mushrooms’)
Psilocybin, psilocin
Hallucinations
Further information
Books and journal articles
Bateman DN, Jefferson R, Thomas SHL, eds. Oxford desk reference: toxicology. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2014.
Benson BE, Hoppu K, Troutman WG, etal. Position paper update: gastric lavage 
for gastrointestinal decontamination. Clin Toxicol 2013;51:140–146.
Gosselin S, Hoegberg LCG, Hoffman RS, etal. Evidence-based 
recommendations on the use of intravenous lipid emulsion therapy in 
poisoning. Clin Toxicol 2016;54(10):899–923.
Thanacoody R. Position paper update: Whole bowel irrigation for gastrointestinal 
decontamination of overdose patients. Clin Toxicol 2015;53:5–12.
Thompson JP, Watson ID, Thanacoody HK, etal. Guidelines for laboratory 
analyses for poisoned patients in the United Kingdom. Ann Clin Biochem 
2014;51:312–325.
Websites
toxbase.org Toxbase, the clinical toxicology database of the UK National 
Poisons Information Service. Free for UK health professionals but registration 
is required. Access for overseas users by special arrangement. Low-cost 
smartphone app available.
wikitox.org/doku.php?id=wikitox:wikitox_home WikiTox, an open access 
curriculum project to improve the treatment of people who are poisoned.
apps.who.int/poisoncentres World directory of poisons centres, as of 28 February 
2019 (interactive map).

[[p272]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p273]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 10.1.  Multiple doses of activated charcoal are useful in the treatment of 
patients with poisoning involving which one of the following:
A. Ferrous sulphate
B. Yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana)
C. Pesticides
D. Lithium carbonate
E. Dapsone
Answer: E.
Ferrous sulphate and lithium are not adsorbed by activated charcoal. 
A clinical trial of multiple-dose activated charcoal for patients with yellow 
oleander or pesticide poisoning showed no benet. The clearance of dap-
sone is enhanced by multiple-dose activated charcoal. This is also true for 
carbamazepine, phenobarbital, quinine and theophylline (Box 10.7).
 10.2.  A 2-year-old child is assessed because the parents are 
concerned he has swallowed some aspirin tablets. Which one of 
the following clinical features is NOT consistent with a diagnosis 
of salicylate poisoning in a child?
A. Respiratory alkalosis
B. Metabolic alkalosis
C. Hypoprothrombinaemia
D. Hypothermia
E. Hypotension
Answer: D.
Respiratory alkalosis is a common feature of salicylate poisoning, espe-
cially in children. Metabolic acidosis can also occur and is associated with 
a worse prognosis. Hypoprothrombinaemia is typical of salicylate poison-
ing. Shock, including hypotension, and hyperpyrexia may also be seen in 
severe poisoning. Hypothermia is not a feature of salicylate toxicity.
 10.3.  An adult male is found unconscious after a suspected drug 
overdose. ECG ndings are as follows: heart rate 78/min, PR 
interval 162 ms, QRS interval 162 ms and QT interval 363 ms. 
The corrected QT interval (QTc, using Bazett’s formula) is 414 ms. 
Which ONE of the following statements is correct?
A. Severe cardiac potassium channel blockade is present
B. Conduction velocity is increased in the bundles of His
C. First-degree heart block is present
D. Overdose with ecainide could account for the ECG ndings
E. Magnesium sulphate should be administered urgently
Answer: D.
The only abnormality identied is prolongation of the QRS interval, 
which is a feature caused by severe sodium channel blockade. This 
results in delayed phase 0 depolarisation and reduced conduction veloc-
ity in the bundles of His and in ventricular myocytes. Drugs that cause 
sodium channel blockade in overdose include class 1a (e.g. quinidine) 
and 1c (e.g. ecainide) anti-dysrhythmic drugs, tricyclic antidepres-
sants, some β-blockers (e.g. propranolol), cocaine and diphenhydramine 
(Box10.8). Cardiac sodium channel blockade is associated with an 
increased risk of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular 
brillation. Treatment is with intravenous sodium bicarbonate. Potassium 
blockade is indicated by QTc prolongation and may culminate in tor-
sades de pointes ventricular tachycardia, which is treated with magne-
sium sulphate; in this case, however, the QTc interval is normal, as is the 
PR interval, so rst-degree heart block is also not present.
 10.4.  A homeless man aged 23 is found unconscious in the street after 
smoking an unidentied illicit drug. No further history is available. 
On examination his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is 9, pupils are 
mid-sized and equal, heart rate is 110/min, blood pressure is 
116/84 mmHg, and temperature is 36.8°C. Arterial blood gases 
show a mild respiratory acidosis. General physical examination 
is otherwise normal. No needle marks are found. Which of the 
following is the most likely substance causing this presentation?
A. Heroin
B. AMB-FUBINACA
C. Alprazolam
D. Ecstasy
E. Gamma hydroxybutyrate
Answer: B.
Ecstasy does not cause a reduction in level of consciousness, but 
this can be caused by any of the other four drugs listed. Alprazolam (a 
benzodiazepine) and gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB) could both cause 
this clinical presentation but are not used by smoking. Heroin can be 
smoked (‘chasing the dragon’) but would usually cause small pupils. 
AMB-FUBINACA is a synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. These 
compounds, commonly referred to as ‘spice’, are usually smoked; they 
can cause reduced level of consciousness and respiratory acidosis, with-
out pupillary changes.
 10.5.  Which of the following antidotes does NOT act by binding to the 
toxin it is used to treat?
A. Fomepizole
B. Digoxin-specic antibody fragments
C. Idarucizumab
D. Hydroxocobalamin
E. Desferrioxamine
Answer: A.
Fomepizole is an alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor. It prevents the 
metabolism of ethylene glycol and methanol to the toxic metabolites 
responsible for the clinical features of poisoning. Digoxin-specic anti-
body fragments bind to digoxin (and other cardiac glycosides) and idaru-
cizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to dabigatran etexilate. 
Hydroxocobalamin complexes with cyanide to form cyanocobalamin and 
desferrioxamine complexes with iron to form ferrioxamine. In all four of 
these examples, drug bound to the antidote no longer causes toxicity.

[[p274]]
Envenomation
11
J White
Comprehensive evaluation of the envenomed patient 240
Geographical distribution of venomous snakes 241
Bedside tests in the envenomed patient 241
Overview of envenomation 242
Venom 242
Venomous animals 242
Clinical effects 243
General approach to the envenomed patient 243
First aid 243
Assessment and management in hospital 246
Treatment 247
Follow-up 248
Prevention 248
Envenomation by specic animals 248
Venomous snakes 248
Scorpions 249
Spiders 249
Paralysis ticks 249
Venomous insects 249
Marine venomous and poisonous animals 250

[[p275]]
240    ENVENOMATION
Comprehensive evaluation of the envenomed patient
Cranial nerves
Drooling
Dysarthria
Dysphagia
Upper airway compromise
Mouth, gums
Evidence of bleeding
Increased salivation
Drooling
Chest
Pulmonary oedema
Diminished respiration
Bite/sting site
Pain
Swelling
Bruising
Discoloration
Necrosis
Skin
In addition to (6):
Piloerection
Erythema
Blistering
Infection
Level of consciousness
Confusion
Agitation
Seizures
Eyes
Miosis or mydriasis
Increased lacrimation
Corneal injury (venom spit injury)
Airway, breathing, circulation
Blood pressure
Pulse
Respiration rate
Oxygen saturation
Dysrhythmias
Bilateral mild ptosis
Ptosis and lateral
ophthalmoplegia
Fixed dilated pupils
Chemosis – can indicate
capillary leak syndrome
Local increased sweating
12
10
11
9
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
Local bleeding, blistering
Local bleeding
6
1
12
Muscles
Weakness
Tenderness
Pain
8
Lymph nodes
Tender or enlarged nodes
draining bite/sting area
9
Abdomen
Intra-abdominal, retroperitoneal
or renal pathology
10
11
Reflexes
Decreased or absent reflexes
7
Copyright © Julian White.

[[p276]]
11
Bedside tests in the envenomed patient    241
South American
rattlesnake
Crotalus durissus
Indian krait
Bungarus caeruleus
European adder
Vipera aspis
Green pit viper
Tr
Russell’s viper
Daboia russelii
Black-necked
spitting cobra
Naja nigricollis
Monacled cobra
Naja kaouthia
Common Indian cobra
Naja naja
Puff adder
Bitis arietans
Saw-scaled viper
Echis carinatus
The geographical location of a snakebite determines the likely animal(s) involved and the nature and risks of the envenomation. Copyright © 
Julian White
Geographical distribution of venomous snakes
Bedside tests in the envenomed patient
  1 Obtain a clean glass container
     (test tube or bottle) that is
     either new, or has only been
     washed with water (not
     detergent/soap)
  2 Place 2–3 mL venous blood
     in the glass container
  3 Allow to stand undisturbed
     for 20 mins
  4 Gently invert/tip the glass
     container checking for
     presence of a blood clot
4a Clot present = negative test
     (no coagulopathy present)
4b Clot absent = positive test
     (coagulopathy present)
1
3
4a
4b
2
Twenty-minute whole-blood clotting test (20WBCT). The presence of coagulopathy is a 
key indicator of major envenoming for some species. While full laboratory coagulation 
studies may be the ideal, the 20WBCT has emerged as a simple standardised bedside 
test of coagulopathy, applicable even in areas with limited health facilities. 
Copyright © Julian White
Examination of urine. Haematuria may indicate 
a coagulopathy. Dark urine is suggestive of 
myoglobinuria, which is a sign of extensive 
rhabdomyolysis. Copyright © Julian White.

[[p277]]
242    ENVENOMATION
11.1  Key venom effects*
Venom component
Clinical effects
Type of venomous animal
Neurotoxin
Paralytic
Flaccid paralysis (may develop in a descending pattern, 
commencing rst in cranial nerves, or in an ascending
pattern, with early ataxia)
Some snakes (descending)
Paralysis ticks (ascending)
Cone snails (descending)
Blue-ringed octopus (descending)
Excitatory
Neuroexcitation: autonomic storm, cardiotoxicity, 
pulmonary oedema
Some scorpions, spiders, jellysh (irukandji)
Myotoxins
Systemic or local myolysis
Some snakes
Cardiotoxins
Direct or indirect cardiotoxicity; cardiac collapse, shock
Some snakes, scorpions, spiders and jellysh (box jellysh)
Haemostasis system toxins
Variation from rapid coagulopathy and bleeding to 
thrombosis, deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary 
emboli
Many snakes and a few scorpions (Hemiscorpius)
Brazilian caterpillars (Lonomia)
Haemorrhagic toxins
Local vessel damage, uid extravasation, blistering, 
ecchymosis, shock
Mainly some snakes
Nephrotoxins (direct or indirect)
Renal damage
Some snakes, massed bee and wasp stings
Necrotoxins
Local tissue injury/necrosis, shock
Some snakes, a few scorpions (Hemiscorpius), spiders 
(recluse spiders), jellysh and stingrays
Allergic toxins
Induction of acute allergic response (direct and indirect)
Almost all venoms but particularly those of social insects  
(i.e. bees, wasps, ants)
*All venom components have lethal potential.
Copyright © Julian White
11.2  Venomous animals and human envenoming
Phyla
Principal 
venomous 
animal groups
Estimated 
number of 
human cases/
year
Estimated 
number of 
human deaths/
year
Chordata
Snakes
> 2.5 million
> 100 000
Spiny sh
? > 100 000
Close to zero
Stingrays
? > 100 000
? < 10
Arthropoda
Scorpions
> 1 million
? < 5000
Spiders
? > 100 000
? < 100
Paralysis ticks
? > 1000
? < 10
Insects
? > 1 million
? > 1000*
Mollusca
Cone snails
? < 1000
? < 10
Blue-ringed 
octopus
? < 100
? < 10
Coelenterata
Jellysh
? > 1 million
? < 10
*Social insect stings cause death by anaphylaxis rather than primary venom toxicity, except for 
massive multiple sting attacks.
Copyright © Julian White
Overview of envenomation
Envenomation occurs when a venomous animal injects sufcient venom 
by a bite or a sting into a prey item or perceived predator to cause del-
eterious local and/or systemic effects. This is dened as a venom-in-
duced disease (VID). Venomous animals generally use their venom to 
acquire and, in some cases, pre-digest prey, with defensive use a sec-
ondary function for many species. Where defensive use of venom is an 
important evolutionary driver, immediate and severe local pain is a com-
mon feature, though the toxin mechanisms causing pain are diverse. 
Accidental encounters between venomous animals and humans are 
frequent, particularly in the rural tropics, where millions of cases of ven-
omous bites and stings occur annually. Globally, an increasing number 
of exotic venomous animals are kept privately, so cases of envenoming 
may present to hospitals where doctors have insufcient knowledge to 
manage potentially complex presentations. Doctors everywhere should 
thus be aware of the basic principles of management of envenomation 
and how to seek expert support. It is important for doctors to know what 
types of venomous animal are likely to occur in their geographical area 
(hospital hinterland; see p. 241) and the types of envenoming they may 
cause.
Venom
Venom is a complex mixture of diverse components, often with several 
separate toxins that can cause adverse effects in humans, with each 
potentially capable of multiple effects (Box 11.1). Venom is produced 
at considerable metabolic cost, so is used sparingly; only some bites/
stings by venomous animals result in signicant envenoming, the remain-
der are ‘dry bites’. The concept of dry bites is important in understanding 
approaches to rst aid and medical management.
Venomous animals
There are many animal groups that contain venomous species (Box 11.2). 
The epidemiological estimates of envenomation episodes reect 
the importance of snakes and scorpions as causes of severe or 
lethal envenomation, but also the fragmentary nature of the data. For 
 snakebites, recent studies have proposed widely varying estimates, 
but even the higher estimates may be too low. In India, studies indicate 
there are at least 45 000 snakebite-related deaths annually, far above 
both government gures and previous estimates. In many areas of the 
rural tropics, health resources are limited and few envenoming cases 
are either seen or recorded within the ofcial hospital system, compared 
to the actual community burden of disease. While fatal cases may gain 
most attention, long-term disability from envenomation affects signif-
icantly more people and has a major social and economic cost. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) has recently recognised snakebite as 
a ‘Neglected Tropical Disease’ and this may improve access to funding. 

[[p278]]
General approach to the envenomed patient    243
11
11.3  Local and systemic effects of envenomation
Local effects
 Pain
 Sweating
 Erythema
 Major direct tissue trauma  
(e.g. stingray injuries)
 Blistering
 Necrosis
 Swelling
 Bleeding and bruising
Non-specic systemic effects
 Headache
 Nausea
 Vomiting and diarrhoea
 Abdominal pain
 Tachycardia or bradycardia
 Hypertension or hypotension
 Pulmonary oedema
 Dizziness
 Collapse
 Convulsions
 Shock
 Cardiac arrest
Specic systemic effects
 Neurotoxic accid paralysis (descending or ascending)
 Excitatory neurotoxicity (catecholamine storm-like and similar)
 Rhabdomyolysis (systemic or local)
 Coagulopathy (procoagulants, anticoagulants, brinolytics and platelet-active 
toxins)
 Cardiotoxicity (decreased/abnormal cardiac function or arrhythmia or arrest)
 Acute kidney injury (polyuria or oliguria or anuria or isolated elevated  
creatinine/urea)
Copyright © Julian White.
Snakebite occurs frequently in low resource areas of the rural tropics 
and so is an important poverty trap; it is also a predominantly occupa-
tional disease, with farmers and other agricultural workers at particularly 
high risk. Although snakebite is undoubtedly the most impactful form of 
envenoming globally, there are some areas where scorpion stings have a 
higher impact on health systems than snakebite.
Stings by social insects such as bees and wasps may also cause lethal 
anaphylaxis and mass stings may cause severe, even lethal, envenom-
ation. Other venomous animals may commonly envenom humans, but 
cause mostly non-lethal effects. A few animals only rarely envenom 
humans, but have a high potential for severe or lethal envenoming. These 
include box jellysh, cone snails, blue-ringed octopus, paralysis ticks and 
Australian funnel web spiders. Within any given group, particularly snakes, 
there may be a wide range of clinical presentations. Some are described 
here, but for a more detailed discussion of the types of venomous animal, 
their venoms and their effects on humans, see toxinology.com.
Clinical effects
With the exception of dry bites, where no signicant toxin effects occur, 
venomous bites/stings can result in three broad classes of effect.
Local effects
These vary from trivial to severe (Box 11.3). There may be minimal or no 
local effects with some snakebites (not even pain), yet lethal systemic 
envenoming may still be present (e.g. kraits in Asia). For other species, 
local effects predominate over systemic, and for some, (e.g. certain 
snakes) both are important (p. 240). Some species commonly cause 
local necrosis, notably some snakes, brown recluse spiders, an Iranian 
scorpion (Hemiscorpius lepturus) and some stingrays. Globally, amputa-
tions secondary to snakebite are an important cause of long-term mor-
bidity and social disadvantage.
General systemic effects
By denition, these are non-specic (see Box 11.3). Shock is an impor-
tant complication of major local envenoming by some snake species and 
if inadequately treated can prove lethal, especially in children.
Specic systemic effects
These are important in both diagnosis and treatment.
 Neurotoxic accid paralysis can develop very rapidly, progressing 
from mild weakness to full respiratory paralysis in less than 30 min-
utes (blue-ringed octopus bite, cone snail sting), or may develop far 
more slowly, over hours (e.g. kraits, some cobras) to days (paralysis 
tick). For neurotoxic snakes, the cranial nerves are usually involved 
rst, with bilateral ptosis a common initial sign, often progressing 
to partial and later complete ophthalmoplegia, xed dilated pupils, 
drooling and loss of upper airway protection (p. 240). From this, 
paralysis may extend to the limbs, with weakness and loss of deep 
tendon reexes, the neck (‘broken neck’ sign), then nally respiratory 
paralysis affecting the diaphragm.
 Excitatory neurotoxins cause an ‘autonomic storm’, often with pro-
fuse sweating (p. 240), variable cardiac effects and cardiac failure, 
sometimes with pulmonary oedema (notably, Australian funnel web 
spider bite, some scorpions such as Indian red scorpion). This type 
of envenomation can be rapidly fatal (many scorpions, funnel web 
spiders), or may cause distressing symptoms with a lesser risk of 
death (widow spiders, banana spiders).
 Myotoxicity can be localised in the bitten limb, or systemic, affecting 
mostly skeletal muscles. It can initially be silent, then present with 
generalised muscle pain, tenderness, myoglobinuria (p. 241) and 
substantial rises in serum creatine kinase (CK). Secondary renal 
failure can precipitate potentially lethal hyperkalaemic cardiotoxicity.
 Cardiotoxicity is often secondary, but symptoms and signs are 
non-specic in most cases. For some scorpions, envenomation can 
cause direct cardiac effects, including decreased cardiac output, 
arrhythmias and pulmonary oedema.
 Haemostasis system toxins cause a variety of effects, depending on 
the type of toxin (Fig. 11.1). Coagulopathy may present as bruising 
and bleeding from the bite site (p. 240), gums and intravenous sites. 
Surgical interventions are high risk in such cases. Other venoms 
cause thrombosis, usually presenting as deep venous thrombo-
sis (DVT), pulmonary embolus or stroke (particularly Caribbean/
Martinique vipers).
 Haemorrhagic toxins (associated with some snakebites) cause vas-
cular damage, especially in the bitten limb, with extravasation of uid 
and sometimes hypotensive shock. They may also cause internal 
bleeding such as retroperitoneal haemorrhage. The role of these 
toxins in causing late-developing capillary leak syndrome (p. 240) is 
uncertain (seen notably with Russell’s viper),
 Renal damage in envenoming is mostly secondary, although some 
species (such as Russell’s vipers) can cause primary renal damage. 
The presentation is similar in both scenarios, with changes in urine 
output (polyuria, oliguria or anuria), proteinuria, or rises in creatinine 
and urea. In cases with intravascular haemolysis, secondary renal 
damage is likely. The clinical effects of specic animals in different 
regions of the world are shown in Boxes 11.4–11.6.
General approach to the envenomed patient
First aid
First aid can be crucial in determining the outcome for envenomed 
patients, yet throughout much of the world inappropriate and dangerous 
rst aid is often administered.
A signicant proportion of venom is transported from the bite/sting 
site via the lymphatic system, particularly for venoms with larger molec-
ular weight toxins, such as many snake venoms. It is recommended 
that for most forms of envenoming, the patient should be kept still, the 
 bitten limb immobilised with a splint and vital systems supported, where 
required. A patent upper airway should be ensured and respiratory 

[[p279]]
244    ENVENOMATION
Haemorrhagic metalloproteinases and disintegrins
Damage blood vessel wall, cause leakage of blood,
degrade platelet plug response
Direct fibrinolytics
Split fibrinogen, often abnormally, resulting in poor clot
formation and a bleeding tendency
Procoagulants
Activate specific coagulation factors to activate clotting
cascade and promote formation of fibrin clots. Can also
activate fibrinolytic system, resulting in defibrination and
reduced ability to form protective clots
Other haemostasis system toxins
Target various parts of haemostasis, either as activators
(e.g. plasminogen activators), or as inhibitors of coagulation
(e.g. serpin inactivators, platelet aggregation inhibitors)
Clotting
factor pathways
Factor II
Factor IIa
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
1
2
3
4
Fig. 11.1 Sites of action of venoms on the haemostasis system. Copyright © Julian White
11.4  Selected important venomous animals in Asia
Scientic name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
South Asia
Bungarus spp. (E)
Kraits
Flaccid paralysis2 3, myolysis4, hyponatraemia5
Indian PV or specic
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis/blistering, shock
Indian PV or specic
Ophiophagus hannah (E)
King cobra
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, shock
Indian PV or specic
Echis spp. (Vv)
Saw-scaled vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, renal failure
Indian PV or specic
Daboia russelii (Vv)
Russell’s viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, myolysis, renal failure, shock, accid 
paralysis2
Indian PV or specic
Hypnale spp. (Vc)
Hump-nosed vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, renal failure
No available AV; Indian PV unlikely to be effective
Trimeresurus6 spp. (Vc)
Green pit vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis, shock
Indian PV unlikely to be effective; consider specic 
AV from Thailand
Hottentotta spp. (Sc)
Indian scorpions
Neuroexcitation, cardiotoxicity
Indian specic AV
Prazosin
East Asia
Bungarus spp. (E)
Kraits
Flaccid paralysis2 3
Specic AV from country
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras (some spitters)
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis/blistering, shock
Specic AV from country
Ophiophagus hannah (E)
King cobra
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, shock
King cobra AV
Calloselasma rhodostoma (Vc)
Malayan pit viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, renal failure, shock
Specic AV from country
Daboia siamensis (Vv)
Russell’s viper
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, renal failure, capillary leak syndrome, 
shock, anterior pituitary haemorrhage and failure
Specic AV from country
Gloydius spp. (Vc)
Mamushis, pit vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, shock, renal failure, accid paralysis2
Specic AV from country
Trimeresurus6 spp. (Vc)
Green pit vipers, habus
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/
blistering, shock
Specic AV from country
Hydrophis schistosus + other 
species
Sea snakes (all species 
globally)
Flaccid paralysis and/or myolysis
Seqirus sea snake AV
1Family names: C = ‘Colubridae’ (mostly ‘non-venomous’; family subject to major taxonomic revisions); E = Elapidae (all venomous); Sc = Scorpionoidea; Vc = Viperidae Crotalinae (New World and  
Asian vipers); Vv = Viperidae viperinae (Old World vipers). 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic. 4Only reported so far for B. candidus, B. niger and B. caeruleus 5Only reported so far for B. multicinctus and B. 
candidus 6Genus is subject to major taxonomic change (split into at least eight genera).
(AV = antivenom; PV = polyvalent)
More information is available from the World Health Organization, Regional Ofce for South-East Asia and from toxinology.com. See ‘Further Information’.
Copyright © Julian White

[[p280]]
General approach to the envenomed patient    245
11
11.5  Selected important venomous animals in the Americas and Australia
Scientic name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
North America
Crotalus spp. (Vc)
Rattlesnakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/blistering 
(accid paralysis2 rare), shock
CroFab (Fab’) AV or Anavip (F(ab’)2 ) AV
Sistrurus spp. (Vc)
Massasaugas
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/blistering, shock
CroFab (Fab’) AV or Anavip (F(ab’)2 ) AV
Agkistrodon spp. (Vc)
Copperheads and moccasins
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/blistering, shock
CroFab (Fab’) AV or Anavip (F(ab’)2 ) AV
Micrurus spp. (E)
Coral snakes
Flaccid paralysis3
Bioclon Coralmyn AV
Latrodectus mactans
Widow spider
Neuroexcitation
MSD Widow spider AV
Centruroides sculpturatus
Arizona bark scorpion
Neuroexcitation
Bioclon Anascorp AV
Central and South America
Crotalus spp. (Vc)
Rattlesnakes
Flaccid paralysis2, myolysis, procoagulant coagulopathy,  
shock, renal failure
Specic AV from country
Bothrops spp. (Vc)
Lancehead vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis/blistering, 
shock, renal failure
Specic AV from country
Bothriechis spp. (Vc)
Eyelash pit vipers
Shock, pain and swelling
Specic AV from country
Lachesis spp. (Vc)
Bushmasters
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, renal failure, local  
necrosis/blistering
Specic AV from country
Micrurus spp. (E)
Coral snakes
Flaccid paralysis2 3, myolysis, renal failure
Specic AV from country
Tityus serrulatus
Brazilian scorpion
Neuroexcitation, shock
Instituto Butantan scorpion AV
Loxosceles spp.
Recluse spiders
Local necrosis
Instituto Butantan spider AV
Phoneutria nigriventer
Banana spider
Neuroexcitation, shock
Instituto Butantan spider AV
Potamotrygon, Dasyatis spp.
Freshwater stingrays
Necrosis of bite area, shock, severe pain and oedema
No available AV; good wound care
Australia
Pseudonaja spp. (E)
Brown snakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, renal failure, accid 
paralysis2 (rare)
Seqirus brown snake AV or PVAV
Notechis spp. (E)
Tiger snakes
Procoagulant coagulopathy, myolysis, accid paralysis2 3, 
renal failure
Seqirus tiger snake AV or PVAV
Oxyuranus spp. (E)
Taipans
Procoagulant coagulopathy, accid paralysis2 3, myolysis, 
renal failure
Seqirus taipan or PVAV
Acanthophis spp. (E)
Death adders
Flaccid paralysis3
Seqirus death adder or PVAV
Pseudechis spp.
Black and mulga snakes
Anticoagulant coagulopathy, myolysis, renal failure
Seqirus black snake AV or PVAV
Hydrophis schistosus + 
other species
Sea snakes (all species 
globally)
Flaccid paralysis and/or myolysis
Seqirus sea snake AV
Atrax, Hadronyche spp.
Funnel web spiders
Neuroexcitation, shock
Seqirus funnel web spider AV
Latrodectus hasseltii
Red back spider
Neuroexcitation, pain and sweating
Seqirus red back spider AV
Chironex eckeri
Box jellysh
Neuroexcitation, cardiotoxicity, local necrosis
Seqirus box jellysh AV
Synanceia spp.
Stonesh
Severe local pain
Seqirus stonesh AV
1For family name, see Box 11.4 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic.
(AV = antivenom; MSD = Merck, Sharpe & Dohme; PV = polyvalent)
Copyright © Julian White
support provided, if required. For some animals, notably snakes in cer-
tain regions, the use of a local pressure pad bandage over the bite site 
(Myanmar) or a pressure immobilisation bandage (Australia, New Guinea) 
is recommended.
Ineffective or dangerous rst aid, such as suction devices, ‘cut and 
suck’, local chemicals, snake stones (stones of some sort placed over 
the snakebite), electric shock devices and tourniquets, should not be 
used. Tourniquets, in particular, have the potential to cause catastrophic 
ischaemic distal limb injuries in snakebite when applied too narrowly or 
too tightly, or left on too long. Caution is required when removing tour-
niquets or other constricting rst aid, as there may be a sudden rush of 
venom into the circulation causing rapid effects and cardiorespiratory 
collapse.
Transporting patients
Where possible, transport should be brought to the patient. It is vital to 
obtain medical assessment and intervention at the earliest opportunity, so 
any delay in transporting the patient to a medical facility should be avoided. 
Severely envenomed patients may develop life-threatening problems dur-
ing transport, such as shock or respiratory failure, so ideally the transport 
method should allow for management of these problems en route.
In resource-poor environments, simple solutions for rapid transport have 
been successfully employed, such as motorbikes or similar with the patient 
supported between the driver in front and another person behind the 
patient. However, this method cannot cope with a patient developing airway 
compromise or respiratory failure, such as from developing neurotoxicity.

[[p281]]
246    ENVENOMATION
11.6  Selected important venomous animals in Africa and Europe
Scientic name1
Common name
Clinical effects
Antivenom/antidote/treatment
Africa
Naja spp. (E)
Cobras
Non-spitters
Flaccid paralysis3 ± local necrosis/blistering
South African PV or other appropriate African-specic AV
Spitters
Local necrosis/blistering (accid paralysis3 uncommon)
South African PV or other appropriate African-specic AV
Dendroaspis spp. (E)
Mambas
Mamba neurotoxic accid paralysis and muscle 
fasciculation, shock, necrosis (uncommon)
South African PV or other appropriate African-specic AV
Hemachatus 
haemachatus (E)
Rinkhals
Flaccid paralysis3, local necrosis, shock
South African PV
Atheris spp. (Vv)
Bush vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, pain and swelling
No available AV (can try South African AV)
Bitis spp. (Vv)
Puff adders etc.
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, cardiotoxicity, local 
necrosis/blistering
South African PV or other appropriate African-specic AV
Causus spp. (Vv)
Night adders
Pain and swelling
No available AV
Echis spp. (Vv)
Carpet vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock, renal failure, local 
necrosis/blistering
Specic anti-Echis AV for species/geographical region or 
other appropriate African-specic AV
Cerastes spp. (Vv)
Horned desert 
vipers
Procoagulant coagulopathy, local necrosis, shock
Specic or polyspecic AV covering Cerastes from 
country of origin
Dispholidus typus (C)
Boomslang
Procoagulant coagulopathy, shock
Boomslang AV
Androctonus spp.
North African 
scorpions
Neuroexcitation
Specic scorpion AV (Algeria, Tunisia, Sano Pasteur 
Scorpifav)
Leiurus 
quinquestriatus
Yellow scorpion
Neuroexcitation, shock
Specic scorpion AV (Algeria, Tunisia, Sano Pasteur 
Scorpifav)
Europe
Vipera spp. (Vv)
Vipers and 
adders
Shock, local necrosis/blistering, procoagulant 
coagulopathy (accid paralysis2 rare)
ViperaTab AV or Zagreb AV or Sano Pasteur Viperfav AV
1For family name, see Box 11.4 2Pre-synaptic. 3Post-synaptic.
(AV = antivenom; PV = polyvalent)
More information is available from the World Health Organization, Regional Ofce for Africa and from toxinology.com. See ‘Further Information’.
Copyright © Julian White
Assessment and management in hospital
On arrival at a health station or hospital, there are two immediate priorities:
 identifying and treating any life-threatening problems (e.g. circulatory 
shock, respiratory failure; see Ch. 16)
 determining whether envenomation has occurred and if that requires 
urgent treatment.
Assessment and management of life-threatening 
problems
Patients who are seriously envenomed must be identied early so that 
appropriate management is not delayed. Critically ill patients must be 
resuscitated (Ch. 9) and this takes precedence over administration of any 
antivenom. Clinicians should look for signs of:
 shock/hypotension
 airway and/or respiratory compromise (likely to be secondary to 
accid paralysis)
 major bleeding, including internal bleeding (especially intracranial, 
intra- or retro-peritoneal)
 impending limb compromise from inappropriate rst aid (e.g. a 
tourniquet).
In a patient with severe neurotoxic accid paralysis, who is still able to 
maintain sufcient respiratory function for survival, clinical assessment 
may erroneously suggest irretrievable brain injury (xed dilated pupils, 
absent reexes, no withdrawal response to painful stimuli, no movement 
of limbs, xed forward gaze with gross ptosis; p. 240) when, in fact, the 
patient is conscious and terried.
Assessment for evidence of envenoming
As in other areas of medicine, comprehensive assessment of a patient 
bitten/stung by a venomous animal requires a good history, a careful tar-
geted examination and, where appropriate, ‘laboratory’ testing (though 
the latter may just consist of simple bedside tests performed by the doc-
tor; p. 241). Animals that are unlikely to cause serious envenomation in 
humans should be identied so that inappropriate admission and inter-
vention are avoided. Occasionally, patients may be unaware they have 
been bitten/stung and thus provide a misleading history. In regions of the 
world where keeping or handling venomous animals is illegal, patients 
may be reticent in giving a truthful history. Multiple bites or stings are 
more likely to cause major envenoming.
The following key questions should be asked:
 When was the patient exposed to the venomous bite/sting?
  Was the organism causing it seen and what did it look like (size, 
colour)?
 What were the circumstances (on land, in water etc.)?
 Was there more than one bite/sting? (multiple bites/stings are more 
likely to be severe)

[[p282]]
General approach to the envenomed patient    247
11
 What rst aid was used, how quickly was it applied and how long 
has it been in place?
 What symptoms has the patient had (local and systemic)?
 Are there symptoms suggesting systemic envenomation (paralysis, 
rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathy etc.)?
 Is there any signicant past medical history and medication use?
 Is there a past exposure to antivenom/venom and allergies?
If patients state that they have been bitten by a particular species, 
ensure this information is accurate. Private keepers of venomous animals 
may not have accurate knowledge of what they are keeping and misi-
dentication of a snake, scorpion or spider can have dire consequences 
if the wrong antivenom is used.
An outline of some principal ndings on examination of the enven-
omed patient is shown on  page 240. The patient may have a cluster of 
clinical features suggestive of a particular type of envenoming (see Box 
11.1). There are documented envenoming syndromes for some groups 
of snakes that, in some regions, can guide diagnosis and treatment (see 
Box 11.7). Detail of this syndromic approach is available in free WHO 
guides on snakebite in Asia and in Africa.
Even with dangerously venomous animals, some bites/stings will be 
dry bites and will not require antivenom. The time to onset of rst symp-
toms and signs of envenomation is variable, depending on both animal 
and patient factors. It may range from a matter of minutes post-bite/
sting to 24 hours later in some cases. Therefore, if the initial assessment 
is normal, it must be repeated multiple times during the rst 24 hours. 
Some types of envenomation will not cause symptoms or signs at all, 
or may appear very late, long after the optimum time for treatment has 
passed. Evidence of envenomation may become apparent only through 
laboratory testing.
Laboratory investigations
Specic tests for venom are currently commercially available only for 
Australian snakebites, but may be developed for snakebites in other 
regions. They are not available for other types of envenomation, where 
venom concentrations are low. For snakebite, a screen for envenomation 
includes full blood count, coagulation screen, urea and electrolytes, cre-
atinine, CK and electrocardiogram (ECG). Lung function tests, peripheral 
oximetry or arterial blood gases may be indicated in cases with poten-
tial or established respiratory failure. In areas without access to routine 
laboratory tests, the 20-minute whole-blood clotting test (20WBCT) is 
useful  (p. 241).
Treatment
Once a diagnosis of likely envenoming has been made, the next and 
urgent decision is whether to give antivenom. However, antivenom 
may not be the only crucial treatment required. For a snakebite by a 
potentially lethal species such as Russell’s viper, the patient may have 
local effects with oedema, blistering, necrosis and resultant uid shifts 
causing shock, and at the same time have systemic effects such as 
intractable vomiting, coagulopathy, paralysis and secondary renal failure. 
Specic treatment with antivenom will be required to reverse the coag-
ulopathy and may prevent worsening of the paralysis and reduce the 
vomiting, but will not greatly affect the local tissue damage or the renal 
failure or shock. The latter will require intravenous uid therapy, possi-
bly respiratory support, renal dialysis and local wound care, perhaps 
including antibiotics. In Myanmar at least, each hour of delay in giving 
antivenom after Russell’s viper bite markedly increases the likelihood of 
developing renal failure.
Each venomous animal will cause a particular pattern of enven-
omation, requiring a tailored response (envenoming syndrome). 
Listing all of these is beyond the scope of this chapter (see ‘Further 
information’).
11.7  Snakebite envenomation syndromes for 
South-East Asia
Clinical denition/characteristics of syndrome
Likely snakes causing the 
syndrome
Syndrome 1
Local envenoming (swelling etc.) + bleeding, 
clotting disturbances
Viper bite (many possible 
species)
Syndrome 2
Local envenoming (swelling etc.) + bleeding, 
clotting disturbances + shock or AKI
Russell’s viper
2a – ± conjunctival oedema and acute 
pituitary insufciency
2a – Russell’s viper in 
Myanmar and South India
2b – ± bilateral ptosis, external 
ophthalmoplegia, accid paralysis, dark urine 
(myoglobinuria)
2b – Russell’s viper in Sri 
Lanka and South India
Syndrome 3
Local envenoming (swelling etc.) + accid 
paralysis (bilateral ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, etc.)
Cobra or king cobra
Syndrome 4
Minimal or no local envenoming + accid 
paralysis (bilateral ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, etc.)
4a – If bitten on land (patient sleeping on 
ground at night) ± abdominal pain
4a – krait
4b – If bitten in water (sea, some lakes) ± dark 
urine (myoglobinuria)
4b – sea snake
4c – If bitten on land in New Guinea ± 
coagulopathy
4c – Australasian Elapid 
(taipan, small-eyed 
snake, etc.)
Syndrome 5
Variable local effects + accid paralysis + 
dark urine (myoglobinuria) and AKI
5a – If bitten on land (sleeping on ground)
5a – krait
5b – If bitten in water (sea, some lakes) + no 
coagulopathy
5b – sea snake
5c – If bitten on land + coagulopathy/bleeding
5c – Russell’s viper (Sri 
Lanka and South India)
(AKI = acute kidney injury).
After World Health Organization, Regional Ofce for South-East Asia. Guidelines for the 
management of snake-bites, 2nd edn; 2016.
Antivenom
Antivenom, sometimes inappropriately labelled as ‘anti-snake venom’ 
(ASV), is the most important tool in treating envenomation. It is made 
by hyperimmunising an animal, usually horses, to produce antibodies 
against venom. Once rened, these bind to venom toxins and render 
them inactive or allow their rapid clearance. Antivenom is available only 
for certain venomous animals and cannot reverse all types of enven-
omation. With a few exceptions, it should be given intravenously, with 
adrenaline (epinephrine) ready in case of anaphylaxis. It should be used 
only when clearly indicated and indications will vary between venomous 
animals (Box 11.8). It is critical that the correct antivenom is used at the 
appropriate dose. Doses vary widely between antivenoms. In some situ-
ations (such as South Asia), pre-treatment with subcutaneous adrenaline 
may reduce the chance of anaphylaxis to antivenom.
Antivenom can sometimes reverse post-synaptic neurotoxic paralysis 
(α-bungarotoxin-like neurotoxins), but will not usually reverse established 
pre-synaptic paralysis (β-bungarotoxin-like neurotoxins), so should be 
given before major paralysis has occurred (Fig. 11.2). Coagulopathy is 
best reversed by antivenom, but even after all venom is neutralised, there 

[[p283]]
248    ENVENOMATION
spider bites and Mexican, South American and Indian scorpion stings), 
but there is controversy about the effectiveness of antivenom for some 
species (some North African and Middle Eastern scorpions). The role of 
antivenom in limiting local venom effects, including necrosis, is also con-
troversial; it is most likely to be effective when given early.
All patients receiving antivenom are at risk of both early and late 
adverse reactions, including anaphylaxis (early; not always related to 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)) and serum sickness (late).
Non-antivenom treatments
Anticholinesterases are used as an adjunctive treatment for post- 
synaptic paralysis.
Prazosin, an α-adrenoceptor antagonist (α-blocker) has been used 
in the management of hypertension or pulmonary oedema in scorpion 
sting cardiotoxicity, particularly for Indian red scorpion stings, though 
antivenom is now the preferred treatment.
Antibiotics are not routinely required for most bites/stings, though a 
few animals, such as some South American pit vipers and stingrays, reg-
ularly cause signicant wound infection or abscess. Tetanus is a risk in 
some types of bite or sting, such as snakebite, but intramuscular toxoid 
should not be given until any coagulopathy is reversed.
Mechanical ventilation  (p. 207) is vital for established respiratory paral-
ysis that will not reverse with antivenom and may be required for pro-
longed periods (up to several months in some cases).
Fasciotomy as a treatment for potential compartment syndrome or 
severe limb swelling is an overused and often disastrous surgical inter-
vention in snakebite and is associated with poor functional outcomes. It 
should be reserved as a treatment of last resort and used only in cases 
where compartment syndrome is conrmed by intra-compartment pres-
sure measurement and after rst trying limb elevation, antivenom and 
ensuring that any coagulopathy has resolved.
Follow-up
Cases with signicant envenomation and those receiving antivenom 
should be followed up to ensure any complications have resolved and to 
identify any delayed envenoming.
Prevention
Community education promoting prevention should be an important 
part of health delivery, particularly in low resource nations where access 
to health care may be suboptimal. For snakebite, avoiding sleeping on 
the ground, walking barefoot or without illumination at night should be 
emphasised. Use of mosquito netting over raised beds may prevent both 
mosquito-borne diseases and nocturnal snakebite (kraits in Asia). Use 
of boots in paddy elds may reduce the risk of snakebite. Installation of 
glossy tiles around the base of buildings may discourage scorpion entry 
in endemic areas.
Envenomation by specic animals
Venomous snakes
Venomous snakes represent the single most important cause of enven-
omation globally, affecting millions of humans annually and resulting in 
large numbers of deaths and patients left with long-term disability. Of 
the 3000-plus snake species, more than 1000 either are venomous 
or produce oral toxins. The most important venomous snake families 
are the Viperidae (vipers; includes typical vipers (subfamily Viperinae) 
and pit vipers, with heat-sensing pit organs (subfamily Crotalinae)) 
and the Elapidae (cobras, kraits, mambas, coral snakes, sea snakes, 
Australian snakes). However, there are also dangerous species among 
the Atractaspidinae (side-fanged burrowing vipers of Africa and the 
Middle East) and the non-front-fanged colubroids (NFFC snakes; several 
11.8  Indications for antivenom
General indications
 Shock/cardiac collapse
 Respiratory compromise
 Rapidly increasing swelling of the bitten 
limb
 Active bleeding
 Intractable non-specic 
symptoms, including recurrent 
vomiting
Specic indications
 Developing paralytic features (ptosis etc.)
 Developing rhabdomyolysis
 Developing coagulopathy
 Developing renal failure
 Developing neuroexcitatory 
envenoming
Copyright © Julian White.
Motor
neuron
Acetylcholine
Ca2+
Voltage-gated
calcium
channel
Acetylcholine
receptor
Sodium channels
in clefts amplify
potential change
Depolarisation
of muscle
membrane
β-bungarotoxin
class snake
neurotoxins
acetylcholine
packets are
released
following
calcium influx
and cross the
NMJ to
bind to the
ACh receptor
α-bungarotoxin
class snake
neurotoxins
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 11.2 Principal snake venom neurotoxins acting at the neuromuscular 
junction (NMJ). The pre-synaptic neurotoxins (β-bungarotoxin-like) bind to the cell 
membrane of the terminal axon (1), form a synaptosome (2) and enter the cell, where 
they disrupt acetylcholine (ACh) production (3) and damage intracellular structures, 
including ion channels (4). On initial entry, they cause release of excess ACh, 
followed by cessation of all ACh release, causing irreversible paralysis until the cell 
is repaired (days to weeks later). The post-synaptic neurotoxins (α-bungarotoxin-like) 
bind adjacent to the ACh receptor on the external surface of the muscle end plate 
and block ACh binding (5), thereby ceasing neurotransmission. Because this action 
is external to the cell and does not cause cell damage, it is potentially a reversible 
paralysis. Copyright © Julian White.
may be a delay of hours before normal coagulation is restored. More 
antivenom should not be given because coagulopathy has failed to nor-
malise fully in the rst 1–3 hours (except in very particular circumstances). 
Thrombocytopenia may persist for days despite antivenom. The role of 
antivenom in reversing established rhabdomyolysis and renal failure is 
uncertain. Antivenom may help limit local tissue effects or injury in the bit-
ten limb, but this is quite variable and time-dependent. Neuroexcitatory 
envenoming can respond very well to antivenom (Australian funnel web 

[[p284]]
Envenomation by specific animals    249
11
families, including the ‘back-fanged’ boomslang and vine snakes of 
Africa and the keelbacks of Asia).
A selection of important species is included in Boxes 11.4–11.6
Clinical features and management
As with other forms of envenomation, the management of snakebite 
follows the standard assessment guidelines described previously (p. 
240). The nature of the risks posed will depend on the specic snake 
fauna in a given region  (p. 241). For example, in South Asia, the major 
snakebite risks are claimed to come from the ‘big four’: cobras, kraits, 
Russell’s viper and saw-scaled vipers. This list is misleading, though, 
as it omits other important snakes, including the hump-nosed vipers, 
king cobra and green pit vipers, all of which can cause severe or lethal 
envenoming and may not be covered by current Indian antivenoms. 
Even for those snakes recognised as causing envenoming, there may 
be major geographical variation in venom and features of envenom-
ing. For Russell’s viper (Daboia spp.), Sri Lankan specimens can cause 
rhabdomyolysis and accid paralysis, in addition to classic severe 
coagulopathy, haemorrhage, local bite site injury and acute kidney 
injury (AKI). Most Indian populations of the same snake are not associ-
ated with either rhabdomyolysis or paralysis, but in parts of Southern 
India may cause anterior pituitary haemorrhage and/or capillary leak 
syndrome (hypotensive shock plus vascular leakage resulting in pulmo-
nary oedema). Capillary leak syndrome is also encountered with pop-
ulations of Burmese Russell’s viper (Myanmar), where AKI is especially 
common and severe.
Antivenom raised against venom from one population of snakes may 
be poorly effective against bites from snakes from other regions; this is 
particularly true for Russell’s vipers. Similarly, each of the several species 
of saw-scaled vipers (Echis spp.) spread from West Africa across the 
Middle East to South Asia (including Sri Lanka) has specic venoms that 
may not be neutralised by antivenoms raised against other species in 
the genus; Indian antivenoms are ineffective against African species. It 
follows that, in managing snakebite envenomation, it is critically important 
to choose the appropriate antivenom and to understand that this may not 
include every antivenom claimed to cover a given species.
It is unwise to assume that everything is known about envenoming by 
snakes because new clinical information and syndromes are emerging as 
more detailed studies are carried out. For instance, krait bites (Bungarus
spp.), long associated with ‘painless’ bites, later development of devas-
tating accid paralysis and a high mortality rate, are now known to have 
some venom diversity. At least some species can cause rhabdomyolysis 
(black krait, Bangladesh) and/or severe hyponatraemia, and while bites 
may be painless, systemic envenomation can cause severe abdominal 
pain in at least some patients. Among cobra bites, the previous division 
into ‘non-spitting’, neurotoxic species and ‘spitting’, less neurotoxic spe-
cies that cause local necrosis is less clear. Non-spitters are now known 
to spit in parts of their range (e.g. Naja kaouthia in West Bengal) and 
may cause local necrosis in addition to paralysis. Previously clear diag-
nostic indicators for envenomation by particular types of snakes, such 
as Russell’s vipers and saw-scaled vipers causing coagulopathy, have 
also become less sure, as other snakes, such as hump-nosed vipers 
(Hypnale spp.) and green pit vipers (Trimeresurus spp.), found in simi-
lar regions, can also cause marked coagulopathy and yet are often not 
covered by available antivenoms. The ability to cause life-threatening 
coagulopathy, associated with snakes previously considered harmless, 
such as the keelbacks in Asia (Rhabdophis spp.), can further complicate 
the diagnostic and management process, as antivenom against these 
snakes is currently available only in Japan.
Scorpions
Scorpions are second only to snakes in their venomous impact on 
humankind. Most medically important scorpions are in the family 
Buthidae and have complex neuroexcitatory venoms with highly specic 
ion-channel toxins. Classically, stings by these scorpions (some key gen-
era listed in Boxes 11.4–11.6) cause moderate to severe local pain and 
rapid-onset systemic envenoming with development of a catecholamine 
storm-like syndrome as the toxins target the nervous system. There may 
be tachycardia or bradycardia, hyper- or hypotension, profuse sweat-
ing, salivation, cardiac dysfunction and pulmonary oedema. Cardiac col-
lapse can occur, especially in children. Other clinical features may vary, 
depending on the scorpion species.
The Iranian scorpion, Hemiscorpius lepturus (principally south-west 
Iran), causes a quite different presentation, with an initial minor sting, 
followed by progressive development of bite site or limb necrosis and 
a potentially lethal systemic envenoming, characterised by intravascu-
lar haemolysis, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), secondary 
renal failure and shock.
Clinical features and management
The approach to management varies with species and region. In South 
America, specic antivenoms are routinely used and associated with 
improved outcomes and reduced mortality. In India, the past reliance on 
prazosin has been replaced with use of specic antivenom, again with 
improved outcomes. In contrast, in parts of North Africa, past reliance on 
antivenom has been replaced with use of cardiac support and arguably 
poorer outcomes.
In Iran, H. lepturus stings are treated with antivenom, though as pres-
entation is often delayed because the sting initially appears to be minor, 
the role of late antivenom is unclear.
Spiders
There are vast numbers and great species diversity of spiders, with two 
broad taxonomic groupings: the more ‘primitive’ Mygalomorphs (several 
medically important species, especially Australian funnel web spiders 
(Atrax, Hadronyche and Illawarra)) and the far more diverse Araneomorphs 
(main clinically important species in the genera Latrodectus (widow spi-
ders), Loxosceles (brown recluse spiders) and Phoneutria (banana or 
wandering spiders)).
Clinical features and management
While spiders and spider bites are common, only those genera noted 
above commonly cause medically signicant effects. In most cases this 
is a neuroexcitatory envenoming, sometimes similar to severe scorpion 
envenoming (notable from Australian funnel web spiders), but the recluse 
spiders cause an often painless bite that develops into local skin necrosis 
and sometimes a systemic illness similar to that caused by the Iranian 
scorpion, H. lepturus, and with similar lethal potential. Widow spiders 
cause ‘latrodectism’, with initial local pain and sweating. In some, the 
pain becomes severe, sometimes spreading regionally followed by gen-
eralised pain, with associated hypertension, nausea and malaise.
For most of these spiders, antivenom remains the key treatment and 
is life-saving in some cases. Studies suggesting that anti-Latrodectus
antivenom is ineffective have not been conrmed by independent studies 
and are in contrast to decades of positive clinical experience.
Paralysis ticks
Most ticks are vectors for disease but a few species in Australia, North 
America and parts of Africa can cause accid paralysis. Toxins in the 
saliva act as potent pre-synaptic neurotoxins that can cause gradual- 
onset ascending accid paralysis.
There are no antivenoms for tick paralysis. Treatment is based on 
removal of all ticks and supportive care, including intubation/ventilation 
where required. The paralysis usually resolves by about 48 hours follow-
ing removal of all ticks, although embedded ticks may be hard to nd, 
hiding in the scalp, ears and skin folds.
Venomous insects
A number of insects are venomous, but very few cause signicant enven-
oming in humans.

[[p285]]
250    ENVENOMATION
Venomous lepidopterans
The Lonomia caterpillars of South America, especially Brazil, have numer-
ous protective venomous spines that, on contact with the skin, can dis-
charge a potent procoagulant venom that can cause a progressive and 
sometimes fatal consumptive coagulopathy, with terminal haemorrhagic 
and/or organ failure events. Treatment includes use of a Brazilian specic 
antivenom and supportive care.
Venomous hymenopterans
Many bees, wasps, hornets and some ants have modied ovipositors in 
the abdomen that act as stings, attached to venom glands. The quan-
tity of venom injected in a single sting is insufcient to cause signicant 
envenomation, but as many of these venoms are potently allergenic, it 
can cause severe and sometimes fatal anaphylaxis in sensitised persons 
(p. 183). Massed stings by hundreds of these insects in a swarm, how-
ever, can cause life-threatening systemic envenoming, often with intra-
vascular haemolysis, DIC, shock and multi-organ failure. ‘Africanised’ 
bees are a particular risk for such attacks in South America and now in 
parts of North America. The giant wasps and hornets of Asia can simi-
larly cause systemic envenoming with multiple attacks, even from a few 
individual insects. Invasive ants, such as Solenopsis spp., are colonising 
new regions and can cause both allergic reactions and unpleasant local 
reactions.
Marine venomous and poisonous animals
The marine environment is dominated by animal life, and many species 
utilise toxins, either self-produced or taken up from the environment, to 
arm themselves for either defence or predation. Many of these animals 
can cause adverse effects in humans, either as a direct venom effect on 
bites/stings (venomous spiny sh, sea snakes, stingrays, jellysh, sea 
urchins, some starsh, cone snails, selected octopuses etc.), or through 
poisoning if eaten (fugu, ciguatera, scombroid, several types of shellsh 
poisoning; p. 236).
For venomous marine animals, there is antivenom available only for 
sea snakes, which can cause rhabdomyolysis and/or paralytic neuro-
toxicity; box jellysh, which can cause very rapid cardiac collapse; and 
stonesh, which cause intense sting-site pain and sometimes local 
necrosis. In general, marine venoms respond to heat; thus a hot water 
immersion or shower (about 45°C) is effective at reducing local pain, 
particularly for jellysh, stinging sh and stingray stings. For stingray 
stings, the venom may cause local tissue damage both through sting 
trauma and a venom effect. Wounds penetrating the abdomen or chest 
are potentially lethal and should be adequately explored, cleaned and 
allowed to heal by secondary intention, with antibiotic treatment of sec-
ondary infection if indicated. For bites by the blue-ringed octopus and 
stings by cone snails, rapid-acting venom can cause early cardiovascular 
collapse and accid paralysis. Supportive care is crucial in ensuring sur-
vival from these potentially lethal and seemingly trivial local wounds. Sea 
urchin and venomous starsh wounds can result in multiple penetrating 
spines, which cause pain and act as a nidus for secondary infection, but 
surgical removal of spines can be difcult and unrewarding. Contact with 
venomous sessile animals (coral, anemones, some sponges etc.) can 
result in painful local envenoming.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Brent J, Burkhart K, Dargan P, Hatten B, Megarbane B, Palmer R, White J, eds. 
Critical care toxicology, 2nd edn. Cham: Springer; 2017.
Meier J, White J. Handbook of clinical toxicology of animal venoms and poisons. 
Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1995.
World Health Organization, Regional Ofce for Africa. Guidelines for the prevention 
and clinical management of snakebite in Africa; 2010. https://www.who.int/
snakebites/resources/9789290231684/en/
World Health Organization, Regional Ofce for South-East Asia. Guidelines for the 
management of snake-bites, 2nd edn; 2016. https://www.who.int/snakebites/
resources/9789290225300/en/.
Websites
toxinology.com Clinical toxinology guide from the University of Adelaide.
who.int Information from the World Health Organization on snakes, snakebite and 
antivenoms.

[[p286]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 11.1.  Snakebite has been classied as a major Neglected Tropical 
Disease, but venomous snakes are not the most common 
and important cause of envenoming in some regions. In those 
regions, such as North Africa, which of these animal groups is 
the most important?
 
A. Spiders
 
B. Hymenopteran insects (bees, wasps and ants)
 
C. Scorpions
 
D. Jellysh
 
E. Stingrays
Answer: C.
While there are far more spider species than scorpions, and many 
scorpions are not dangerous for humans, scorpion sting can be severe 
and life threatening. Scorpion sting causes more hospitalisations than 
snakebite in some regions such as North Africa, parts of the Middle East 
and parts of Latin America, including Mexico. Globally hymenopteran 
insect stings causing major allergy are also important, but with fewer 
hospitalisations. Jellysh stings and stingray injuries are important in 
some regions, but again with comparatively fewer hospitalisations.
 11.2.  Descending neurotoxic accid paralysis is a feature of 
envenoming by a number of animals, both terrestrial and 
marine, but most notably some species of snakes. Which is 
the common key rst sign to look for as evidence of developing 
neurotoxicity?
 
A. Limb weakness
 
B. Ophthalmoplegia
 
C. Difculty speaking and swallowing
 
D. Loss of deep tendon reexes
 
E. Bilateral ptosis
Answer: E.
All of the listed signs can occur with neurotoxic descending ac-
cid paralysis, but cranial nerves are usually affected rst and bilateral 
ptosis is usually the rst clear sign and should be a standard part of 
repeated examinations of patients with suspected snakebite, as impor-
tant and frequently tested as pulse, blood pressure and respiratory rate. 
Ophthalmoplegia often rst manifests as partial paralysis affecting medial 
gaze and generally occurs after ptosis becomes apparent. As neurotox-
icity progresses the patient may develop difculty with speech, swallow-
ing and may start drooling and at this point pharyngeal airway protection 
may become imperilled and require airway support. Limb weakness and 
loss of deep tendon reexes usually occur later in the progression of neu-
rotoxicity. Ideally, as soon as ptosis develops the patient should receive 
an appropriate antivenom to try to prevent paralysis progressing through 
to full respiratory paralysis.
 11.3.  Procoagulants in some snake venoms can cause consumption 
of clotting factors, particularly brinogen, resulting in a bleeding 
tendency. In West Africa which of the following snakes is most 
likely to cause this type of coagulopathy?
 
A. Puff adder
 
B. Night adder
 
C. Spitting cobra
 
D. Saw-scaled viper
 
E. Forest cobra
Answer: D.
Saw-scaled vipers are a classic cause of procoagulant-mediated con-
sumptive coagulopathy throughout their range, including West Africa, 
where they pose a major hazard to humans. Their venom also contains 
potent haemorrhagins and severe local and systemic bleeding effects can 
occur. Cobras do not cause coagulopathy. Puff adders and night adders 
can cause local bleeding, but not this severe systemic coagulopathy.
 11.4.  Which of the following common causes of snakebite in parts 
of India and Sri Lanka is not covered by current polyvalent 
antivenoms available in this region?
 
A. Common cobra
 
B. Saw-scaled viper
 
C. Hump-nosed viper
 
D. Russell’s viper
 
E. Common krait
Answer: C.
Hump-nosed vipers, Hypnale spp., are common in some parts of 
India and Sri Lanka, causing a signicant number of bites and can cause 
coagulopathy and acute kidney injury in addition to local effects at the 
bite site. Envenoming by these snakes can appear similar to envenoming 
caused by Russell’s viper and saw-scaled vipers, however their venom 
is distinct and not used in production of current antivenoms. Therefore 
these antivenoms are unlikely to provide benet in treating hump-nosed 
viper bites. A new antivenom is being developed for Sri Lanka that will 
include venom from these snakes in the immunising mix and this may 
become a better treatment option in future, if clinical trials prove both 
effectiveness and safety.
 11.5.  Most scorpions causing medically signicant envenoming have 
potent neuroexcitatory venoms that cause rapid development 
of both local pain and systemic envenoming which can, in 
some cases, cause a catecholamine-storm-like effect, but one 
scorpion causes a quite different type of envenoming, with 
minimal initial pain and development over many hours to days 
of local sting site necrosis, with a systemic illness. Which of the 
following scorpions causes this local necrotic effect?
 
A. Tityus serrulatus (Brazil)
 
B. Hemiscorpius lepturus (Iran)
 
C. Leiurus quinquestriatus (Middle East)
 
D. Hottentotta tamulus (India)
 
E. Androctonus australis (North Africa)
Answer: B.
Most medically signicant scorpions globally are in the family Buthidae 
and cause local pain and systemic neuroexcitatory envenoming and 
do not cause sting site tissue injury/necrosis. The Iranian scorpion, 
Hemiscorpius lepturus, is in the family Hemiscorpiidae and is unique 
amongst scorpions in having a locally necrotic and systemically haemo-
lytic and tissue-damaging venom, similar in clinical presentation to 
recluse spider (Loxosceles spp.) envenoming. In parts of SW Iran it is 
the most important cause of scorpion stings and despite antivenom, 
probably because presentation is often delayed until after the optimum 
time to use antivenom, stings can cause sometimes fatal envenoming, 
especially in children.

[[p287]]
Medicine in austere environments
12
AC Baker
Extremes of temperature 252
The cold environment 252
Heat-related illness 254
Acute high altitude illness 256
Illness at high altitude 256
Subaquatic medicine 257

[[p288]]
252    MEDICINE IN AUSTERE ENVIRONMENTS
‘Wilderness medicine’ can be dened as medical care delivered in 
environments greater than one hour away from denitive care, how-
ever in practice it often represents the care of patients that are multi-
ple hours, if not days, away from the nearest hospital. This covers a 
broad range of scenarios from expeditions to commercial work and 
research projects, often in austere conditions. Adventure tourism 
is also becoming increasingly popular, and projected to grow further 
in the future.
Delivery of exemplary care in this context is summarised in Box 12.1. 
It involves a core understanding of the interaction between the environ-
ment and human health, alongside strong situational awareness and 
consideration of human factors. As the environment continually alters, 
whether through population growth, economic development or climate 
change, it plays an important role in disease causation – one that may 
increase over time. This chapter deals principally with the acute effects 
of environmental hazards on individuals and should be read in conjunc-
tion with the chapters on Acute Medicine and Critical Illness (Ch. 9) and 
Poisoning (Ch. 10).
Extremes of temperature
Thermoregulation
Body heat is generated by basal metabolic activity and muscle move-
ment, and lost by four main mechanisms: conduction, convection, 
evaporation and radiation (Fig. 12.1). Body temperature is controlled 
in the hypothalamus, which is directly sensitive to changes in core 
temperature and indirectly responds to temperature-sensitive neu-
rons in the skin. The normal ‘set-point’ of core temperature is tightly 
regulated within the range 37 ± 0.5°C, which is necessary to preserve 
the normal function of many enzymes and metabolic processes. 
Aspects of thermoregulation specic to old age are detailed in 
Box 12.2
The cold environment
Protective mechanisms in a cold environment include activation of the 
sympathetic nervous system with cutaneous vasoconstriction, shivering 
and increases in both heart rate and cardiac contractility. Shivering, an 
involuntary contraction and relaxation of muscles, is an early adaptive 
cold response that results in a two- to vefold increase in heat genera-
tion. As core temperature drops these protective mechanisms fail; shiv-
ering stops between 29°C and 31°C.
Physiological effects
The cold environment has six main effects on physiological systems:
Metabolism
Regional organ blood ow is reduced in the cold environment with 
marked variation; the kidneys demonstrate the most signicant change, 
similar in response to that seen with haemorrhage or sepsis. The stress 
response results in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis with a relatively 
defective insulin efcacy resulting in hyperglycaemia.
Fluid and electrolytes
As the body cools there is a relative decrease in plasma volume as uid 
moves intracellularly with subsequent inadequate tissue perfusion. There 
is a decrease in intracellular potassium below a core temperature of 
25°C, which is linked to the risk of arrhythmias.
Respiratory
For every 1°C reduction in core temperature there is a 6% drop in oxygen 
consumption. The initial increased respiratory rate declines with ongoing 
cooling, with animal studies suggesting a cessation of breathing at a core 
temperature of 24°C. There is direct respiratory centre depression from a 
reduction in both oxygen expenditure and production of carbon dioxide.
Cardiovascular
As the core temperature falls there is a reduction in cardiac output with 
initial maintenance of stroke volume. At around 28°C the heart rate is 
reduced by 50% with a subsequent increased risk of arrythmias. Initial 
conduction abnormalities include a sinus bradycardia, progressing to 
slow atrial brillation (AF) and then to ventricular brillation (VF). VF may be 
induced below 30°C with excessive stimulation/movement, which is why 
handling of a hypothermic patient needs to be performed with great care.
Haematological
There is an increased plasma viscosity, with a 150% rise in haematocrit 
documented at a core temperature of 25°C. Enzymatic reactions within 
the coagulation cascade are prolonged, alongside platelet trapping 
within the liver and spleen, resulting in an increased bleeding risk.
12.1  Key factors in the delivery of exemplary wilderness 
medicine
Optimise participant tness (e.g. pre-departure health screening)
Understand the patterns of injury and anticipate issues
 Appropriate technical equipment, medical kit and drugs
 Effective logistical support
 Multiple communication options (awareness of limitations of each)
 Understand environmental factors that affect ingress and egress
 Proactive rather than reactive approach (e.g. daily skin checks/blister care)
 Established standard operating procedures (SOPs)
Evaporation
Through sweating
or wicking into
clothing
1
Radiation
Heat dissipating
into the colder
environment
2
3
Convection
Wind disturbance
of the insulating
layer of the air
surrounding the
body, carrying
heat away with it
4
Conduction
Heat dissipating
into objects in
contact, for example
a patient lying on the
cold ground
Fig. 12.1 Mechanisms of heat loss.
12.2  Thermoregulation in old age
Age-associated changes: impairments in vasomotor function, skeletal muscle 
response and sweating mean that older people react more slowly to changes in 
temperature.
Increased comorbidity: thermoregulatory problems are more likely in the 
presence of pathology such as atherosclerosis and hypothyroidism, and 
medication such as sedatives and hypnotics.
Hypothermia: this may arise as a primary event, but more commonly 
complicates other acute illness, e.g. pneumonia, stroke or fracture.
Ambient temperature: nancial pressures and older equipment may result in 
inadequate heating during cold weather.

[[p289]]
Extremes of temperature    253
12
Neurological
There is a decline in cognitive function in the cold environment with 
unconsciousness occurring at a core temperature around 28–30°C. 
Slurred speech, ataxia and paradoxical undressing are all described 
with lowering core temperatures. Absence of brain electrical activity is 
seen below 20°C; this is generally considered to be neuroprotective. It is 
believed that the cold stabilises the blood–brain barrier and cerebral cell 
membranes that would otherwise be disrupted by hypoxia.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is dened as a core temperature below 35°C and can be sub-
categorised into primary hypothermia due to environmental exposure and 
secondary hypothermia due to abnormal thermoregulatory mechanisms 
as a result of an underlying altered physiological state. Measurement of 
core temperature can be challenging, with tympanic measurements often 
considered inaccurate; monitors are often not calibrated below 35.5°C. 
Alternatives such as oesophageal temperature can be difcult to achieve 
in practice, and rectal measurements (considered the gold standard 
measurement) can lag behind the true core temperature.
Traditionally, hypothermia is categorised as mild (32–35°C), moderate 
(28–32°C) and severe (< 28°C), however, newer staging systems, such 
as the Swiss Staging System, adopted by some ambulance services, 
dene the level of hypothermia based on symptoms (Fig. 12.2). This has 
been shown to overestimate the degree of hypothermia in around 20% 
of cases but remains a helpful classication when an accurate core tem-
perature cannot be obtained.
Management
Following resuscitation, the objectives of management are to rewarm the 
patient in a controlled manner whilst treating associated hypoxia (by oxy-
genation and ventilation if necessary), uid and electrolyte disturbance, 
and cardiovascular abnormalities. Careful handling is essential to avoid 
precipitating arrhythmias. The Swiss Staging System can be used to 
guide treatment at various levels of hypothermia (see Fig. 12.2).
Mild hypothermia
Continued heat loss can be prevented by sheltering the patient from the 
cold, replacing wet clothing, covering the head and insulating the patient 
from the ground. Hibler’s method is the best available technique for 
packaging a patient, which involves wrapping the patient in an insulating 
layer, followed by an outer vapour-tight layer. Warm drinks and active 
movement can raise the core temperature by 2°C per hour. Forced-air 
re-warming blankets and heat packs can increase core temperature by 
0.1–3.4°C per hour. Warmed intravenous uids have been shown to pro-
vide no active warming but they do prevent further cooling.
Severe hypothermia
For severe hypothermia a number of invasive warming methods can 
be instigated in hospital. This includes bladder lavage, which involves 
ushing the bladder with 300 mL of warm saline resulting in a 1–2°C 
rise in core temperature per hour. Thoracic lavage through two uni-
lateral chest drains (anterior and lateral) can result in a 2–3°C rise per 
hour. A single chest drain approach can be used by clamping a 32–36 
French tube for 2–3 minutes after ushing in 300 mL of warm saline, 
then allowing it to drain.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and cardiopulmonary 
bypass (CPB) are performed in specialist hospitals and represent the best 
warming strategies, with increases in core temperature of 6–10°C per hour.
Cardiac arrest
There are a number of adaptations to resuscitation algorithms for hypo-
thermic patients in cardiac arrest (Box 12.3). There is an old adage that 
'you’re not dead until you’re warm and dead’ with documented cases of 
full recovery following extended periods of ECMO and CPB (Box 12.4). 
There are, however, some markers of futility. These include: obvious 
01: 32–35°
02: 28–<32°
03: 24–<28°
04: <24°
Stage/core
temperature
Symptoms
Alert and
shivering
Drowsy
and not
shivering
Unconscious
with vital
signs, no
shivering
Unconscious
with no
vital signs
Treatment
Pragmatic support. Warm environment
and clean warm clothes. Hot sugary
drinks. Active movement – can
increase temperature generation
by 20 times the basal metabolic rate
Same as stage 2 but added airway
support as needed. May require more
invasive warming methods including
extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) or
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB)
Same as stage 3 but manage as
cardiac arrest
Insulate whole body, wind and vapour
barrier and external rewarming
(warming blanket or chemical packs
around axilla and groin). Warm fluids
(this prevents further cooling but
doesn’t actively warm). Try to reduce
movement to avoid arrhythmias.
Keep horizontal.
Fig. 12.2 Swiss Staging System and the treatment of hypothermia.
12.3 Management of cardiac arrest in hypothermic patients
 Assessment for signs of life should be extended to 1 minute
 Ventricular brillation and ventricular tachycardia can be debrillated, however if after 
three shocks there is no response, additional shocks should be delayed until core 
temperature is > 30°C (3-shock ‘stacked’ sequences are not recommended)
 Withhold adjunctive medications (adrenaline, amiodarone etc.) if the 
temperature is below 30°C; or double the interval between doses when 
temperature is 30–35°C
12.4 Cases of full recovery following extended periods of ECMO 
and CPB
 In 1999 a 29-year-old Norwegian radiology registrar fell whilst skiing into an 
ice waterfall gully. She was cut out after 1 hour and 20 minutes with a core 
temperature of 13.7°C. Following 9 hours of CPR and CPB she survived with no 
neurological impairment.
 In 2011 a 7-year-old Swedish girl fell from a cliff into the sea and was found in 
the water after 3–4 hours with a core temperature of 13.2°C. Following CPR 
and warming she survived with no neurological impairment.
(CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass; CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation;  
ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation)
lethal injury, prolonged asphyxia (mouthful of snow etc.), incompressible 
thorax (distinct from a stiff chest which is common), frozen abdomen, or 
potassium > 12 mmol/L.
Cold injury
Freezing cold injury (‘frostbite’)
Hypothermia-induced vasoconstriction results in tissue cooling and 
frostbite refers to ice formation and freezing within the tissue, most com-
monly affecting the hands and feet (around 90% of cases). Risk factors 
include alcohol consumption (which impairs decision-making and results 

[[p290]]
254    MEDICINE IN AUSTERE ENVIRONMENTS
in peripheral vasodilatation), previous frostbite, drug use, inappropriate 
clothing, fatigue and dehydration. There are two distinct phases to cold 
injury: a ‘cooling–supercooling–freezing’ stage during exposure; and 
a vascular stage during re-warming. When skin tissues cool to below 
0°C ice crystal formation causes microvascular and cell damage. During 
warming, this results in a degree of circulatory failure and uid loss. The 
release of inammatory mediators causes ischaemia and clot produc-
tion. Re-freezing following warming is particularly destructive, resulting in 
massive cell inammatory changes, therefore re-warming should only be 
initiated if there is no risk of further re-freezing.
Patients often describe an initial numbness and woody sensation 
followed by a severe pain during warming with a persistent throbbing 
sensation. Pain can endure for months alongside potentially perma-
nent sensory changes. The skin can look waxy, discoloured or blistered 
(Fig. 12.3), however prognostication using initial skin changes can be 
very challenging.
Management
If concerned about the possibility of cold injury, immediate pre-hospi-
tal treatment is to try to shelter from the environment, consume warm 
drinks, remove shoes, wet clothing and jewellery and re-dress in warm, 
dry clothing. If there is absolutely no risk of re-freezing then warming the 
area can be achieved by placing the area into a companion’s armpit or 
groin. Aspirin 75–300 mg and ibuprofen 800 mg are recommended. Do 
not rub the area and do not place heat sources directly onto the area. 
Evacuation for formal medical review should be obtained. Warmed areas 
need to be made non-load-bearing and therefore prior thought about 
extraction needs to be considered. Aloe vera gel has anti-prostaglandin 
effects and can be applied before application of a non-adherent dress-
ing, splinting and elevation of the affected region.
Denitive warming involves placing the affected area into circulat-
ing water between 37°C and 42°C with small amounts of antiseptic 
for around an hour, avoiding contact with the sides of the container. 
Additional treatment involves uid replacement with warmed uids (due 
to cold diuresis), strong analgesia and blister care. Blisters may present 
as clear, cloudy or haemorrhagic. Blister management remains contro-
versial, with current evidence recommending débridement of all blisters 
in hospital (likely under a general anaesthetic) to improve wound healing. 
There is no evidence for prophylactic antibiotics and tetanus prophylaxis 
should be given according to local protocols; frostbite wounds are not 
considered tetanus-prone.
In-hospital management includes specialist imaging (e.g. angiography 
and technetium bone scanning) to inform prognosis. A combination of 
thrombolysis and vasodilators (such as nitroglycerin), given within 
24 hours, has evidence of good outcomes. Iloprost, a prostacyclin 
analogue that causes vasodilation and reduces the requirement for 
amputation, can be given intravenously after 24 hours of injury. Early 
amputations have a higher morbidity and surgery should be delayed 
unless there is evidence of sepsis. There is also a potential role for hyper-
baric oxygen treatment and this is an area of current research.
Non-freezing cold injury
This results from prolonged exposure to cold, damp conditions and is 
often seen in individuals who become wet but are unable to dry out. 
The important distinction from frostbite is that the tissues do not freeze. 
It is almost exclusively seen in the lower limb and feet, however con-
comitant injury to the hands is sometimes seen. It is often described 
as a patch of numbness, which when rewarmed, changes in colour 
from pale to red, with associated swelling and pain. These symptoms 
can last for months or indenitely; often far longer than an equivalent 
freezing injury. The pathology remains uncertain but probably involves 
endothelial injury. Gradual re-warming is associated with less pain than 
rapid re-warming. The pain and associated paraesthesia are difcult 
to control with conventional analgesia and may benet from early use 
of amitriptyline. The patient is at risk of further damage on subsequent 
exposure to the cold.
Heat-related illness
Heat-related illness denes a spectrum of pathology from benign heat 
oedema to lethal heat stroke, the denitions of which are found in 
Box 12.5. There is a growing risk of heat-related illness with global 
temperatures predicted to rise by between 1.7°C and 5.6°C within this 
century alone; the World Health Organization predicts over 250 000 
additional deaths a year from 2050 as a result of heat exposure.
Heat-related illness is often categorised as either environmental or 
exertional heat illness depending on the primary underlying mechanism. 
Environmental heat illness results from elevated ambient temperatures, 
Fig. 12.3 Frostbite in a female Everest sherpa.
12.5  Denitions of heat-related illness
Heat-related illness
Denition
Heat oedema
Mild swelling to the limbs during the rst few days 
of heat exposure due to increased plasma volume, 
peripheral vasodilation and interstitial pooling of blood
Heat cramps
Muscle spasms related to sodium loss. Generally 
occur after exercise in non-acclimatised individuals 
who sweat freely and replace losses with water 
or other hypotonic solutions, so they become salt 
depleted. Salt supplementation reduces the incidence
Heat syncope
Heat syncope refers to a multi-factorial syndrome 
involving transient loss of consciousness in the 
context of heat exposure with a relatively rapid return 
to normal function and baseline. Contributing factors 
may include peripheral vasodilation, orthostatic 
pooling of blood, prolonged standing, advanced 
age and dehydration, as well as coexisting medical 
conditions such as ischaemic heart disease that 
reduce cardiac output
Heat exhaustion
Characterised by volume and salt depletion. It is an 
inability to continue an activity due to heat stress. It 
presents with thirst, lethargy, headache, nausea but 
importantly a normal mental status. Some literature 
describes it as benign as it may be protective in the 
development of heat stroke, causing an individual to 
stop an activity and thus the generation of heat
Heat stroke
Neurological impairment with core body temperature 
≥ 40°C (rectal temperature is gold standard in a 
pre-hospital environment). Symptoms can involve a 
coarse muscle tremor, confusion, aggression and loss 
of consciousness. Sweating may be absent due to 
dehydration and failure of thermoregulatory mechanisms

[[p291]]
Extremes of temperature    255
12
A patient should be removed from the heat source and put into shade 
to reduce radiant heat gain. Resting in an air-conditioned room has cool-
ing rates of 0.03–0.06°C/min. Clothes should be removed, high-ow 
oxygen administered, intravenous access established and a rectal tem-
perature taken. If temperature measurement is unavailable but the history 
and clinical ndings are consistent with heat illness, initiation of treatment 
with cooling techniques should not be delayed.
A number of cooling strategies exist (Box 12.8), and their implemen-
tation will depend on what is feasible within each particular environment. 
Two meta-analyses have concluded that ice water immersion is the most 
effective treatment strategy with cooling rates of 0.20–0.35°C/min for 
iced water and 0.11°C/min for wet towels. Immersion is unlikely to be 
feasible in the wilderness environment and many hospitals, with fur-
ther consideration of the potential dangers of immersing a patient with 
a reduced conscious level. Immersing the hands and forearms in cold 
water results in reduction of heat stress in normal subjects, but has not 
been evaluated in the treatment of heat stroke patients.
The placement of ice/cold packs in the axillae, groin and neck has 
been recommended as an easy method to use in the eld, but when 
compared with evaporative cooling in healthy subjects, cooling times 
were longest when the ice packs were used alone and shortest when 
both methods were used simultaneously. Evaporative cooling involves 
the removal of clothing, spraying tepid or cool water over the patient, and 
facilitating evaporation and convection with the use of a fan.
The role of invasive cooling methods such as gastric, bladder or peri-
toneal lavage has not been fully established. Neither hyperhydration 
nor dantrolene (used in the treatment of malignant hyperthermia) have 
12.6  Risk factors for the development of heat-related illness
Risk factor
Mechanism
High ambient temperatures
Increased radiant heat gain
High humidity
Ineffective evaporative heat loss at 
humidities > 75%
Little shade
Increased radiant heat gain
Intercurrent illness
Raised core temperature
Extremes of age
Suboptimal homeostatic thermoregulation
Overweight/unt
The main identiable risk factor for heat 
illness during military training was a body 
mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2
Effects of alcohol and medication 
(diuretics, ACE inhibitors, 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists, 
vasodilators, antidepressants, 
anticholinergics, antihistamines 
and stimulants)
Either through dehydration, decreased 
cardiovascular and peripheral response 
to dissipate heat, reduced sweating or 
increased metabolic rate
Inappropriate clothing
Reduced heat loss through combination 
of radiation, convection and evaporation
Dehydration
Regardless of body habitus or tness 
level, uid losses that result in a 2%–3% 
decrease in body weight correlate with 
decreased aerobic performance, increased 
perception of fatigue, and greater core 
temperatures at a given workload
Previous heat-related illness
Impaired homeostatic thermoregulation
No acclimatisation
Body uid decits are reduced by around 
30% in acclimatised individuals, despite 
increased sweat rates of up to 18%, as a 
result of a more accurate thirst  
response
Intense work/duration
Increased heat generation
with increased incidence seen at the extremes of age, due to sub-
optimal homeostatic thermoregulation. Peaks of incidence are com-
mon during heatwaves, exemplied by the 70 000 heat-related deaths 
reported during the 2003 European heatwave. Conversely, exertional 
heat illness predominantly affects young, physically t individuals (such 
as soldiers and athletes), reecting a failure to dissipate intrinsic heat 
production from physical activity.
Risk factors for the development of heat illness are well established 
(Box 12.6).
Pathophysiology of heat stroke
The pathophysiology of heat stroke can be summarised as organ dys-
function from the high temperature itself, and end-organ ischaemia from 
diminished blood ow. Increased sweating results in dehydration and 
blood pools in vasodilated peripheral vasculature resulting in a decreased 
effective blood volume. The blood viscosity increases resulting in heart 
strain. Enzymes denature at 40 °C and at 41 °C mitochondrial activity 
stops; the subsequent loss of oxidative phosphorylation results in organ 
ischaemia. The muscles and gastrointestinal tract are affected rst, fol-
lowed by the central nervous system, circulatory and clotting systems. 
The pathophysiology is similar to sepsis, severe trauma and extensive 
burns (Box 12.7).
Management
Mortality of heat illness is around 30% and is directly proportional to the 
duration and magnitude of hyperthermia, therefore immediate cooling 
should begin at the scene, before transfer to hospital. The aim should be 
to reduce core temperature to approximately 39°C.
12.7  Pathophysiology of heat stroke
Increased heart rate and an increase in cardiac 
output by 3 L/min for each 1°C rise in core 
temperature. Increased peripheral blood ow from 
0.2 L/min up to 8 L/min. Dehydration with sweat 
rates increasing from 0.5 L/day up to 15 L/day. Risk 
of heart failure if pre-existing cardiac disease
Ischaemia and cerebral oedema due to the high 
temperature itself and vascular endothelial damage
Intestinal mucosal impairment results in toxins 
entering the portal vein and circulating systemically 
resulting in sepsis
Tachypnoea and pulmonary vasodilatation result  
in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)  
(p. 201)
Acute renal failure due to ischaemia, dehydration 
and rhabdomyolysis (p. 198)
Acute liver injury from ischaemia and high levels of 
circulating inammatory cytokines (p. 879)
Microthrombus formation causing further 
ischaemia and disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (p. 988)
H
H
H
K
K
K
Mg2+
Mg2+
Mg2+
Multiple electrolyte abnormalities including 
hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hypoglycaemia 
and metabolic acidosis

[[p292]]
256    MEDICINE IN AUSTERE ENVIRONMENTS
evidence of benet. Cold intravenous uids may supplement cooling. In a 
study of healthy volunteers, infusion of 4°C saline over 30 minutes cooled 
the body by 1°C, compared to 0.5°C with room-temperature saline.
Prevention
Cooling in a wilderness setting may be incredibly challenging, with likely 
no access to ice or cold uids. Prevention of heat illness is therefore 
paramount. Strategies include:
 1. Ensuring adequate hydration. The 2019 Wilderness Medical Society 
heat illness guidelines identify hydration as the ‘most readily modi-
able physiologic risk factor’. Fluid ingestion is also identied as the 
most effective approach to mitigate the rise in core temperature 
amongst athletes. Military guidelines recommend a 0.25–1.25 L/hr 
hydration strategy that varies for work rates (low/medium/high/very 
high) at a given Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT) (Box 12.9).
 2. Consider accepted WBGT cut-offs for activities (Box 12.9).
 3. Expedition participants should receive high-level education pre- 
departure on the dangers of heat-related illness with evidence- 
based advice on risk reduction. Increased hydration and cooling 
strategies have been documented following educational material 
targeting older people prior to heatwaves.
 4. If possible, implementing a period of acclimatisation with at least 
1–2 hours of mild exertion in a hot environment for at least 8 days. 
Body uid decits are reduced by around 30% in acclimatised  
individuals as a result of a more accurate thirst response.
Acute high altitude illness
Illness due to high altitudes represents over a quarter of all serious med-
ical incidents from reviews of expeditions in a range of environments. 
High altitude is generally considered to be over 2500 m and extreme 
altitude over 5500 m. The summit of Mount Everest stands at 8848 m, 
where the barometric pressure and atmospheric partial pressure of oxy-
gen (PO2) is around one-third of that at sea level; the percentage of oxy-
gen remains the same at 20.9%.
Unconsciousness secondary to hypoxia normally occurs within 3 min-
utes if the body is exposed to an altitude over 8000 m. However, with a 
period of acclimatisation, the body is able to adapt and overcome even 
profound hypoxaemia with arterial partial pressures of oxygen (PaO2) of 
2.55 kPa recorded at 8400 m in a healthy climber (normally > 10.6 kPa 
at sea level).
Physiological effects of high altitude
There are a number of physiological systems affected by altitude.
Respiratory
Reduction in oxygen tension results in a fall in arterial oxygen satura-
tion (Fig. 12.4). This varies widely between individuals, depending on 
the shape of the sigmoid oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve (see 
Fig. 25.5) and the ventilatory response. Alveolar ventilation increases 
with altitude, lowering carbon dioxide and resulting in a respiratory 
alkalosis, with metabolic compensation via renal bicarbonate loss. At 
high altitude, individuals are at the steep section of the oxygen disso-
ciation curve whereby a small fall in PaO2 can result in a substantial 
decrease in oxygen saturation. The initial respiratory alkalosis shifts the 
curve to the left but with a period of acclimatisation, increased produc-
tion of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate moves the curve rightwards towards a 
sea-level position.
Haematological
Measured haemoglobin concentration increases with acclimatisation – 
a 20% fall in plasma volume causes haemoconcentration and erythro-
poietin release (stimulated by hypoxia) leads to increased production of 
haemoglobin.
Cardiovascular
There is an initial increase in cardiac output due to increased sympathetic 
activity and heart rate. The reduction in plasma volume causes a fall in 
preload and stroke volume. Cardiac output returns to baseline over sev-
eral weeks but the stroke volume remains lowered.
Illness at high altitude
Neurological and respiratory complications from high altitude occur in 
individuals who ascend rapidly and are not acclimatised. Acute mountain 
sickness (AMS) is seen in over a third of people who ascend to 3000 m. 
Serious illness includes high altitude pulmonary oedema (HAPE) and 
12.8  Summary of cooling rates
Cooling technique (target < 39°C)
Cooling rate
Ice water immersion
0.20–0.35°C/min
Wet towels
0.11°C/min
Evaporative and convective 
combined
0.034–0.31°C/min
Air-conditioned room
0.03–0.06°C/min
Intravenous cold saline
0.03°C/min
Intravenous room-temperature saline
0.015°C/min
12.9  Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT)
Meteorological conditions affect environmental temperatures and a widely used 
index to calculate this is the WBGT, originally developed by the US Marines. 
WBGT is an apparent temperature measurement taking into account temperature, 
humidity, wind speed and solar radiation. This gives a much more accurate 
representation of the degree of heat stress experienced. WBGT is used to 
formulate a set of guidelines that guide activity levels, hydration and rest periods. 
For example, a ‘do not start’ WBGT of 21°C has been suggested for American 
marathons based on an unsuccessful attempt of 160 per 1000 nishers above this 
level, although the incidence of heat-related illness is not well described.
Summit
of Everest
(8848 m)
Highest
permanent
habitation
(< 5200 m)
Arterial
oxygen
saturation
    Partial
  pressure of
inspired oxygen
4
22
Partial pressure of oxygen (kPa)
Pressurised
aircraft cabin
(< 2400 m)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Arterial oxygen saturation (%)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Altitude above sea level (m)
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Fig. 12.4 Change in inspired oxygen tension and blood oxygen saturation at 
altitude. The blue curve shows changes in oxygen availability at altitude and the red 
curve shows the typical resultant changes in arterial oxygen saturation in a healthy 
person. Oxygen saturation varies between individuals according to the shape of the 
oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve and the ventilatory response to hypoxaemia. 
(To convert kPa to mmHg, multiply by 7.5.)

[[p293]]
Subaquatic medicine    257
12
high altitude cerebral oedema (HACE), occurring in 0.1–4% of people 
climbing over 4000 m. Prevention is essential and achievable through 
controlled ascents.
Acute mountain sickness
AMS is a syndrome comprised principally of non-specic symptoms 
including headache, fatigue, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, insomnia 
and dizziness. The pathophysiology of AMS is not fully understood but 
it is thought that hypoxia results in vasodilation and increased capil-
lary hydrostatic pressure causing a uid leak and a raised intracranial 
venous volume with risk of raised intracranial pressure. There is believed 
to be an increase in CSF production with a reduced buffering capacity. 
Non-acclimatised individuals show impaired gas exchange and a lower 
degree of hyperventilation, alongside uid retention and a heightened 
sympathetic activation. Symptoms can occur within 4 hours, with the 
diagnostic denition specifying an ascent to > 2500 m within the prior 
4 days. The symptoms can vary in severity, from trivial to completely 
incapacitating.
Management
Treatment of mild cases consists of rest and symptomatic control with 
simple analgesia; symptoms usually resolve after 1–3 days at a stable 
altitude, but may recur with further ascent. Occasionally there is progres-
sion to cerebral oedema (HACE). Persistent symptoms indicate the need 
to descend, which is considered the denitive treatment.
Medication options include acetazolamide and dexamethasone. 
Acetazolamide is used in both the prophylaxis of AMS and as a treat-
ment option. It works as a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor in the kidneys, 
increasing bicarbonate excretion and inducing a metabolic acidosis, 
thereby offsetting the hyperventilation-induced alkalosis seen at altitude. 
It also decreases CSF production, reducing intracranial pressure and risk 
of progression to HACE. Ideal dosing strategies are debated, however 
125 mg twice daily may be used as prophylaxis and 250 mg three times 
daily for treatment. Higher doses (750 mg) have greater efcacy but also 
increased side-effects. Dexamethasone (8 mg) moderates capillary leak 
and reduces the inammatory response, improving symptoms to allow 
for a safe descent.
High altitude cerebral oedema
HACE is considered a severe sequela of AMS, presenting as ataxia or 
cognitive impairment in addition to the symptoms described above. It 
very rarely occurs without being preceded by milder AMS symptoms, 
making early recognition and treatment of AMS essential. Untreated 
HACE can progress to coma within 24 hours.
Management
Management is directed at improving oxygenation. Descent is essen-
tial and dexamethasone (8 mg immediately, followed by 4 mg four times 
daily) should be given. If descent is impossible, descent can be simulated 
with the use of portable hyperbaric chambers, such as a Gamow bag. 
Use of these devices, however, can be difcult in patients with vomiting 
or a reduced level of consciousness.
High altitude pulmonary oedema
HAPE is a life-threatening condition that usually occurs in the rst 4 days 
after ascent above 2500 m and is the leading cause of mortality from high 
altitude illness. It is dened as an imbalance of hydrostatic pressure within 
the alveoli with no evidence of inammatory changes. Hypoxic pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction causes alveolar capillary stress failure and subse-
quent pulmonary hypertension. This results in capillary uid leak which is 
exacerbated by exercise and compounded by impaired epithelial sodium 
transport, normally essential for uid reabsorption. Initial symptoms 
include a dry cough, exertional dyspnoea and extreme fatigue. Later, 
the cough becomes wet with haemoptysis and orthopnoea. Tachycardia 
and tachypnoea occur at rest and crepitations may often be heard in 
both lung elds. Fever may also be present. There may be profound 
hypoxaemia and radiological evidence of diffuse alveolar oedema. HAPE 
may occur without the preceding signs of AMS, although around 50% of 
patients with HAPE have concurrent AMS and 14% have HACE.
Management
Treatment is directed at reversal of hypoxia, with immediate descent 
(by a minimum of 1000 m) and oxygen administration targeting satura-
tions > 90%. A portable hyperbaric chamber should be used if descent 
is delayed. Nifedipine (60 mg modied release divided into 2–3 doses) 
is recommended prophylactically, starting 1 day before attempting 
ascent above 2500 m and continued for a further 5 days at altitude or 
until descent below 2500 m. For treatment of HAPE there is no evidence 
of benet for any pharmacological therapy compared to descent and 
oxygen.
Subaquatic medicine
Drowning
Drowning remains a leading cause of death globally and is dened as 
‘the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/
immersion in liquid’. Immersion refers to the upper airway being above 
the water surface and submersion below it. The drowning process 
involves initial breath holding, followed by a period of laryngospasm. 
Gas exchange is prevented resulting in hypoxia, hypercarbia and aci-
dosis. Respiratory movements are stimulated by the respiratory centre 
due to hypercarbia, however the laryngospasm results in obstruction of 
the airway. The laryngospasm eventually falters with continued hypoxia 
resulting in the aspiration of liquid of a variable amount, usually < 4mL/kg.
Aspiration of either saltwater or freshwater results in changes to the 
alveolar surfactant and the alveolar capillary barrier causing atelectasis, 
ventilation–perfusion mismatch and hypoxia. Saltwater is hypertonic 
resulting in bronchoconstriction, inammation and pulmonary oedema; 
aspiration of 2.5 mL/kg of seawater results in a 75% increase in right-
to-left shunting of deoxygenated blood. Fresh water is hypotonic and is 
generally absorbed through the pulmonary circulation, entering the sys-
temic circulation and damaging the alveolar capillary membrane. This 
can also generate foam which further decreases ventilation efciency. 
The clinical signicance of swallowing water into the stomach during the 
drowning process remains unclear. Clinically signicant electrolyte abnor-
malities from aspiration and swallowing of both hypotonic and hypertonic 
uids are uncommon requiring > 22 mL/kg of uid, although both hyper- 
and hyponatraemia have been described.
The majority of drownings occur in cold water that results in body 
cooling, water being considered thermoneutral at around 35°C. Skin 
cooling (cold shock) and tissue cooling (hypothermia) are important fac-
tors in drowning. The historical term ‘dry-drowning’ refers to the 10% 
of drowning cases that are documented to have ‘macroscopically dry 
lungs’ on examination, attributed to laryngospasm from water irritation 
on contact. This remains controversial but is no longer felt to be true, with 
newer evidence demonstrating the presence of microscopic liquid in the 
lungs of all drowned patients. ‘Secondary drowning’, referring to patients 
who develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), is now also 
considered a misnomer as there is no second submersion and ARDS is 
a recognised complication of the drowning process.
Cold shock
The cold shock response is believed to be responsible for the major-
ity of drowning deaths. Sudden cold-water immersion results in an 
uncontrolled reex inspiratory gasping, hyperventilation with profound 
hypocapnia and tachycardia from activation of peripheral sub-epider-
mal cold receptors. There is a 75% reduction in breath hold time, which 
can therefore result in the aspiration of water. The response is maximal 

[[p294]]
258    MEDICINE IN AUSTERE ENVIRONMENTS
at water temperatures of 10–15 °C and peaks within the rst 30 sec-
onds of immersion, waning over 2–3 minutes. Continued immersion 
then results in physical incapacitation from neuromuscular cooling, with 
peripheral paralysis occurring at regional limb temperatures of 5–15 °C. 
Hypothermia develops after around 30 minutes in cold water.
Autonomic conict
Simultaneous positive and negative chronotropic triggers are considered 
arrhythmogenic. Bradycardia from vagal stimulation (initiated when face 
down in water – dive reex) coupled with a tachycardia from sympathetic 
activation (cold, stress or exercise) can generate arrhythmias in previ-
ously healthy individuals and can be fatal in those with structural cardiac 
abnormalities.
Pre-hospital management
In-water CPR and rescue breaths are no longer recommended. In-water 
rescue is not recommended for untrained individuals – remember ‘Reach, 
Throw, Row, Don’t Go’. If extracting someone from the water following 
prolonged immersion, the patient should be kept horizontal to prevent 
post-immersion hypotension; the loss of hydrostatic pressure that the 
water was applying can result in venous pooling and a sudden circulatory 
collapse. The patient should be kept warm, with life support commenced 
at the earliest opportunity. Cervical spine precautions should be consid-
ered as there may be a traumatic precursor to the drowning incident (e.g. 
tombstoning), although these injuries are uncommon (0.5% of cases). 
Postural drainage techniques to try to clear uid from the lungs have no 
proven benet.
In-hospital management
Treatment is often focused on re-warming and organ support including 
non-invasive ventilation (CPAP) and protective lung ventilation strategies 
for acute lung injury/ARDS. Prolonged immersion can result in hypovol-
aemia due to the hydrostatic pressure effect of water and the patient 
may require IV uid. Prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended 
unless submersion was in grossly contaminated water. Asymptomatic 
patients, with no respiratory compromise, a normal chest X-ray and 
normal arterial blood gas can be discharged home after 6–8 hours’ 
observation.
CPR modications
Five initial rescue ventilations are recommended given the hypoxic 
nature of a cardiac arrest in drowning. The patient’s chest should be 
dried before application of debrillation pads; however less than 5% of 
drowned patients are in a shockable rhythm. The common progression 
of cardiac rhythm is from bradycardia, to pulseless electrical activity, 
to asystole. Submersion in ice-cold water (less than 6°C) may con-
fer improved survival due to neuroprotection from rapid brain cooling 
before the onset of severe hypoxia; children in particular appear to have 
greater protection, believed in part to be due to a greater surface area 
to mass ratio allowing quicker cooling. For submersion times greater 
than 30 minutes in water warmer than 6°C, resuscitation is likely to 
be futile. If water temperature is below 6°C resuscitation is likely to be 
futile following a submersion over 90 minutes long. Submersion within a 
vehicle may prolong these times due to the potential presence of an air 
bubble. International guidelines do vary on the futility associated with 
submersion duration. The overall mortality of drowned patients who 
present in cardiac arrest is 93%.
Decompression illness
Changes in environmental pressure (as seen in diving) can result in 
decompression illness due to intravascular or extravascular bubbles, the 
clinical manifestations of which include both arterial gas embolism and 
decompression sickness. Diagnosis of decompression illness is based 
on the history and clinical features in patients following a dive; 90% of 
cases are symptomatic within 6 hours, however, delays up to 72 hours 
are described.
A brief review of the physics and physiology of diving is essential in 
understanding the medical issues encountered. The two most important 
gas laws are Boyle’s law and Henry’s law (Fig. 12.5).
Decompression sickness
Nitrogen bubble formation on ascent can cause direct mechanical 
damage to the vascular endothelium and an inammatory response. 
The bubbles occur almost anywhere in the body; therefore, the clinical 
presentation is broad ranging from malaise and headache to paraes-
thesiae, lymphoedema, rash, joint pain and neurological manifestations 
including ataxia, paralysis and altered mentation. The overall incidence 
is low (0.03%) for recreational divers. Decompression sickness is very 
uncommon for diving depths less than 10 m and is normally seen follow-
ing multiple dives.
Depth in
metres
Boyle’s law
Surface
Compression
Decompression
0
10
20
30
40
1
2
3
4
5
1
1/2
1/3
1/4
1/5
6L
3L
2L
1.5L
1.2L
Pressure in
atmospheres
Volume of a
sealed container
Lung
volume
A
Henry’s law
B
Isopression
= Nitrogen
Fig. 12.5 Boyle’s law and Henry’s law. 
inversely proportional to the pressure. Atmospheric pressure increases with depth, 
increasing by 1 atmosphere for each 10 m of depth in water. During diving this 
increasing pressure compresses the gas within the human body, including the lungs, 
ears, sinuses and bowels. During ascent this gas expands and can cause barotrauma 
liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas. Nitrogen is not metabolised 
by the body and increasingly dissolves into the blood on descent. The reverse occurs 
on ascent, which if ascending too quickly can cause bubbles to form, resulting in 
decompression sickness.

[[p295]]
12
Further information    259
Arterial gas embolism
Expanding gases during ascent from diving, from depths as little as 
1 metre, can rupture the alveolar capillary membrane (barotrauma), intro-
ducing alveolar gas into the arterial circulation. The brain is the most 
commonly affected organ. Small venous gas emboli are common with 
diving and usually are of no clinical consequence due to pulmonary cap-
illary ltering. A patent foramen ovale is seen in around a quarter of the 
population which can result in these emboli transferring to the arterial 
circulation, causing neurological sequelae. Overall, the risk of arterial gas 
embolism is rare, representing only around 4% of documented decom-
pression illnesses. Risks include rapid ascents, breath holding and 
pre-existing pulmonary disease. If there is rapid onset of neurological 
signs, including seizures or a reduced consciousness following ascent, 
arterial gas embolism should be suspected.
Management
Any obtunded patient should have appropriate rst aid. Denitive treat-
ment for decompression illness is providing 100% oxygen to wash out 
gas from the tissues to the lungs and remove bubbles. This should be 
instigated for all patients regardless of their oxygen saturations.
Chamber recompression is the gold standard therapy and should be 
performed as soon as possible causing a theoretical crushing of bubbles 
(as per Boyle’s law) and providing improved oxygenation to damaged tis-
sues. Extraction to a recompression chamber may require aeromedical 
retrieval and helicopters at low altitude (less than 300 m) or those with 
cabins pressurised to 1 atmosphere are recommended. In-water recom-
pression is controversial and is recommended only for divers, including 
the patient, with specic training in decompression procedures underwa-
ter. Previous recommendations of a head-down position to stop cranial 
spread of bubbles is no longer recommended due to the increased risk 
of cerebral oedema; patients should be kept horizontal. One litre of intra-
venous uid should be given to correct the intravascular uid loss from 
endothelial bubble injury and dehydration associated with immersion. 
Analgesia should be avoided; non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs can 
result in haemorrhage whilst opiates raise the risk of oxygen toxicity. 
The Divers Alert Network can be contacted for international advice and 
support.
Immersion pulmonary oedema
Immersion pulmonary oedema can affect surface swimmers as well as 
divers and is believed to be a leading cause of death during the swim 
stage of triathlons, previously felt to be due to drowning. Immersion 
results in exposure to hydrostatic pressure which collapses veins and 
redistributes blood to the thorax, causing increased preload, cardiac 
contractility and stroke volume. Rising pulmonary alveolar capillary 
pressure results in a uid shift into the lung interstitium initially, followed 
by the alveoli. This is normally balanced by the release of natriuretic 
peptides (ANP and BNP) causing a natriuresis and diuresis, however 
in immersion pulmonary oedema this compensation is overwhelmed. 
Risk factors include overhydration, overexertion, heart disease, hyper-
tension and cold water, all resulting in raised ventricular lling pressures. 
Breathing into a snorkel or scuba equipment can result in higher neg-
ative pressures in the alveoli with a subsequent greater uid transu-
dation into them (the opposite of positive pressure ventilation used to 
treat pulmonary oedema). Symptoms range from shortness of breath 
to haemoptysis and frothy sputum, generally occurring within 10 min-
utes of starting swimming, and of variable onset with diving. Treatment 
involves extraction from the water to remove the hydrostatic pressure, 
which in turn decreases ventricular lling pressures. Patients should 
be kept warm to prevent vasocontriction, sat upright and given 100% 
oxygen. In-hospital management involves a combination of vasodilators 
(nitrates), diuretics and positive-pressure ventilation (CPAP). Recurrence 
rates are around 30%.
Shallow-water blackout
This condition refers to the loss of consciousness underwater when 
hyperventilation is followed by breath holding. It generally occurs in 
water less than 5 m in depth and can affect even experienced swim-
mers. Hyperventilation (as rapid shallow breaths before diving) preceding 
a breath hold lowers the arterial CO2 and delays the hypercarbic stim-
ulus to breathe, which may not occur before hypoxaemia and uncon-
sciousness develop. Unconsciousness usually occurs on ascent as the 
hydrostatic pressure decreases, reducing the thoracic shunting of blood 
and gas exchange, coupled with a decreasing partial pressure of oxygen 
(Boyle’s law) and resulting in a signicant hypoxaemia.
Further information
Books
Edmonds C, Bennett M, Lippmann J, Mitchell S. Diving and subaquatic medicine, 
5th edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016. An excellent review of subaquatic 
medicine.
Websites
rgs.org Royal Geographical Society. Multiple downloadable expedition guidance 
documents for a range of environments.
christopherimray.co.uk/highaltitudemedicine Extensive publications on high 
altitude medicine and cold injury by Professor Chris Imray.
altitude.org A website written by doctors with expertise and experience of 
expedition and altitude medicine.
scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=ZJRl2HEAAAAJ&hl=en Lists publications 
by Professor Mike Tipton of the Extreme Environments Laboratory, University 
of Portsmouth, on cold water immersion, thermoregulation and environmental 
physiology.

[[p296]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p297]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 12.1  You are part of a search and rescue team looking for a trapped 
skier, following an avalanche 20 minutes prior. On nding the 
patient you are instructed by the team leader to move them very 
carefully, to not induce a cardiac arrhythmia. Below what core 
temperature can ventricular brillation be induced from excessive 
movement?
A. 36°C
B. 32°C
C. 35°C
D. 30°C
E. 33°C
Answer: D.
As the core temperature falls there is a reduction in cardiac output 
with initial maintenance of stroke volume. At around 28°C the heart rate 
is reduced by 50%. Initial conduction abnormalities include a sinus brad-
ycardia, progressing to slow atrial brillation (AF) and then to ventricular 
brillation (VF). VF may be induced below 30°C with excessive stimula-
tion/movement, which is why handling of hypothermic patients needs to 
be performed with great care.
 12.2  You are working as a medic for a 100-mile ultramarathon, 
environmental conditions are wet (moderate rain), with a 
temperature of 8°C. You are asked to see a competitor who 
has come into the medical tent after 12 hours of running. The 
competitor is drowsy, confused and is not shivering. Blood sugar 
is normal. You do not have access to a rectal thermometer. 
Using the Swiss Staging System, quantify the possible degree of 
hypothermia for this patient.
A. < 24°C
B. 28–31°C
C. 24–27°C
D. 32–35°C
E. 35–36°C
Answer: B.
Traditionally, hypothermia is categorised as mild (32–35°C), moderate 
(28–32°C) and severe (< 28°C), however newer staging systems, such 
as the Swiss Staging System, adopted by some ambulance services, 
dene the level of hypothermia based on symptoms (see Fig. 12.3). This 
has been shown to overestimate the degree of hypothermia in around 
20% of cases but remains a helpful classication when an accurate core 
temperature cannot be obtained.
 12.3  Which of the following statements is true for adaptations to 
resuscitation algorithms for hypothermic patients in cardiac 
arrest?
A. Withhold all shocks – chance of shockable rhythm < 5%
B. Signs of life should be checked for 30 seconds rather than 10 
seconds
C. Do not warm hypothermic patients in cardiac arrest – the 
hypothermia is neuroprotective
D. Withhold medications (adrenaline, amiodarone etc.) until core 
temperature > 30°C and double the interval time between 
doses between core temperatures of 30°C and 35°C
E. A potassium level of 7 mmol/L is diagnostic of resuscitation 
futility
Answer: D.
There are a number of adaptations to resuscitation algorithms for 
hypothermic patients in cardiac arrest. Assessment for signs of life 
should be extended to 1 minute. Ventricular brillation and ventricular 
tachycardia can be debrillated, however if after three shocks there is 
no response, additional shocks should be delayed until core temper-
ature is greater than 30°C. Stacked shocks are not recommended. 
Withhold adjunctive medications (adrenaline, amiodarone, etc.) if the 
patient is below 30°C, and double the interval time between doses 
between 30°C and 35°C.
Markers of futility include: obvious lethal injury, prolonged asphyxia 
(mouthful of snow etc.), incompressible thorax (distinct from a stiff chest 
which is common), frozen abdomen, or potassium > 12 mmol/L.
 12.4  With regards to freezing cold injury (frostbite), which of the 
following statements around management is correct?
A. The affected area should always be rewarmed immediately in 
the pre-hospital environment
B. Early amputation is the gold standard therapy
C. Rubbing of the area with direct application of heat pads to 
thaw the affected region is recommended
D. Analgesia is not required, freezing injuries are not painful
E. Aspirin 75–300 mg and ibuprofen 800 mg are recommended
Answer: E.
If concerned about the possibility of cold injury, immediate pre-hos-
pital treatment is to try to shelter from the environment, consume warm 
drinks, remove shoes, wet clothing and jewellery and re-dress in warm, 
dry clothing. If there is absolutely no risk of re-freezing then warming 
the area can be achieved by placing the area into a companion’s armpit 
or groin. Aspirin 75–300 mg and ibuprofen 800 mg are recommended. 
Do not rub the area and do not place heat sources directly onto 
the area. Evacuation for formal medical review should be obtained. 
Warmed areas need to be made non-load-bearing and therefore prior 
thought about extraction needs to be considered. Aloe vera gel has 
anti-prostaglandin effects and can be applied before application of a 
non-adherent dressing, splinting and elevation of the affected region.
Denitive warming involves placing the affected area into circulat-
ing water between 37°C and 42°C with small amounts of antiseptic 
for around an hour, avoiding contact with the sides of the container. 
Additional treatment involves uid replacement with warmed uids (due 
to cold diuresis), strong analgesia and blister care. Blisters may present 
as clear, cloudy or haemorrhagic. Blister management remains contro-
versial, with current evidence recommending débridement of all blisters 
in hospital (likely under a general anaesthetic), to improve wound heal-
ing. There is no evidence for prophylactic antibiotics and tetanus should 
be given following local protocols; frostbite wounds are not considered 
tetanus-prone.
 12.5  The most readily modiable physiological risk factor for the 
development of heat illness is:
A. Obesity
B. Hydration
C. Acclimatisation
D. Use of beta-blockers
E. Aerobic tness
Answer: B.
The 2019 Wilderness Medical Society heat illness guidelines identify 
hydration as the ‘most readily modiable physiologic risk factor’. Fluid 

[[p298]]
ingestion is also identied as the most effective approach to mitigate the 
rise in core temperature amongst athletes. Military guidelines recommend 
a 0.25 L/hr – 1.25 L/hr hydration strategy that varies for work rates (low/
medium/high/very high) at a given Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT).
 12.6 The denition of heat stroke is:
A. Mild swelling to the limbs during the rst few days of heat 
exposure due to increased plasma volume
B. Neurological impairment with core body temperature ≥ 40°C
C. A transient loss of consciousness in the context of heat expo-
sure with a relatively rapid return to normal function and baseline
D. It is an inability to continue an activity due to heat stress
E. Body spasms related to sodium loss
Answer: B.
Heat-related illness denes a spectrum of pathology from benign heat 
oedema to lethal heat stroke. The denition of heat stroke is: neurological 
impairment with core body temperature ≥ 40°C (rectal temperature is 
gold standard in a pre-hospital environment). Symptoms can involve a 
coarse muscle tremor, confusion, aggression and loss of consciousness. 
Sweating may be absent due to dehydration and failure of thermoregu-
latory mechanisms.
 12.7  You are working on an expedition in the Costa Rican jungle. The 
expedition leader asks you theoretically what the best cooling 
strategy is for patients with heat stroke. In your current location 
you only have access to cold water. You suggest:
A. Removing the patient into the shade
B. Calling for a helicopter to use the downwash from the blades
C. Forcing the patient to drink cold water
D. Spraying the patient with cool water and using a combination 
of evaporative and convective heat loss
E. Ice water immersion.
Answer: D.
A number of cooling strategies exist and their implementation will 
depend on what is feasible within each particular environment. Two 
meta-analyses have concluded that ice water immersion is the most 
effective treatment strategy, with cooling rates of 0.20°C–-0.35°C/min 
for iced water and 0.11°C/min for wet towels. Immersion is unlikely to be 
feasible in the wilderness environment and in many hospitals, with further 
consideration for the dangers of potentially immersing a patient with a 
reduced conscious level.
The placement of ice/cold packs in the axillae, groin and neck has 
been recommended as an easy method to use in the eld, but when 
compared with evaporative cooling in ve healthy subjects, cooling times 
were longest when the ice packs were used alone and shortest when 
both methods were used simultaneously. Evaporative cooling involves 
the removal of clothing, spraying tepid or cool water over the patient, and 
facilitating evaporation and convection with the use of a fan.
 12.8  You are working on an expedition on Mont Blanc and are 
asked to see a patient who at 3500 m has developed a wet 
cough with frothy sputum. The patient is tachycardic with 
a high respiratory rate and you hear bibasal crepitations in 
both lungs. The patient insists they have mild acute mountain 
sickness, which they have had previously, and wants to 
continue to summit. They have taken no prophylactic 
medications. What is the most appropriate plan?
A. The patient likely has high altitude pulmonary oedema and 
should immediately descend by at least 1000 m alongside 
giving high-ow oxygen
B. The patient is most likely correct and has mild acute mountain 
sickness and should be allowed to summit
C. The patient has high altitude cerebral oedema and should 
be given 8 mg of dexamethasone and then start to 
descend
D. The patient has no evidence of high altitude illness, and the 
ndings are consistent with normal physiological changes at 
altitude. No action is required
E. The patient has severe acute mountain sickness and should 
remain at their current altitude for 2–3 days
Answer: A.
HAPE is a life-threatening condition that usually occurs in the rst 4 days 
after ascent above 2500 m and is the leading cause of mortality from high 
altitude illness. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction causes alveolar capil-
lary stress failure and subsequent pulmonary hypertension. This results in 
capillary uid leak which is exacerbated by exercise and compounded by 
impaired epithelial sodium transport, normally essential for uid reabsorp-
tion. Initial symptoms include a dry cough, exertional dyspnoea and extreme 
fatigue. Later, the cough becomes wet with haemoptysis and orthopnoea. 
Tachycardia and tachypnoea occur at rest and crepitations may often be 
heard in both lung elds. Fever may also be present. There may be profound 
hypoxaemia and radiological evidence of diffuse alveolar oedema. HAPE 
may occur without the preceding signs of AMS, although around 50% of 
patients with HAPE have concurrent AMS and 14% have HACE.
Treatment is directed at reversal of hypoxia, with immediate descent 
(by a minimum of 1000 m) and oxygen administration targeting satura-
tions > 90%. A portable hyperbaric chamber should be used if descent 
is delayed. Prophylactically, nifedipine (60 mg modied release divided 
into 2–3 doses) should be given to reduce pulmonary arterial pressure, 
ideally 1 day preceding ascent and continued for a further 5 days.
 12.9  You are working in an Emergency Department and are asked 
to review a 17-year-old male patient who 1-hour prior aspirated 
some water whilst swimming in the sea and was rescued by 
members of the public who described initial panicking and 
respiratory impairment. The patient appears well, with normal 
observations. The most appropriate plan is:
A. The patient is suitable for discharge with no evidence of 
ongoing respiratory distress
B. The patient is suitable for discharge following a normal chest X-ray
C. The patient is suitable for discharge following 6–8 hours’ 
observation if his observations remain normal, with a normal 
chest X-ray ± normal arterial blood gas
D. The patient should be admitted for 72 hours to observe for 
delayed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
E. The patient does not need to be seen in an Emergency 
Department and should be discharged home without review
Answer: C.
Drowning is dened as ‘the process of experiencing respiratory impair-
ment from submersion/immersion in liquid’. Asymptomatic patients, with 
no respiratory compromise, a normal chest X-ray and normal arterial 
blood gas can be discharged home after 6–8 hours’ observation.
 12.10  You are on holiday on a beach and see a 50-year-old female 
swimmer in difculty. She is dragged from the water by a rst 
aider on scene and is currently lying on her back in the shallow 
water with small waves breaking over her. She is alert but is 
coughing frequently, with a fast respiratory rate. The rst aider 
does not wish to move the patient due to the risk of a cervical 
spine injury. The most appropriate plan is:
A. Assist the rst aider by applying cervical spine immobilisa-
tion and wait for an ambulance to arrive with a scoop

[[p299]]
B. Drag the patient up the beach out of the water to prevent 
further aspiration or development of hypothermia
C. Acknowledge the rst aider’s concern, but reassure that 
the risks are low (0.5%) for a cervical injury and it would be 
safest to ask the patient to move with help up the beach
D. Do nothing, the patient is clearly alert and breathing and no 
further intervention is required
E. Administer 5 rescue breaths, followed by raising the patient’s 
body above their head to allow for postural drainage of 
water from the lungs
Answer: C.
The safest option is to remove the patient from the water due to the 
ongoing risk of further aspiration and ongoing cooling with subsequent 
hypothermia. Risk of cervical spine injury is low (0.5%). Asking the 
patient if they are able to move up the beach with support is the most 
appropriate initial step. Postural drainage techniques are not recom-
mended, with no evidence of benet.

[[p300]]
Infectious disease
13
DH Dockrell
S Sundar
BJ Angus
Clinical examination of patients with infectious disease 262
Presenting problems in infectious diseases 264
Fever 264
Positive blood culture 270
Sepsis 271
Acute diarrhoea and vomiting 272
Infections acquired in the tropics 274
Infections in adolescence 278
Infections in pregnancy 279
Viral infections 279
Systemic viral infections with exanthem 279
Systemic viral infections without exanthem 283
Viral infections of the skin 290
Gastrointestinal viral infections 292
Respiratory viral infections 292
Viral infections with neurological involvement 298
Viral infections with rheumatological involvement 299
Prion diseases 299
Bacterial infections 299
Bacterial infections of the skin, soft tissues and bones 299
Systemic bacterial infections 303
Gastrointestinal bacterial infections 309
Respiratory bacterial infections 312
Bacterial infections with neurological involvement 314
Mycobacterial infections 314
Rickettsial and related intracellular bacterial infections 316
Chlamydial infections 319
Protozoal infections 319
Systemic protozoal infections 319
Leishmaniasis 326
Gastrointestinal protozoal infections 330
Infections caused by helminths 332
Intestinal human nematodes 332
Tissue-dwelling human nematodes 335
Zoonotic nematodes 337
Trematodes (ukes) 338
Cestodes (tapeworms) 340
Ectoparasites 342
Fungal infections 342
Supercial mycoses 343
Subcutaneous mycoses 344
Systemic mycoses 344

[[p301]]
262    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Clinical examination of patients with infectious disease 
Heart and lungs
Tachycardia, hypotension
Murmurs or prosthetic heart
sounds
Pericardial rub
Signs of consolidation
Pleural or pericardial effusion
Skin
Generalised erythema
Rash (see opposite)
IV injection track marks
Surgical scars
Prosthetic devices, e.g. central
venous catheters
Tattoos
Oropharynx
Dental caries
Tonsillar enlargement or exudate
Candidiasis
Hands and nails
Finger clubbing
Splinter haemorrhages
Janeway lesions
Signs of chronic liver disease
Vasculitis lesions
Head and neck
Lymphadenopathy
Parotidomegaly
Abnormal tympanic membranes
Chest X-ray consolidation
in pneumonia
Roth spots in
endocarditis
Testicular swelling
in adult mumps
Musculoskeletal
Joint swelling, erythema or
tenderness
Localised tender spine suggestive
of epidural abscesses or discitis
Draining sinus of
chronic osteomyelitis
Eyes
Conjunctival petechiae
Painful red eye in uveitis
Loss of red reflex in endophthalmitis
Roth spots in infective endocarditis
Haemorrhages and exudates
of cytomegalovirus retinitis
Choroidal lesions of tuberculosis
Streptococcal tonsillitis
Splinter haemorrhages
in endocarditis
Abdomen
Hepatosplenomegaly
Ascites
Renal angle tenderness
Localised tenderness or
guarding with decreased bowel
sounds, e.g. in left iliac fossa
with diverticulitis
Mass lesions
Surgical drains
Neurological
Neck stiffness
Photophobia
Delirium
Focal neurological signs
Genitalia and rectum
Ulceration or discharge
Testicular swelling or nodules
Inguinal lymphadenopathy
Prostatic tenderness
Rectal fluctuance
Observation
 Temperature
 Sweating
 Weight loss
 Respiratory distress
 Altered consciousness
 Pallor
 Jaundice
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2
1
3
10
9
7
4
5
6
8
Insets: (splinter haemorrhages) Courtesy of Dr Nick Beeching, Royal Liverpool University Hospital; (Roth spots) Courtesy of Prof. 
Ian Rennie, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld.
(A–C opposite) Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld.

[[p302]]
Clinical examination of patients with infectious disease     263
13
13
Fever
Documentation of fever
 ‘Feeling hot’ or sweaty does not necessarily  
signify fever – diagnosed only when a body 
temperature of over 38.0°C is recorded
 Axillary and aural measurement is less  
accurate than oral or rectal
 Outpatients may be trained to keep a  
temperature chart
Rigors
 Shivering (followed by excessive sweating)  
occurs with a rapid rise in body temperature  
from any cause
Night sweats
 Associated with particular infections (e.g.  
TB, infective endocarditis); sweating from  
any cause is worse at night
Excessive sweating
 Alcohol, anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, diabetes  
mellitus, acromegaly, lymphoma and excessive 
environmental heat all cause sweating without 
temperature elevation
Recurrent fever
 There are various causes, e.g. Borrelia  
recurrentis, bacterial abscess
Accompanying features
 Severe headache and photophobia, although 
characteristic of meningitis, may accompany other 
infections, including parameningeal infections such as 
sinusitis or mastoiditis
 Delirium during fever is more common in young 
children and older people
 Myalgia may occur with viral infections, such as 
inuenza, and with sepsis including meningococcal 
sepsis
 Shock may accompany severe infections and sepsis 
History-taking in suspected infectious disease*
Presenting complaint
 Diverse manifestations of infectious disease  
make accurate assessment of features and  
duration critical; e.g. fever and cough lasting  
2 days imply an acute respiratory tract infection  
but raise suspicion of TB if they last 2 months
Review of systems
 Must be comprehensive
Past medical history
 Dene the ‘host’, comorbidities and likelihood of 
infection(s)
 Include surgical and dental procedures involving 
prosthetic materials
 Document previous infections and antimicrobial-
resistant infections
Medication history
 Include non-prescription drugs, use of  
antimicrobials and immunosuppressants
 Identify medicines that interact with  
antimicrobials or that may cause fever
Allergy history
 Esp. to antimicrobials, noting allergic manifestation 
(e.g. rash versus anaphylaxis)
Family and contact history
 Note infections and their duration
 Sensitively explore exposure to key infections,  
e.g. TB and HIV
Travel history
 Include countries visited and where previously 
resident (relevant to exposure and likely  
vaccination history, e.g. likelihood of BCG  
vaccination in childhood)
Occupation
 e.g. Anthrax in leather tannery workers
Recreational pursuits
 e.g. Leptospirosis in canoeists and windsurfers
Animal exposures
 Include pets, e.g. dogs/hydatid disease
Dietary history
 Consider under-cooked meats, shellsh, 
unpasteurised dairy products or well water
 Establish who else was exposed, e.g. to food-borne 
pathogens
History of intravenous drug injection or receipt of 
blood products
 Risks for blood-borne viruses, e.g. HIV-1, HBV and 
HCV
Sexual history
 Explore in a condential manner (Ch. 15); remember 
HIV-1 transmission is most frequently heterosexual 
(Ch. 14)
Vaccination history and use of prophylactic 
medicines
 Consider occupation- or age-related vaccines
 In a traveller or infection-predisposed patient, 
establish adherence to prophylaxis 
Skin lesions in infectious diseases
 Migrating erythema, e.g. enlarging rash of erythema 
migrans in Lyme disease (see Fig. 13.24)
 Macular or papular rashes, e.g. primary infection with 
HIV (see Box 14.9)
 Erythema multiforme (see Fig. 27.54 and Box 27.33)
 Nodules or plaques, e.g. Kaposi’s sarcoma
Box 27.34)
D
Erythema nodosum.
Meningococcal sepsis.
B
Shingles.
C
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus)
*Always consider non-infectious aetiologies in the differential diagnosis. (HBV/HCV = hepatitis B/C virus; HIV-1 = human immunodeciency virus-1; TB = tuberculosis)
A
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome.
1

[[p303]]
264    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
The principles of infection and its investigation and therapy are described 
in Chapter 6. This chapter and the following ones on human immunode-
ciency virus/acquired immunodeciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and sex-
ually transmitted infection (STI) describe the approach to patients with 
potential infectious disease, the individual infections and the resulting 
syndromes.
Presenting problems in infectious diseases 
Infectious diseases present with myriad clinical manifestations. Many of 
these are described in other chapters.
Fever 
‘Fever’ implies an elevated core body temperature of more than 38.0°C. 
Fever is a response to cytokines and acute phase proteins (pp. 62 and 
67), and occurs both in infections and non-infectious conditions.
Clinical assessment 
The differential diagnosis is broad so clinical features are used to guide 
the most appropriate investigations. The systematic approach described 
in this chapter should be followed. Box 13.1 describes the assessment 
of older patients.
Investigations 
If the clinical features do not suggest a specic infection, then initial investi-
gations should include:
 a full blood count (FBC) with differential, including eosinophil count
 urea and electrolytes, liver function tests (LFTs), blood glucose and 
muscle enzymes
 inammatory markers: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 
C-reactive protein (CRP) and/or procalcitonin (PCT) (depending on 
local use and availability)
 an HIV-1 antigen/antibody test
 autoantibodies, including antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
 chest X-ray and electrocardiogram (ECG)
 urinalysis and urine culture
 blood culture
 throat swab for culture or respiratory pathogen nucleic acid detec-
tion (usually by polymerase chain reaction (PCR))
 other specimens, as indicated by history and examination, e.g. 
wound swab; sputum culture; stool culture, microscopy for ova and 
parasites, and Clostridioides difcile toxin assay
 specic tests and their priority, indicated by geographical location: 
malaria lms on three consecutive days or a malaria rapid diagnostic 
test (RDT), a test for non-structural protein 1 (NS1) in dengue (antigen 
detection) and blood cultures for Salmonella Typhi, as well as abdom-
inal ultrasound, would be standard initial tests in many areas where 
these infections are prevalent.
Subsequent investigations in patients with HIV-related, nosocomial or 
travel-related pyrexia, immunocompromised patients and patients with 
clinical features suggesting infection in the respiratory, gastrointestinal or 
neurological systems are described elsewhere.
Management 
Fever and its associated systemic symptoms can be treated with par-
acetamol, and tepid sponging to cool the skin. Replacement of salt and 
water is important in patients with drenching sweats. Further manage-
ment is focused on the underlying cause.
Fever with localising symptoms or signs 
In most patients, the site of infection is apparent after clinical evaluation, 
and the likelihood of infection is reinforced by investigation results (e.g. 
neutrophilia with raised CRP in bacterial infections). Not all apparently 
localising symptoms are reliable, however; headache, breathlessness 
and diarrhoea can occur in systemic infection, such as sepsis or malaria, 
without localised infection in the central nervous system (CNS), respira-
tory tract or gastrointestinal tract. Abdominal pain may be a feature of 
basal pneumonia. Careful interpretation of the clinical features is vital 
(e.g. severe headache associated with photophobia, rash and neck stiff-
ness suggests meningitis, whereas moderate headache with cough and 
rhinorrhoea is consistent with a viral upper respiratory tract infection).
Common infections that present with fever are shown in Figure 13.1. 
Further investigation and management are specic to the cause, but may 
include empirical antimicrobial therapy (Fig. 6.15) pending conrmation 
of the microbiological diagnosis.
Pyrexia of unknown origin 
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) was classically dened as a tempera-
ture above 38.0°C on multiple occasions for more than 3 weeks, without 
diagnosis, despite initial investigation in hospital for 1 week. The deni-
tion has been relaxed to allow for investigation over 3 days of inpatient 
care, three outpatient visits or 1 week of intensive ambulatory investiga-
tion. Subsets of PUO are described as HIV-1 related, immune-decient 
or nosocomial.
Clinical assessment 
Major causes of PUO are outlined in Box 13.2. Periodic fever syndromes 
are rare causes that should be considered in those with a family history. 
Children and younger adults are more likely to have infectious causes. 
Older adults are more likely to have certain infectious and non-infectious 
causes (see Box 13.1). Detailed history and examination should be 
repeated at regular intervals to detect emerging features (e.g. rashes, 
signs of infective endocarditis or features of vasculitis). In men, the pros-
tate should be considered as a potential source of infection.
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility of factitious fever, in which 
high temperature recordings are engineered by the patient (Box 13.3).
Investigations 
If initial investigations are negative, further microbiological and non-
microbiological investigations should be considered (Boxes 13.4 and 13.5). 
As with initial investigation of fever described above, the prioritisation of 
tests will be inuenced by the geographical location of potential exposure 
to pathogens (see Box 13.4). These will usually include:
 induced sputum or other specimens for mycobacterial stains and culture
 serological tests, including an HIV test and ferritin estimation
 imaging of the abdomen by ultrasonography or computerised 
tomography (CT)
 echocardiography.
Lesions identied on imaging should usually be biopsied in order 
to seek evidence of relevant pathogens by culture, histopathology or 
13.1  Fever in old age
 Temperature measurement: fever may be missed because oral temperatures 
are unreliable. Rectal measurement may be needed but core temperature is 
increasingly measured using eardrum reectance.
 Delirium: common with fever, especially in those with underlying 
cerebrovascular disease or dementia.
 Prominent causes of pyrexia of unknown origin: include tuberculosis and intra-
abdominal abscesses, complicated urinary tract infection and infective endocarditis. 
Non-infective causes include polymyalgia rheumatica/temporal arteritis and 
tumours. A smaller fraction of cases remain undiagnosed than in young people.
 Diagnostic pitfalls: conditions such as stroke or thromboembolic disease 
can cause fever but every effort must be made to exclude concomitant 
infection.
 Common infectious diseases in the very frail (e.g. nursing home residents): 
pneumonia, urinary tract infection, soft tissue infection and gastroenteritis.

[[p304]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     265
13
Meningitis
Endophthalmitis
Encephalitis
Brain abscess
Neurosurgical
infection
MRI with
enhancement
of the temporal
lobe in herpes
simplex
encephalitis
Chest X-ray
from a patient
with pulmonary
tuberculosis
CT thorax in
empyema
Cellulitis of the leg
Tuberculous
osteomyelitis of
the lower tibia
CT abdomen
showing a
pyogenic
liver abscess
CT abdomen
showing a
diverticular
abscess
Liver abscess
Pancreatic
abscess
Hepatitis
Biliary infection
Pyelonephritis
Diverticulitis
Peritonitis
Tubulo-ovarian
abscess
Appendiceal
abscess
Cellulitis
Impetigo
Erysipelas
Subcutaneous fat
Deeper fascial planes
Necrotising
fasciitis
Muscle
Epidermis
Dermis
Pyomyositis
Bone
Osteomyelitis
Colitis
Sinusitis
Pharyngitis
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Empyema
Lung abscess
Fig. 13.1 Common infectious syndromes presenting with fever and localised features. Major causes are grouped by approximate anatomical location and include central 
nervous system infection; respiratory tract infections; abdominal, pelvic or urinary tract infections; and skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) or osteomyelitis. For each site of 
infection, particular syndromes and their common causes are described elsewhere in the book. The causative organisms vary, depending on host factors, which include whether 
the patient has lived in or visited a tropical country or particular geographical location, has acquired the infection in a health-care environment or is immunocompromised. 
Insets (cellulitis of the leg) Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld; (pulmonary tuberculosis) Courtesy of Dr Ann Chapman, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, 
Shefeld; (empyema, pyogenic liver abscess, diverticular abscess, tuberculous osteomyelitis) Courtesy of Dr Robert Peck, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld.
nucleic acid detection. Particularly in patients who have received prior 
antimicrobials, 16 S rRNA analysis (Box 6.2) may aid diagnosis if a 
microorganism is not cultured. The chance of a successful diagnosis is 
greatest if procedures for obtaining and transporting the correct sam-
ples in the appropriate media are carefully planned between the clinical 
team, the radiologist or surgeon performing the procedure, and the local 
microbiologist and histopathologist. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron 
emission tomography (PET) scans may aid diagnosis of vasculitis or help 
selection of biopsy sites. Liver biopsy may be justied – for example, 
to identify idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis – if there are biochemical 
or radiological abnormalities. Bone marrow biopsies have a diagnostic 
yield of up to 15%, most often revealing haematological malignancy, 
myelodysplasia or tuberculosis, and also identifying brucellosis, typhoid 
fever or visceral leishmaniasis. Bone marrow should be sent for culture, 
as well as microscopy. Laparoscopy is occasionally undertaken with 
biopsy of abnormal tissues. Splenic aspiration in specialist centres is the 
diagnostic test of choice for suspected visceral leishmaniasis. Diagnostic 
tests for giant cell arteritis should be considered in patients over the 
age of 50 years, even in the absence of physical signs or a raised ESR. 
‘Blind’ biopsy of other structures in the absence of localising signs or 
laboratory or radiology results is unhelpful.
Prognosis 
No cause is found in up to one-half of PUO cases, but as long as there 
is no signicant weight loss or signs of another disease, the long-term 
mortality is low.
Fever in the injection drug-user 
Intravenous injection of recreational drugs is a global problem. Infective 
organisms are introduced by non-sterile (often shared) injection equipment 
(see Fig. 13.2). Approximately 50% of people who inject drugs (PWID) 
report a recent bacterial infection, with Streptococcus pyogenes (group A 
ß-haemolytic streptococci) and Staphylococcus aureus infections increas-
ing in particular. Risk factors for these infections include increasing age, 
homelessness and injection in prison. The risks increase with prolonged 
drug use and injection into large veins of the groin and neck necessitated 
by progressive thrombosis of supercial peripheral veins. The most com-
mon causes of fever are soft tissue or respiratory infections.

[[p305]]
266    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
13.3  Clues to the diagnosis of factitious fever
 A patient who looks well
 Bizarre temperature chart with absence of diurnal variation and/or temperature-
related changes in pulse rate
 Temperature > 41°C
 Absence of sweating during defervescence
 Normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein despite high fever
 Evidence of self-injection or self-harm
 Normal temperature during supervised (observed) measurement
 Infection with multiple commensal organisms (e.g. enteric or mouth ora)
13.2  Aetiology of pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)
Infections (~30%)
Specic locations
 Abscesses: hepatobiliary, diverticular, urinary tract (including prostate),  
pulmonary, CNS
 Infections of oral cavity (including dental), head and neck (including  
sinuses)
 Bone and joint infections
 Infective endocarditis
Specic organisms
 TB (particularly extrapulmonary)*
 HIV-1 infection
 Other viral infections: cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
 Fungal infections (e.g. Aspergillus spp., Candida spp. or dimorphic fungi)
 Infections with fastidious organisms (e.g. Bartonella spp., Tropheryma  
whipplei)
Specic patient groups
 Recently spent time in a region with geographically restricted infection:
 Malaria*, dengue, rickettsial infections, Brucella spp., amoebic liver 
abscess, enteric fevers (Africa, Asia, Oceania, Central and South America), 
Leishmania spp. (southern Europe, India, Africa and Latin America), 
Burkholderia pseudomallei (South-east Asia), Middle East respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV; Arabian Peninsula)
 Residence in or travel to a region with endemic infection:
 TB* (Africa, Asia, Central and South America), extensively drug-resistant 
TB (XDR-TB; South Africa), Brucella spp. (Africa, Asia, Central and South 
America), HIV-1 (Africa, Asia), Trypanosoma cruzi (Central and South 
America)
 Nosocomial infections:
 Pneumonia*, infections related to prosthetic materials and surgical 
procedures, urinary tract infections, central venous catheter infections
 HIV-positive individuals:
 Acute retroviral syndrome
 AIDS-dening infections (disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex 
(DMAC), Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, CMV and others)
Malignancy (~20%)
Haematological malignancy
 Lymphoma*, leukaemia and myeloma
Solid tumours
 Renal, liver, colon, stomach, pancreas
Connective tissue disorders (~15%)
Older adults
 Temporal arteritis/polymyalgia rheumatica*
Younger adults
 Still’s disease (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis)*
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
 Vasculitic disorders, including polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid disease with 
vasculitis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegener’s 
granulomatosis)
 Polymyositis
 Behçet’s disease
 Rheumatic fever (in regions where still endemic, e.g. Asia, Oceania and parts of 
Africa)
Miscellaneous (~20%)
Cardiovascular
 Atrial myxoma, aortitis, aortic dissection
Respiratory
 Sarcoidosis, pulmonary embolism and other thromboembolic disease, extrinsic 
allergic alveolitis
Gastrointestinal
 Inammatory bowel disease, granulomatous hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease, 
pancreatitis
Endocrine/metabolic
 Thyrotoxicosis, thyroiditis, hypothalamic lesions, phaeochromocytoma, adrenal 
insufciency, hypertriglyceridaemia
Haematological
 Haemolytic anaemia, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura, myeloproliferative disorders, Castleman’s disease, graft-
versus-host disease (after allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation)
Inherited
 Familial Mediterranean fever and periodic fever syndromes
Drug reactions*
 e.g. Antibiotic fever, drug hypersensitivity reactions etc.
Factitious fever
Idiopathic (~15%)
*Most common causes within each group. (AIDS = acquired immunodeciency syndrome; CNS = central nervous system; HIV-1 = human immunodeciency virus-1; TB = tuberculosis;  
XDR = extensively drug-resistant)
Clinical assessment 
The history should address the following risk factors:
 Site of injection. Femoral vein injection is associated with vascular 
complications such as deep venous thrombosis (DVT; 50% of which 
are septic) and accidental arterial injection with false aneurysm 
formation or a compartment syndrome due to swelling within the 
fascial sheath. Local complications include ilio-psoas abscess, 
and septic arthritis of the hip joint or sacroiliac joint. Injection of the 
jugular vein can be associated with cerebrovascular complications. 
Subcutaneous and intramuscular injection has been related to infec-
tion by clostridial species, the spores of which contaminate heroin. 
Clostridium novyi causes a local lesion with signicant toxin produc-
tion, leading to shock and multi-organ failure. Tetanus, wound botu-
lism, anthrax and gas gangrene also occur.
 Technical details of injection. Sharing of needles and other inject-
ing paraphernalia (including spoons and filters) increases the risk 
of blood-borne virus infection (e.g. HIV-1, hepatitis B or C virus). 
Some users lubricate their needles by licking them prior to injec-
tion, thus introducing mouth organisms (e.g. anaerobic strepto-
cocci, Fusobacterium spp. and Prevotella spp.). Contamination 
of commercially available lemon juice, used to dissolve heroin 
before injection, has been associated with blood-stream infec-
tion with Candida spp. Excessive use of citric acid to dissolve 
heroin is associated with DVT and skin and soft tissue 
infection.
 Substances injected. Injection of cocaine is associated with a 
variety of vascular complications. Psychoactive drugs increase 
risk taking and bacterial infections. Certain formulations of heroin 
have been linked with particular infections, e.g. wound botulism 
with black tar heroin. Drugs are often mixed with other subs-
tances, e.g. talc.

[[p306]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     267
13
13.4 Microbiological investigation of pyrexia of unknown origin1
Location-independent investigations
Microscopy
 Blood for atypical lymphocytes (EBV, CMV, HIV-1, hepatitis viruses or Toxoplasma 
gondii)
 Respiratory samples for mycobacteria and fungi
 Stool for ova, cysts and parasites
 Biopsy for light microscopy (bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi) and/or electron 
microscopy (viruses, protozoa (e.g. microsporidia) and other fastidious organisms 
(e.g. Tropheryma whipplei))
 Urine for white or red blood cells and mycobacteria (early morning urine ×3)
Culture
 Aspirates and biopsies (e.g. joint, deep abscess, débrided tissues)
 Blood, including prolonged culture and special media conditions
 Sputum for mycobacteria
 CSF
 Gastric aspirate for mycobacteria
 Stool
 Swabs
 Urine ± prostatic massage in older men
Antigen detection
 Blood, e.g. HIV p24 antigen (usually combined with an antibody test), cryptococcal 
antigen, Aspergillus galactomannan ELISA and (1,3)-β-D-glucan (for fungi other 
than mucoraceous moulds and Cryptococcus)
 CSF for cryptococcal antigen
 Bronchoalveolar lavage uid for Aspergillus galactomannan
 Nasopharyngeal aspirate/throat swab for respiratory viruses, e.g. IAV or RSV
 Urine, e.g. for Legionella antigen
Nucleic acid detection
 Blood for Bartonella spp. and viruses
 CSF for viruses and key bacteria (meningococcus, pneumococcus, Listeria 
monocytogenes)
 Nasopharyngeal aspirate/throat swab for respiratory viruses
 Sputum for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and rifampicin (RIF) resistance with 
geneXpert MTB/RIF cartridge-based nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT)
 Bronchoalveolar lavage uid, e.g. for respiratory viruses
 Tissue specimens, e.g. for T. whipplei
 Urine, e.g. for Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae
 Stool, e.g. for norovirus, rotavirus
Immunological tests
 Serology (antibody detection) for viruses, including HIV-1, and some bacteria
 Interferon-gamma release assay for diagnosis of exposure to tuberculosis (but note 
this will not distinguish latent from active disease and can only be used to trigger 
further investigations of active disease)
Geographically restricted tests2
Microscopy
 Blood for trypanosomiasis, malaria and Borrelia spp.
 Stool for geographically restricted ova, cysts and parasites
 Biopsy for light microscopy (dimorphic fungi, Leishmania spp. and other parasites)
 Urine for red blood cells and schistosome ova
Antigen detection
 Blood, e.g. dengue virus NS1 antigen, Histoplasma antigen (restricted availability) 
and malaria antigen (e.g. HRP-2 for Plasmodium falciparum or parasite-specic 
LDH for P. falciparum and P. vivax)
Nucleic acid detection
 Blood for causes of viral haemorrhagic fever
 CSF for geographically restricted viruses, e.g. Japanese encephalitis virus
 Nasopharyngeal aspirate/throat swab or bronchoalveolar lavage uid for 
geographically restricted respiratory viruses, e.g. MERS-CoV
Immunological tests
 Serology (antibody detection) for viruses, dimorphic fungi and protozoa
1This list does not apply to every patient with a pyrexia of unknown origin. Appropriate tests should be selected in a stepwise manner, according to specic predisposing factors, epidemiological 
exposures and local availability, and should be discussed with a microbiologist.  2Addition of these tests should be guided by the location of presentation or travel history. 
(CMV = cytomegalovirus; CSF = cerebrospinal uid; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HIV-1 = human immunodeciency virus-1; HRP-2 = histidine-rich 
protein 2; IAV = inuenza A virus; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; MERS-CoV = Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus; NS1 = non-structural 1; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus)
13.5 Additional investigations to be considered in pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)
 Serological tests for connective tissue disorders:
Autoantibody screen
Complement levels
Immunoglobulins
Cryoglobulins
 Ferritin
 Echocardiography
 Ultrasound of abdomen
 CT/MRI of thorax, abdomen and/or brain
 Imaging of the skeletal system:
Plain X-rays
CT/MRI spine
Isotope bone scan
 Labelled white cell scan
 Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT)
 Biopsy:
Bronchoscopy and lavage ± transbronchial biopsy
Lymph node aspirate or biopsy
Biopsy of radiological lesion
Biopsy of liver
Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy
Lumbar puncture
Laparoscopy and biopsy
Temporal artery biopsy
 Blood-borne virus status. Results of previous HIV-1 and hepatitis 
virus tests or vaccinations for hepatitis viruses should be recorded.
 Surreptitious use of antimicrobials. Addicts may use antimicrobials 
to self-treat infections, masking initial blood culture results.
Key ndings on clinical examination are shown in Figure 13.2. It can 
be difcult to distinguish the effects of infection from the effects of drugs 
or drug withdrawal (excitement, tachycardia, sweating, marked myalgia, 
delirium). Stupor and delirium may result from drug administration but 
may also indicate meningitis or encephalitis. Non-infected venous throm-
boembolism is also common in this group.
Investigations 
The initial investigations are as for any fever (see above), including a 
chest X-ray and blood cultures. Since blood sampling may be difcult, 
contamination is often a problem. Echocardiography (transthoracic or 
transoesophageal) to detect infective endocarditis should be performed 
in all injection drug-users with bacteraemia due to Staph. aureus or 
other organisms associated with endocarditis (Fig. 13.3A); thrombo-
embolic phenomena; or a new or previously undocumented murmur. 
Endovascular infection should also be suspected if lung abscesses or 
pneumatoceles are detected radiologically. Infected thrombus at injec-
tion sites, such as the groin, is common and may lead to abscess 

[[p307]]
268    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
formation. Additional imaging should be focused on sites of injection or 
of localising symptoms (Fig. 13.3B). Any pathological uid collections 
should be sampled.
Urinary toxicology tests may suggest a non-infectious cause of the 
presenting complaint. While being investigated, all injection drug-users 
should be tested for infection with hepatitis B and C virus and HIV-1.
Injection drug-users may have more than one infection. Skin and soft 
tissue infections are most often due to Staph. aureus or streptococci, 
and sometimes to Clostridium spp. or anaerobes. Pulmonary infec-
tions are most often due to the common pathogens causing commu-
nity-acquired pneumonia, tuberculosis or septic emboli (Fig. 13.3C). 
Endocarditis with septic emboli commonly involves Staph. aureus and 
viridans streptococci, but Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida spp. 
are also encountered.
Management 
Empirical therapy of fever in the injection drug-user includes an anti-
staphylococcal penicillin (e.g. ucloxacillin) or, where meticillin-resistant 
Staph. aureus (MRSA) is prevalent, a glycopeptide (e.g. vancomycin) or 
lipopeptide (e.g. daptomycin). Once microbiological results are available, 
therapy can be narrowed to focus on the microorganism identied. In 
injection drug-users, meticillin-sensitive Staph. aureus is customar-
ily treated with high-dose intravenous (IV) ucloxacillin, with a 2-week 
duration for uncomplicated right-sided endocarditis. Right-sided endo-
carditis caused by MRSA is usually treated with 4 weeks of vancomycin. 
Specialist advice should be sought.
For localised infections of the skin and soft tissues, oral ther-
apy with agents active against staphylococci, streptococci and 
anaerobes is appropriate (e.g. ucloxacillin or clindamycin). Non-
adherence to prescribed antimicrobial regimens leads to a high rate of 
complications.
Fever in the immunocompromised host 
Immunocompromised hosts include those with congenital immunode-
ciency, HIV infection and iatrogenic immunosuppression induced by 
chemotherapy, or immunosuppressant medicines, including high-dose 
glucocorticoids. Metabolic abnormalities, such as under-nutrition or 
hyperglycaemia, may also contribute. Multiple elements of the immune 
system are potentially compromised. A patient may have impaired 
Hands and nails
Splinter haemorrhages
Signs of chronic liver disease
Oropharynx
Dental infections
Oropharyngeal candidiasis or
other signs of HIV-1 infection
Skin and soft tissues (any site)
Cellulitis
Purulent drainage
Abscesses
Ulcers
Bullae or extreme pain suggestive
of necrotising fasciitis
Optic fundi
Roth spots
Candidal cotton wool spots
Nervous system
Signs of drug intoxication
Encephalopathy
Signs of meningitis
Focal neurological features or
seizures in septic embolism/
mycotic aneurysm/abscess
Cranial nerve palsies of botulism
Trismus, muscle rigidity or
spasms in tetanus
Localised pain over vertebrae with
epidural abscess
Cardiovascular system
Systolic ‘V’ waves in JVP of
tricuspid regurgitation (Ch. 16)
Regurgitant murmurs in
endocarditis
Respiratory system
Consolidation in pneumonia
Upper lobe signs in tuberculosis
Pleural rub with septic
pulmonary emboli
Abdomen
Jaundice ± tender liver edge
with hepatitis
Pain in left upper quadrant with
splenic abscess
Bone and joints
Osteomyelitis
Septic arthritis
Injection sites
Abscesses
Fistula
Haematoma
Pseudoaneurysm
Femoral stretch test
Passive extension of the hip
joint causes pain and reflex
muscle spasm in ilio-psoas
abscess
Legs
Signs of DVT
Vasculitis or ischaemic signs of
septic emboli, endocarditis or
vasospasm
Compartment syndrome
Hip flexor spasm in an
injection drug-user with
ilio-psoas abscess
Skin abscesses in an
injection drug-user
Sharing injecting
equipment may transmit
blood-borne viruses
Observation
1
4
2
3
5
11
10
9
8
6
7
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Fig. 13.2 Fever in the injection drug-user: key features of clinical examination. Full examination is required but features most common amongst injection drug-users are 
shown here. (DVT = deep venous thrombosis; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; JVP = jugular venous pulse)

[[p308]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     269
13
neutrophil function from chemotherapy, impaired T-cell and/or B-cell 
responses due to underlying malignancy, T-cell and phagocytosis defects 
due to glucocorticoids, mucositis from chemotherapy and an impaired 
skin barrier due to insertion of a central venous catheter.
Fever may result from infectious or non-infectious causes, includ-
ing drugs, vasculitis, neoplasm, lymphoproliferative disease, graft-
versus-host disease (in recipients of haematopoietic stem cell transplants 
(HSCT)), organising pneumonitis or Sweet syndrome (reddish nodules or 
plaques with fever and leucocytosis, in association with haematological 
malignancy).
Although many infections in immunocompromised patients are caused 
by common organisms they may also be infected with organisms that 
cause infection in the non-immunocompromised host rarely, or not at all 
(opportunistic pathogens/opportunistic infections).
Clinical assessment 
The following should be addressed in the history:
 identication of the immunosuppressant factors and nature of the 
immune defect
 any past infections and their treatment, including antimicrobial- 
resistant or recurrent infections
 epidemiological risk factors increasing exposure to infections, 
including opportunistic infections that would not cause disease in an 
immunocompetent host
 prophylactic medicines and vaccinations administered.
Examination should include inspection of the skin, any central venous 
catheters, the mouth, sinuses, ears and perianal area (digital rectal 
examination should be avoided). Disseminated infections can manifest 
as cutaneous lesions. The areas around ngernails and toenails should 
also be inspected closely.
Investigations 
Initial screening tests are as described above. Immunocompromised 
hosts often have decreased inammatory responses leading to attenua-
tion of physical signs, such as neck stiffness with meningitis, radiological 
features and laboratory ndings, such as leucocytosis. Chest CT scan 
should be considered in addition to chest X-ray when respiratory symp-
toms occur. Abdominal imaging may also be warranted, particularly if 
there is right lower quadrant pain, which may indicate typhlitis (inamma-
tion of the caecum) in neutropenic patients. Blood cultures from a central 
venous catheter, urine cultures and stool cultures if diarrhoea is present 
are also recommended.
Nasopharyngeal aspirates are sometimes diagnostic, as immuno-
compromised hosts may shed respiratory viruses for prolonged periods. 
Skin lesions should be biopsied if nodules are present, and investigation 
should include fungal stains. Useful molecular techniques include PCR 
for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Aspergillus spp. DNA. Antigen assays 
that may be used include blood tests for cryptococcal antigen (CrAg), 
Aspergillus galactomannan, (1,3)-β-D-glucan (for Pneumocystis jirovecii
and fungi other than Cryptococcus spp. and mucoraceous moulds) and 
a urine test for Legionella pneumophila type 1. Antibody detection is 
rarely useful in immunocompromised patients. Patients with respiratory 
signs or symptoms should be considered for bronchoalveolar lavage to 
detect Pneumocystis jirovecii, other fungi, bacteria and viruses.
Neutropenic fever 
Patients with neutropenia are highly susceptible to bacterial and fun-
gal infection, the risk of which increases progressively as the neutro-
phil count drops below 1.0 × 109/L. Gram-positive organisms are the 
most common pathogens, particularly in association with in-dwelling 
catheters. There is no universal denition of neutropenic fever, but most 
authorities dene neutropenia as a neutrophil count of <0.5 × 109/L 
(p. 935) and fever as a single measurement >38.5°C or sustained tem-
perature >38°C.
Empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy is commenced when 
cultures have been obtained. The most common regimens for neutropenic 
fever are broad-spectrum penicillins, e.g. piperacillin–tazobactam. The 
routine addition of aminoglycosides to these agents is not supported by 
trial data. If fever has not resolved after 3–5 days, empirical antifungal ther-
apy (e.g. caspofungin) is added (p. 122). An alternative antifungal strategy 
is to use azole prophylaxis in high-risk patients and markers of early fungal 
infection, such as galactomannan, (1,3)-β-D-glucan and/or fungal PCR, to 
guide initiation of antifungal treatment (a ‘pre-emptive approach’).
Post-transplantation fever 
Fever in transplant recipients may be due to infection, episodes of graft 
rejection in solid organ transplant recipients, or graft-versus-host disease 
following haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Infections in solid organ transplant recipients are grouped according to 
the time of onset (Box 13.6). Those in the rst month are mostly related to 
the underlying condition or surgical complications. Those occurring 1–6 
months after transplantation are characteristic of impaired T-cell function. 
Risk factors for CMV infection have been identied; patients commonly 
receive either prophylaxis or intensive monitoring involving regular test-
ing for CMV DNA by PCR and early initiation of anti-CMV therapy using 
A
B
A
B
C
Fig. 13.3 
joint (arrow A) (note the erosion of the bony surfaces at the sternoclavicular joint) 
by Staph. aureus. Thoracic CT scan shows multiple embolic lesions with cavitation 
(arrows). The patient presented with haemoptysis. (C) Courtesy of Dr Julia Greig, 
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld

[[p309]]
270    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
intravenous ganciclovir or oral valganciclovir if tests become positive. 
Greater use of prophylactic regimens, despite reducing infections overall, 
is extending the period of risk so that some opportunistic infections, e.g. 
CMV, may be seen after this initial 6-month period.
Following HSCT, infections in the rst 4 weeks are more common in 
patients receiving a myeloablative-conditioning regimen (see Box 13.6). 
Later infections are more common if an allogeneic, as opposed to autol-
ogous, procedure is performed.
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is an Epstein–Barr 
virus (EBV)-associated lymphoma that can complicate transplantation, 
particularly when primary EBV infection occurs after transplantation.
Positive blood culture 
Blood-stream infection (BSI) is a frequent presentation of infection. 
This can be community-acquired or hospital-acquired (‘nosocomial’). 
Common causes are shown in Fig. 13.4. In immunocompromised hosts, 
a wider range of microorganisms may be isolated, e.g. fungi.
Primary BSI refers to cases in which an extravascular source of 
infection (e.g. pneumonia or urinary tract infection) is not identied, 
and is commonly caused by Staph. aureus. In community-acquired 
Staph. aureus bacteraemia, 20%–30% of cases are associated with 
infectious endocarditis and up to 10% are due to osteomyelitis. 
Peripheral and central venous catheters are an important source of 
nosocomial BSI.
BSI has an associated mortality of 15%–40%, depending on the set-
ting, host and microbial factors.
Clinical assessment 
The history should determine the setting in which BSI has occurred. 
Host factors predisposing to infection include skin disease, diabetes 
mellitus, injection drug use, the presence of a central venous, urinary or 
haemodialysis catheter, and surgical procedures, especially those involv-
ing the implantation of prosthetic materials (in particular, endovascular 
prostheses).
Physical examination should focus on signs of infective endocarditis 
(p. 462), evidence of bone (especially spinal) or joint infection (tender-
ness or restriction of movement), and abdominal or ank tenderness. 
Central venous catheters should be examined for erythema or purulence 
at the exit site. Particularly in cases with Candida spp. infection or sus-
pected infectious endocarditis, fundoscopy after pupil dilatation should 
be performed.
Investigations 
Positive blood cultures may be caused by contaminants. When isolated 
from only one bottle, or from all bottles from one venesection, coag-
ulase-negative staphylococci often represent contamination. Repeated 
isolation of coagulase-negative staphyloccoci, however, should raise 
suspicion of infective endocarditis or, in a patient with any form of pros-
thetic material, prosthesis infection. Viridans streptococci occasionally 
cause transient non-signicant bacteraemia or blood culture contamina-
tion but, in view of their association with infective endocarditis, signicant 
infection must always be excluded. Bacillus spp. (‘aerobic spore bear-
ers’) and Clostridium spp. often represent incidental transient bacterae-
mia or contamination, but certain species (e.g. C. septicum) are more 
likely to be genuine pathogens.
Further investigations are inuenced by the causative organism and set-
ting. Initial screening tests are similar to those for fever and should include 
chest X-ray, urine culture and, in many cases, ultrasound or other imaging 
of the abdomen. Imaging should also include any areas of bone or joint 
pain and any prosthetic material, e.g. a prosthetic joint or an aortic graft.
Echocardiography should be considered for those patients with BSI 
who have valvular heart disease or clinical features of endocarditis, those 
whose cultures reveal an organism that is a common cause of endocar-
ditis (e.g. Staph. aureus, viridans streptococci or enterococci), those in 
whom multiple blood cultures are positive for the same organism, and 
those with a rapid positive result on culture. The sensitivities of transtho-
racic echocardiography (TTE) and transoesophageal echocardiography 
(TOE) for the detection of vegetations are 50%–90% and over 95%, 
respectively. Therefore, if TTE is negative, TOE should be considered.
Certain rare causes of BSI have specic associations that warrant 
further investigation. Endocarditis caused by Streptococcus gallolyticus
subsp. gallolyticus (formerly Strep. bovis biotype I) and BSI with C. sep-
ticum are both associated with colonic carcinoma and should lead to 
appropriate investigation.
Management 
BSI is treated with antimicrobial therapy and, where possible, source 
control (surgical drainage, joint washout etc.). Two weeks of therapy 
may be sufcient for Staph. aureus BSI from central and peripheral 
venous catheter infections when the source is identied and removed, 
for uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections, and for uncomplicated 
right-sided infective endocarditis. Other Staph. aureus BSIs are usually 
treated for 4–6 weeks.
Staphylococcus
aureus including
MRSA
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Viridans
streptococci
Coagulase-negative
staphylococci
Enterococci,
including VRE
Candida spp.
Enterobacterales other
than E. coli
Predominantly community
acquired
Predominantly nosocomial
Beta-haemolytic
streptococci
Fig. 13.4 Common causes of blood-stream infection. Causes of community- 
and hospital-acquired blood-stream infection are subject to signicant regional and 
geographic location. (MRSA = meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; VRE = 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus spp )
13.6 Infections in transplant recipients
Time post-transplantation
Infections
Solid organ transplant recipients
0–1 month
Bacterial or fungal infections related 
to the underlying condition or surgical 
complications
1–6 months
CMV, other opportunistic infections 
(e.g. Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia)
>6 months
Bacterial pneumonia, other bacterial 
community-acquired infections, 
shingles, cryptococcal infection, PTLD
Myeloablative haematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients
Pre-engraftment (typically 0–4 
weeks)
Bacterial and fungal infections, 
respiratory viruses or HSV reactivation
Post-engraftment:
Early (<100 days)
CMV, Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia, moulds or other 
opportunistic infections
Late (>100 days)
Community-acquired bacterial 
infections, shingles, CMV, PTLD
(CMV = cytomegalovirus; HSV = herpes simplex virus; PTLD = post-transplant 
lymphoproliferative disorder)

[[p310]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     271
13
Central venous catheter infections 
Infections of central venous catheters typically involve the catheter lumen 
and are associated with fever, positive blood cultures and, in some 
cases, signs of purulence or exudate at the site of insertion. Infection 
is more common in temporary catheters inserted into the groin or jug-
ular vein than in those in the subclavian vein. Tunnelled catheters, e.g. 
Hickman catheters, may also develop tunnel site infections.
Staphylococci account for 70%–90% of catheter infections, with coag-
ulase-negative staphylococci more common than Staph. aureus. Other 
causes include enterococci and Gram-negative bacilli. Unusual Gram-
negative organisms, such as Citrobacter freundii and Pseudomonas 
uorescens, raise the possibility of non-sterile infusion equipment or infu-
sate. Candida spp. are a common cause of line infections, particularly in 
association with total parenteral nutrition. Non-tuberculous mycobacteria 
may cause tunnel infections.
Investigations and management 
In bacteraemic patients with fever and no other obvious source of infec-
tion, a catheter infection is likely. Local evidence of erythema, purulence 
or thrombophlebitis supports the diagnosis but microbiological conr-
mation is essential. If the line is removed a semi-quantitative culture of 
the tip may conrm the presence of 15 or more colony-forming units, but 
this technique is retrospective and does not detect luminal infection. If 
the catheter remains in place, paired blood cultures (with approximately 
equal volumes) should be taken through the catheter and from a periph-
eral vein. A differential time to positive culture of 2 hours or more, with 
the catheter sample coming up positive rst, suggests a luminal catheter 
infection.
For coagulase-negative staphylococcal line infections, the options 
are to remove the line and provide 5–7 days’ therapy or, particularly in 
the case of tunnelled catheters, to treat empirically with a glycopeptide 
antibiotic, e.g. vancomycin, with or without the use of antibiotic-contain-
ing lock therapy to the catheter for approximately 14 days. For Staph. 
aureus infection, the chance of curing an infection with the catheter in 
situ is low and the risks from infection are high. Therefore, unless the 
risks of catheter removal outweigh the benets, treatment involves cath-
eter removal, followed by 14 days of antimicrobial therapy; the same 
applies to infections with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida spp., atyp-
ical mycobacteria or Bacillus spp. Infections complicated by endocardi-
tis, thrombophlebitis, metastatic infection or tunnel infection also require 
catheter removal.
Infection prevention is a key component of the management of vascu-
lar catheters. Measures include strict attention to hand hygiene, optimal 
siting, full aseptic technique on insertion and subsequent interventions, 
skin antisepsis with chlorhexidine and isopropyl alcohol, daily assess-
ment of catheter sites (e.g. with visual infusion phlebitis (VIP) score; see 
Box 13.39), and daily consideration of the continuing requirement for 
catheterisation. The use of catheters impregnated with antimicrobials, 
such as chlorhexidine or silver, is advocated in some settings.
Sepsis 
Sepsis is discussed on page 198 and there are many causes (Box 13.7). 
The results of blood cultures and pre-existing host factors guide ini-
tial investigations. Patients who are immunocompromised may have a 
broader range of causal pathogens that may be harder to culture, includ-
ing mycobacteria and fungi. In many regions, malaria and dengue must 
also be excluded.
Severe skin and soft tissue infections 
Skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) are an important cause of sepsis. 
Cases can be classied as in Box 13.8, according to the clinical features 
and microbiological ndings. In some cases, severe systemic features 
may be out of keeping with mild local features.
13.7 Causes of sepsis
Infection
Setting
Bacterial
Staph. aureus, coagulase-negative 
staphylococci
Bacteraemia may be associated with 
endocarditis, intravascular cannula 
infection, or skin or bone foci
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Invasive pneumococcal disease, 
usually with pneumonia or 
meningitis; asplenia
Other streptococci
Invasive streptococcal disease, 
especially necrotising fasciitis
Viridans streptococci in neutropenic 
host with severe mucositis
Staphylococcal or streptococcal toxic 
shock syndrome
Toxin-mediated, blood cultures 
negative; clues include erythrodermic 
rash and epidemiological setting
Enterococci
Most often with abdominal focus
Neisseria meningitidis
Sepsis in children or young adults 
with petechial rash and/or meningitis
Escherichia coli, other  
Gram-negative bacteria
Urinary or biliary tract infection, or 
other abdominal infections
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative 
bacteraemia
Nosocomial infection
Salmonella Typhi or Paratyphi
In countries with a high incidence of 
enteric fever
Yersinia pestis
In plague
Burkholderia pseudomallei
Endemic in areas of Thailand; 
more likely to involve patients 
with diabetes mellitus or 
immunocompromised
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Associated with dog bites and 
asplenic individuals
Clostridioides difcile
Severe colitis, particularly in older 
adults
Polymicrobial infection with  
Gram-negatives and anaerobes
Bowel perforation, bowel ischaemia
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
M. avium complex (MAC)
HIV-positive or immunocompromised 
with miliary tuberculosis or 
disseminated MAC
Fungal
Candida spp.
Line infection or post-operative 
complication, nosocomial or 
immunocompromised host
Histoplasma capsulatum, other 
dimorphic fungi
Immunocompromised host
Parasitic
Falciparum malaria
Malaria with high-level parasitaemia 
and multi-organ failure or as 
a complication of bacterial 
superinfection
Babesia microti
Asplenic individual
Strongyloides stercoralis
hyperinfection syndrome
Gram-negative infection complicating 
Strongyloides infection in 
immunocompromised host
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus)
Necrotising fasciitis 
In necrotising fasciitis, cutaneous erythema and oedema progress to 
bullae or areas of necrosis. Unlike in cellulitis, pain may be dispropor-
tionate to the visible cutaneous features or may spread beyond the zone 
of erythema. The infection spreads quickly along the fascial plane. Type 
1 necrotising fasciitis is a mixed infection with Gram-negative bacteria 
and anaerobes, often seen post-operatively in diabetic or immunocom-
promised hosts. Subcutaneous gas may be present. Type 2 necrotis-
ing fasciitis is caused by group A or other streptococci. Approximately 

[[p311]]
272    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
60% of cases are associated with streptococcal toxic shock syndrome 
(p. 302). Type 3 infection involves organisms such as Aeromonas hydro-
phila and Vibrio vulnicus, which is found in tropical to subtropical regions 
and is associated with marine exposure. Type 4 is caused by fungi such 
as mucoraceous moulds and may also vary geographically in incidence, 
with recent reports of increased cases in India and other regions.
Necrotising fasciitis is a medical emergency, requiring immediate 
surgical débridement with inspection of the involved muscle groups, in 
addition to antimicrobial therapy (Fig. 13.5). Empirical treatment is with 
broad-spectrum agents (e.g. piperacillin–tazobactam plus clindamycin; 
meropenem with clindamycin). Ceftazidime or ciprooxacin with doxy-
cycline may be used where marine exposure is a factor, and antifungals 
for suspected fungal necrotising fasciitis, but it is important to combine 
these with effective coverage against streptococcal infection. MRSA-
associated necrotising fasciitis has emerged in some regions, where gly-
copeptides or linezolid should be added to the empirical regimen to cover 
MRSA until microbiological results allow focused therapy. Hyperbaric 
oxygen therapy may be considered for polymicrobial infection. Group A 
streptococcal infection is treated with benzylpenicillin plus clindamycin, 
and often immunoglobulin, though to date clinical trials have not pro-
vided clear evidence of the benet of immunoglobulin.
Gas gangrene 
Although Clostridium spp. may colonise or contaminate wounds, no 
action is required unless there is evidence of spreading infection.
Anaerobic cellulitis occurs when C. perfringens, or other clostridia, 
infect devitalised tissue, usually following a wound. Gas forms locally and 
extends along tissue planes but bacteraemia does not occur. Prompt 
surgical débridement of devitalised tissue and therapy with penicillin or 
clindamycin is usually effective.
Gas gangrene (clostridial myonecrosis) is dened as acute invasion 
of healthy living muscle undamaged by previous trauma, and is most 
commonly caused by C. perfringens. In at least 70% of cases it follows 
deep penetrating injury sufcient to create an anaerobic (ischaemic) 
environment, allowing clostridial proliferation. Severe pain at the site of 
the injury progresses rapidly over 18–24 hours. Skin colour changes 
from pallor to bronze/purple discoloration and the skin is tense, swollen, 
oedematous and exquisitely tender. Gas in tissues may be obvious, with 
crepitus on clinical examination, or visible on X-ray, CT or ultrasound. Signs 
of systemic toxicity develop rapidly, with high leucocytosis, multi-organ 
dysfunction, raised creatine kinase and evidence of disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation and haemolysis. Antibiotic therapy with high-dose 
intravenous penicillin and clindamycin is recommended, coupled with 
aggressive surgical débridement of the affected tissues. Alternative 
agents include cephalosporins and metronidazole. Hyperbaric oxygen 
has a putative but controversial role.
Other SSTIs 
‘Synergistic gangrene’ is a polymicrobial infection with anaerobes and 
other bacteria (Staph. aureus or Gram-negatives). When this affects 
the genital/perineal area, it is known as ‘Fournier’s gangrene’. Severe 
gangrenous cellulitis in immunocompromised hosts may involve Gram-
negative bacteria or fungi. Entamoeba histolytica can cause soft tissue 
necrosis following abdominal surgery in areas of the world where infec-
tion is common. Contact with sea water or shellsh consumption in trop-
ical to subtropical regions worldwide, such as the Gulf of Mexico, can 
lead to infection with Vibrio vulnicus. This infection causes soft tissue 
necrosis and bullae, and may lead to necrotising fasciitis. Patients with 
chronic liver disease are particularly susceptible to this infection and can 
develop sepsis.
Acute diarrhoea and vomiting
Acute diarrhoea, sometimes with vomiting, is the predominant symp-
tom in infective gastroenteritis (Box 13.9). Acute diarrhoea may also be 
a symptom of other infectious and non-infectious diseases (Box 13.10). 
Stress, whether psychological or physical, can also produce loose stools.
Global Burden of Disease 2016 estimates suggest acute diarrhoea 
causes 1.7 million deaths annually, a quarter in children under 5. In 
high-income countries older people are most susceptible (Box 13.11). 
The majority of episodes are due to infections spread by the faecal–oral 
route and transmitted either on fomites, on contaminated hands or in 
food or water. Provision of clean drinking water, appropriate disposal of 
human and animal sewage, and the application of simple principles of food 
hygiene all limit gastroenteritis (water, sanitation and hygiene – WASH).
Some organisms (Bacillus cereus, Staph. aureus and Vibrio cholerae) 
elute exotoxins that cause vomiting and/or so-called ‘secretory’ diar-
rhoea (watery diarrhoea without blood or faecal leucocytes, reecting 
13.8 Severe necrotising soft tissue infections
 Necrotising fasciitis (primarily conned to subcutaneous fascia and fat)
 Clostridial anaerobic cellulitis (conned to skin and subcutaneous tissue)
 Non-clostridial anaerobic cellulitis
 Progressive bacterial synergistic gangrene (Staph. aureus + micro-aerophilic 
streptococcus) (‘Meleney’s gangrene’, primarily conned to skin)
 Pyomyositis (discrete abscesses within individual muscle groups)
 Clostridial myonecrosis (gas gangrene)
 Anaerobic streptococcal myonecrosis (non-clostridial infection mimicking gas 
gangrene)
 Group A streptococcal necrotising myositis
Fig. 13.5 Excision following necrotising fasciitis in an injection drug-user.
13.9 Causes of infectious gastroenteritis
Toxin in food: <6 hrs incubation
 Bacillus cereus
 Staph. aureus
 Clostridium spp. enterotoxin
Bacterial: 12–72 hrs incubation
 Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(ETEC)
 Shiga toxin-producing E. coli
(EHEC)*
 Entero-invasive E. coli (EIEC)*
 Vibrio cholerae
 Salmonella
 Shigella*
 Campylobacter*
 Clostridioides difcile*
Viral: short incubation
 Rotavirus
 Norovirus
Protozoal: long incubation
 Giardiasis
 Cryptosporidiosis
 Microsporidiosis
 Amoebic dysentery*
 Cystoisosporiasis
*Associated with bloody diarrhoea.

[[p312]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     273
13
small bowel dysfunction). In general, the time from ingestion to the onset 
of symptoms is short and, other than dehydration, little systemic upset 
occurs. Other organisms, such as Shigella spp., Campylobacter spp. 
and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), may directly invade the 
mucosa of the small bowel or produce cytotoxins that cause mucosal 
ulceration, typically affecting the terminal small bowel and colon. The 
incubation period is longer and more systemic upset occurs, with 
prolonged bloody diarrhoea. Salmonella spp. are capable of invading 
enterocytes and of causing both a secretory response and invasive 
disease with systemic features. This is seen with Salmonella Typhi and 
Salmonella Paratyphi (enteric fever without diarrhoea), but may occa-
sionally be seen with other non-typhoidal Salmonella spp., particularly in 
the immunocompromised host and older people.
Clinical assessment 
The history should address foods ingested (Box 13.12), duration and 
frequency of diarrhoea, presence of blood or steatorrhoea, abdominal 
pain and tenesmus, and whether other people have been affected. Fever 
and bloody diarrhoea suggest an invasive, colitic, dysenteric process. An 
incubation period of less than 18  hours suggests toxin-mediated food 
poisoning, and longer than 5 days suggests diarrhoea caused by proto-
zoa or helminths. Person-to-person spread suggests infections, such as 
shigellosis or cholera.
Examination including assessment of the degree of dehydration such 
as thirst, headache, altered skin turgor, dry mucous membranes and 
postural hypotension, is important, particularly in tropical regions, where 
dehydration progresses rapidly. Signs of more marked dehydration 
include supine hypotension and tachycardia, decreased urinary output, 
delirium and sunken eyes. The blood pressure, pulse rate, urine output 
and ongoing stool losses should be monitored closely.
The severity of diarrhoea may be assessed by reference to the Bristol 
stool form scale (Bristol stool chart), which allows an objective assess-
ment of stool consistency by providing a verbal and visual reference 
scale (Fig. 13.6). The Bristol stool form scale guides (at least in UK hos-
pitals) decisions on stool sampling and infection prevention precautions 
in hospital inpatients, especially in relation to C. difcile
Investigations 
These include stool inspection for blood and microscopy for leucocytes, 
and also an examination for ova, cysts and parasites if the history indi-
cates residence or travel to areas where these infections are prevalent. 
Stool culture should be performed and C. difcile toxin sought. FBC and 
serum electrolytes indicate the degree of inammation and dehydration. 
Where cholera is prevalent, examination of a wet lm with dark-eld 
microscopy for darting motility aids diagnosis. In a malarious area, a 
blood lm for malaria parasites should be obtained. Blood and urine cul-
tures and a chest X-ray may identify alternative sites of infection, particu-
larly if the clinical features suggest a syndrome other than gastroenteritis.
Management 
All patients with acute, potentially infective diarrhoea should be appro-
priately isolated to minimise person-to-person spread of infection. If the 
history suggests a food-borne source, public health measures must be 
implemented to identify the source and to establish whether other linked 
cases exist.
Fluid replacement 
Replacement of uid losses in diarrhoeal illness is crucial and may be 
life-saving.
Normal daily uid intake in an adult is only 1–2 L, but there is consid-
erable additional uid movement in and out of the gut in secretions (see 
Fig. 23.7). Altered gut resorption with diarrhoea causes substantial iso-
tonic uid loss; up to 10–20 L per day in cholera. Water and electrolytes 
need to be replaced, but electrolyte absorption from the gut is an active 
13.10 Differential diagnosis of acute diarrhoea and vomiting
Infectious causes
 Gastroenteritis
 Clostridioides difcile infection
 Acute diverticulitis (p. 832)
 Sepsis (p. 198)
 Pelvic inammatory disease (p. 375)
 Meningococcaemia
 Pneumonia (especially ‘atypical 
disease’, p. 512)
 Malaria
Non-infectious causes
Gastrointestinal
 Inammatory bowel disease (p. 835)
 Bowel malignancy (p. 826)
 Overow from constipation (p. 833)
 Enteral tube feeding
Metabolic
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (p. 721)
 Thyrotoxicosis (p. 652)
 Uraemia (p. 588)
 Neuro-endocrine tumours releasing 
(e.g.) VIP or 5-HT
Drugs and toxins
 NSAIDs
 Cytotoxic agents
 Antibiotics
 Proton pump inhibitors
 Dinoagellates (p. 236)
 Plant toxins (p. 237)
 Heavy metals
 Ciguatera sh poisoning (p. 236)
 Scombrotoxic sh poisoning (p. 237)
(5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs;  
VIP = vasoactive intestinal peptide)
13.11 Infectious diarrhoea in old age
 Incidence: not increased but the impact is greater.
 Mortality: most deaths due to gastroenteritis in high-income countries are in 
adults aged over 70. Most are presumed to be caused by dehydration leading to 
organ failure.
 Clostridioides difcile infection (CDI): more common, especially in 
hospital and nursing home settings, usually following antibiotic exposure.
13.12 Foods associated with infectious illness, including 
gastroenteritis
Raw seafood
 Norovirus
 Vibrio spp.
 Hepatitis A
Raw eggs
 Salmonella serovars
Under-cooked meat or poultry
 Salmonella serovars
 Campylobacter spp.
 EHEC
 Hepatitis E (pork products)
 Clostridium perfringens
Unpasteurised milk or juice
 Salmonella serovars
 Campylobacter spp.
 EHEC
 Yersinia enterocolitica
Unpasteurised soft cheeses
 Salmonella serovars
 Campylobacter spp.
 ETEC
 Yersinia enterocolitica
 Listeria monocytogenes
Home-made canned goods
 Clostridium botulinum
Raw hot dogs, pâté
 Listeria monocytogenes
(EHEC = enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli; ETEC = enterotoxigenic E. coli )

[[p313]]
274    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
energy-requiring process. Infected mucosa is capable of very rapid uid 
and electrolyte transport if carbohydrate is available as an energy source. 
Oral rehydration solutions (ORS) therefore contain sugars, as well as 
water and electrolytes (Box 13.13). ORS are as effective as intravenous 
replacement uid, even for cholera. In mild to moderate gastroenteritis, 
adults should be encouraged to drink uids and continue normal dietary 
food intake. If this is impossible – due to vomiting, for example – intrave-
nous uid administration is required. In very sick patients or those with 
cardiac or renal disease, monitoring of urine output and central venous 
pressure may be necessary.
The volume of uid replacement required should be estimated based 
on the following considerations:
 Replacement of established decit. The average adult’s diarrhoeal 
stool accounts for a loss of 200 mL of isotonic uid. After 48 hours 
of moderate diarrhoea (6–10 stools per 24 hours), the average adult 
will be 2–4 L depleted. This requires rapid replacement of 1–1.5 L, 
either orally (ORS) or by intravenous infusion (normal saline), within 
the rst 2–4 hours of presentation. Longer symptomatology, addi-
tional vomiting or more persistent/severe diarrhoea rapidly produces 
uid losses comparable to diabetic ketoacidosis and is a metabolic 
emergency requiring active intervention.
 Replacement of ongoing losses. Stool losses should be accu-
rately recorded and an estimate of ongoing losses calculated. 
Commercially available rehydration sachets provide 200 mL of ORS; 
one sachet per diarrhoea stool replaces losses.
 Replacement of normal daily requirement. The average adult has 
a daily requirement of 1–1.5 L of uid in addition to the calcula-
tions above. This will be increased substantially in fever or a hot 
environment.
Antimicrobial agents
In non-specic gastroenteritis, routine use of antimicrobials does not 
improve outcome and may lead to antimicrobial resistance or side-
effects. They are usually used where there is systemic involvement, 
immunocompromise or signicant comorbidity.
Evidence suggests that, in EHEC infections, antibiotics should not 
be used since they can enhance haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS; 
p. 582) due to increased toxin release.
Conversely, antibiotics are indicated in Shigella dysenteriae infection 
and in invasive salmonellosis – in particular, typhoid fever. Antibiotics may 
also be advantageous in cholera epidemics, reducing infectivity and con-
trolling infection spread.
Antidiarrhoeal, antimotility and antisecretory agents
These agents are not recommended in acute infective diarrhoea. 
Loperamide, diphenoxylate and opiates are potentially dangerous in dys-
entery in childhood, causing intussusception. Antisecretory agents, such 
as bismuth and chlorpromazine, may make the stools appear bulkier 
but do not reduce stool uid losses and may cause signicant sedation. 
Adsorbents, such as kaolin or charcoal, have little effect.
Non-infectious causes of food poisoning 
Although less common non-infectious causes must also be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of gastroenteritis. These are discussed on 
page 236.
Antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea
Antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea (AAD) is a common complication of 
antimicrobial therapy, especially with broad-spectrum agents. It is most 
common in older people but can occur at all ages. Although the specic 
mechanism is unknown in most cases of AAD, C. difcile is implicated in 
20%–25% of cases and is the most common cause among patients with 
evidence of colitis. Clostridium perfringens is a rarer cause that usually 
remains undiagnosed, and Klebsiella oxytoca may also cause antibiot-
ic-associated haemorrhagic colitis.
Infections acquired in the tropics 
Recent decades have seen unprecedented increases in long-distance 
travel, as well as extensive migration. Some infections maintain a xed 
geographical distribution, being dependent on specic vectors or 
weather conditions, while others move with their human hosts and some 
Type 6
Fluffy pieces with
ragged edges, a
mushy stool
Type 7
Watery, no solid 
pieces
Entirely liquid
Type 5
Soft blobs with
clear-cut edges
(passed easily)
Type 4
Like a sausage or
snake, smooth
and soft
Type 3
Like a sausage but
with cracks on its
surface
Type 2
Sausage-shaped
but lumpy
Type 1
Separate hard
lumps, like nuts
(hard to pass)
Fig. 13.6 Bristol stool chart. The stool is given a ‘score’ of 1–7 by reference to 
the verbal and visual description. This is recorded on a chart (usually known as a 
‘Bristol stool chart’) or in a patient monitoring database. Adapted from Lewis SJ, 
Heaton KW. Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit time. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 1997; 32:920–924
13.13 Composition of oral rehydration solution and other 
replacement uids*
Fluid
Na
K
Cl
Energy
WHO
90
20
80
54
Dioralyte
60
20
60
71
Pepsi
6.5
0.8
–
400
7UP
7.5
0.2
–
320
Apple juice
0.4
26
–
480
Orange juice
0.2
49
–
400
Breast milk
22
36
28
670
*Values given in mmol/L for electrolyte and kcal/L for energy components.
(WHO = World Health Organization)

[[p314]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     275
13
13.15 How to obtain a history from travellers to the tropics with 
fever
Questions
Factors to ascertain
Countries visited and dates 
of travel
Relate travel to known outbreaks of 
infection or antimicrobial resistance
Determine the environment 
visited
Travel to rural environments, forests, rivers 
or lakes
Clarify where the person 
slept
Sleeping in huts, use of bed nets, sleeping 
on the ground
Establish what he/she was 
doing
Exposure to people with medical illness, 
animals, soil, lakes and rivers
History of insect bites
Type of insect responsible, circumstances 
(location, time of day etc.), preventative 
measures
Dietary history
Ingestion of uncooked foods, salads and 
vegetables, meats (especially if under-
cooked), shellsh, molluscs, unpasteurised 
dairy products, unbottled water and sites 
at which food prepared
Sexual history
History of sexual intercourse with 
commercial sex workers, local population 
or travellers from other countries
Malaria prophylaxis
Type of prophylaxis
Vaccination history
Receipt of pre-travel vaccines and 
appropriateness to area visited
History of any treatments 
received while abroad
Receipt of medicines, local remedies, 
blood transfusions or surgical procedures
may then be transmitted to other people. This means that the pattern of 
infectious diseases seen in each country changes constantly, and travel 
history and information on countries previously lived in, particularly during 
childhood, are crucial.
In general, the diversity of infectious diseases is greater in tropical than 
in temperate countries, and people in temperate countries have immunity 
to a narrower range of infections, reecting less exposure in childhood 
and less ongoing boosting of immunity later in life, so that the most com-
mon travel-associated infections are those that are acquired by residents 
of temperate countries during visits to the tropics. In addition, those who 
have lived in tropical areas may lose immunity when they move to temper-
ate countries and become susceptible when visiting their homeland.
Most travel-associated infections are preventable. Pre-travel advice 
is tailored to the destination and the traveller (Box 13.14). It includes 
avoidance of insect bites (using at least 20% diethyltoluamide (DEET)), 
sun protection (sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 
15), food and water hygiene (‘Boil it, cook it, peel it or forget it!’), how to 
respond to travellers’ diarrhoea (seek medical advice if bloody or if it lasts 
more than 48  hours) and, if relevant, safe sex (condom use).
Fever acquired in tropical regions 
Presentation with unexplained fever is common in travellers who are vis-
iting or have recently travelled to tropical areas. Fever may also occur 
in those living in tropical regions if they lack immunity to endemic path-
ogens or if immunity is compromised by factors such as pregnancy. 
Common causes are malaria, enteric fever, viral hepatitis and dengue 
fever. Travellers to affected areas may have viral haemorrhagic fevers 
(VHFs) such as Ebola, Lassa, Crimean–Congo and Marburg (see 
Box 13.35), avian inuenza (H5N1) or Middle East respiratory syndrome 
(MERS), which require special isolation precautions (High Consequence 
Infectious Diseases; HCID).
Clinical assessment 
The approach to unexplained fever is as described above and key 
questions relating to infections acquired in tropical regions are listed in 
Box 13.15. Medicines purchased in some countries may have reduced 
efcacy, e.g. for malaria prophylaxis. Consult reliable up-to-date sources 
about resistance to antimalarial drugs in the country visited. Vaccinations 
against yellow fever and hepatitis A and B are sufciently effective to vir-
tually exclude these infections. Oral and injectable typhoid vaccinations 
are 70%–90% effective.
The differential diagnosis is guided by the clinical scenario, presence 
of specic exposures (Box 13.16) and incubation period (Box 13.17). 
Falciparum malaria typically presents 7–28 days after exposure. VHF, 
dengue and rickettsial infection can usually be excluded if more than 
21 days have passed between leaving the area and onset of illness.
Clinical examination is summarised on page 262. Particular attention 
should be paid to the skin, throat, eyes, nail beds, lymph nodes, abdo-
men and heart. Patients may be unaware of tick bites or eschars. Body 
temperature should be measured at least twice daily.
Investigations and management 
Initial investigations include blood lms and a rapid diagnostic test (RDT; 
antigen detection) for malaria parasites, FBC, urinalysis and chest X-ray 
if indicated. Box 13.18 lists diagnoses and investigations to consider in 
unexplained acute fever.
Management is directed at the underlying cause. In patients with sus-
pected HCID, such as VHF, strict infection control measures with iso-
lation and barrier nursing are implemented to prevent contact with the 
patient’s body uids. The risk of VHF should be determined using epide-
miological risk factors and clinical signs (Fig. 13.7), and further manage-
ment undertaken as described in this chapter.
Diarrhoea acquired in the tropics 
Gastrointestinal illness is the most common infection amongst vis-
itors to the tropics, with Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp. and 
Cryptosporidium spp. infections prevalent worldwide (Box 13.19). 
Shigella spp. and Entamoeba histolytica (amoebiasis) are usually 
acquired in South Asia or sub-Saharan and southern Africa.
The approach to patients with acute diarrhoea is described on page 
272. The benets of treating travellers’ diarrhoea with antimicrobials 
are marginal, with slight reductions in stool frequency and likelihood 
of cure at 72  hours offset by increased side-effects. The differential 
diagnosis of diarrhoea persisting for more than 14 days is wide (see 
Box 23.19). The differential of chronic diarrhoea includes parasitic and 
bacterial causes, tropical malabsorption, inammatory bowel disease 
and neoplasia. Causes particularly associated with the tropics include 
giardiasis, strongyloidiasis, chronic intestinal schistosomiasis, intestinal 
ukes, enteropathogenic E. coli, HIV enteropathy, hypolactasia (lactase 
13.14 How to assess health needs in travellers before departure*
 Destination
 Personal details, including previous travel experience
 Dates of trip
 Itinerary and purpose of trip
 Personal medical history, including pregnancy, medication and allergies (e.g. to 
eggs, vaccines, antibiotics)
 Past vaccinations:
Childhood schedule followed? Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Neisseria 
meningitidis types B/C, Haemophilus inuenzae B (HiB)
Travel-related? Typhoid, yellow fever, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, meningococcal 
ACW135Y, rabies, Japanese B encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis
 Malaria prophylaxis: questions inuencing the choice of antimalarial drugs are 
destination, past experience with antimalarials, history of epilepsy or psychiatric 
illness
* Further information is available at tfortravel.nhs.uk.

[[p315]]
276    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
deciency) and chronic calcic pancreatitis. The workup should include 
tests for parasitic causes of chronic diarrhoea, such as examination 
of stool and duodenal aspirates for ova and parasites, and serological 
investigation.
Giardia lamblia infection (giardiasis) may progress to a malabsorption 
syndrome. If no cause is found, empirical treatment for giardiasis with 
metronidazole is often helpful.
HIV-1 may cause chronic diarrhoea due to medications or infec-
tion. Causes such as HIV enteropathy or infection with agents such as 
Cryptosporidium spp., Cystoisospora belli or microsporidia are uncom-
mon once antiretroviral therapy is commenced, and AIDS-associated 
diarrhoea due to CMV or disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex 
infection is uncommon in tropical regions.
Eosinophilia acquired in the tropics 
Eosinophilia occurs in a variety of haematological, allergic and inamma-
tory conditions discussed on page 935. It may also arise in HIV-1 and 
human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-1 infection. However, eosinophils 
are important in the immune response to parasitic infections, especially 
those with a tissue migration phase. In the context of travel to or res-
idence in the tropics, a patient with an eosinophil count of more than 
0.4 × 109/L should be investigated for both non-parasitic (see Box 25.9) 
and parasitic causes (Box 13.20).
The response to parasite infections is often different when travellers 
to and residents of endemic areas are compared. Travellers often have 
recent and light infections associated with eosinophilia. Residents who 
have been infected for a long time often have chronic pathology without 
eosinophilia.
Clinical assessment 
A history of travel to known endemic areas for schistosomiasis, oncho-
cerciasis and the lariases will indicate possible causes. Assessment 
13.16 Specic exposures and causes of fever in the tropics
Exposure
Infection or disease
Mosquito bite
Malaria, dengue fever, chikungunya, 
lariasis, tularaemia
Tsetse y bite
African trypanosomiasis
Tick bite
Rickettsial infections including typhus, 
Lyme disease, tularaemia, Crimean–
Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur 
forest disease, babesiosis, tick-borne 
encephalitis
Louse bite
Typhus
Flea bite
Plague
Sandy bite
Leishmaniasis, arbovirus infection
Reduviid bug
Chagas’ disease
Animal contact
Q fever, brucellosis, anthrax, plague, 
tularaemia, viral haemorrhagic fevers, 
rabies
Freshwater swimming
Schistosomiasis, leptospirosis, 
Naegleria fowleri
Exposure to soil
Inhalation: dimorphic fungi
Inhalation or inoculation: Burkholderia 
pseudomallei
Inoculation (most often when barefoot): 
hookworms, Strongyloides stercoralis
Raw or under-cooked fruit and 
vegetables
Enteric bacterial infections, hepatitis A 
or E virus, Fasciola hepatica, Toxocara
spp., Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid 
disease), Entamoeba histolytica
Under-cooked pork
Taenia solium (cysticercosis)
Crustaceans or molluscs
Paragonimiasis, gnathostomiasis, 
Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection, 
hepatitis A virus, cholera
Unpasteurised dairy products
Brucellosis, salmonellosis, abdominal 
tuberculosis, listeriosis
Untreated water
Enteric bacterial infections, giardiasis, 
Cryptosporidium spp. (chronic in 
immunocompromised), hepatitis A or 
E virus
13.17 Incubation times and illnesses in travellers
<2 weeks
Non-specic fever
 Malaria
 Chikungunya
 Dengue
 Scrub typhus
 Spotted group rickettsiae
 Acute HIV
 Acute hepatitis C virus
 Campylobacter
 Salmonellosis
 Shigellosis
 East African trypanosomiasis
 Leptospirosis
 Relapsing fever
 Inuenza
 Yellow fever
Fever and coagulopathy (usually thrombocytopenia)
 Malaria
 VHF
 Meningococcaemia
 Enteroviruses
 Leptospirosis and other bacterial 
pathogens associated with 
coagulopathy
Fever and central nervous system involvement
 Malaria
 Typhoid fever
 Rickettsial typhus (epidemic caused 
by Rickettsia prowazekii)
 Meningococcal meningitis
 Arboviral encephalitis
 East African trypanosomiasis
 Tick-borne encephalitis
 Other causes of encephalitis or 
meningitis
 Angiostrongyliasis
 Rabies
Fever and pulmonary involvement
 Inuenza
 Pneumonia, including Legionella
pneumonia
 Acute histoplasmosis
 Acute coccidioidomycosis
 Q fever
 COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2)
 SARS
Fever and rash
 Viral exanthems (rubella, measles, 
varicella, mumps, HHV-6, 
enteroviruses)
 Chikungunya
 Dengue
 Spotted or typhus group rickettsiosis
 Typhoid fever
 Parvovirus B19
 HIV-1
2–6 weeks
 Malaria
 Tuberculosis
 Hepatitis A, B, C and E viruses
 Visceral leishmaniasis
 Acute schistosomiasis
 Amoebic liver abscess
 Leptospirosis
 African trypanosomiasis
 VHF
 Q fever
 Acute American trypanosomiasis
 Viral causes of mononucleosis 
syndromes
>6 weeks
 Non-falciparum malaria
 Tuberculosis
 Hepatitis B and E viruses
 HIV-1
 Visceral leishmaniasis
 Filariasis
 Onchocerciasis
 Schistosomiasis
 Amoebic liver abscess
 Chronic mycoses
 African trypanosomiasis
 Rabies
 Typhoid fever
(HHV-6 = human herpesvirus-6; HIV-1 = human immunodeciency virus-1; SARS = severe 
acute respiratory syndrome; VHF = viral haemorrhagic fever)
Adapted from Traveller’s Health Yellow Book, CDC Health Information for International Travel, 2008.

[[p316]]
Presenting problems in infectious diseases     277
13
should establish duration of exposure and the history should address all 
the elements in Box 13.15
Physical signs or symptoms that suggest a parasitic cause for eosino-
philia include transient rashes (schistosomiasis or strongyloidiasis), fever 
(Katayama syndrome), pruritus (onchocerciasis) or migrating subcutane-
ous swellings (loiasis, gnathostomiasis) (see Box 13.21). Paragonimiasis 
can give rise to haemoptysis, and the migratory phase of intestinal nem-
atodes or lymphatic lariasis may cause cough, wheezing and transient 
pulmonary inltrates. Schistosomiasis, strongyloidiasis and gnathosto-
miasis induce transient respiratory symptoms with inltrates in the acute 
stages and, when eggs reach the pulmonary vasculature in chronic 
schistosomiasis infection, can result in shortness of breath with features 
of right heart failure due to pulmonary hypertension. Fever and hepato-
splenomegaly are seen in schistosomiasis, Fasciola hepatica infection 
and toxocariasis (visceral larva migrans). Intestinal worms, such as 
Ascaris lumbricoides and Strongyloides stercoralis, can cause abdomi-
nal symptoms, including intestinal obstruction and diarrhoea. In the case 
of heavy infestation with Ascaris, this may be due to fat malabsorption 
and there may be associated nutritional decits. Schistosoma haema-
tobium can cause haematuria or haematospermia. Toxocara spp. can 
give rise to choroidal lesions with visual eld defects. Angiostrongylus 
cantonensis and gnathostomiasis induce eosinophilic meningitis, and 
the hyperinfection syndrome caused by S. stercoralis in immunocompro-
mised hosts induces meningitis due to Gram-negative bacteria. Myositis 
is a feature of trichinosis (trichinellosis) and cysticercosis. Periorbital 
oedema can occur with trichinosis.
Investigations 
The diagnosis of a parasitic infestation requires direct visualisation of 
adult worms, larvae or ova. Serum antibody detection may not distin-
guish between active and past infection and is often unhelpful in those 
born in endemic areas. Radiological investigations may provide circum-
stantial evidence of parasite infestation. Box 13.21 describes initial inves-
tigations for eosinophilia.
Management 
A specic diagnosis guides therapy. In the absence of a specic diag-
nosis, many clinicians will give an empirical course of praziquantel if 
the individual has potentially been exposed to schistosomiasis, or with 
albendazole/ivermectin if strongyloidiasis or intestinal nematodes are 
likely causes.
Skin conditions acquired in the tropics 
Community-based studies in the tropics consistently show that skin 
infections (bacterial and fungal), scabies and eczema are the most com-
mon skin problems (Box 13.22). Scabies and eczema are discussed 
on pages 1093 and 1096. Cutaneous leishmaniasis and onchocerci-
asis have dened geographical distributions. In travellers, secondarily 
infected insect bites, pyoderma, cutaneous larva migrans and non-spe-
cic dermatitis are common.
13.18 Investigation of tropically acquired acute fever without 
localising signs
Features on full blood count
Further investigations
Neutrophil leucocytosis
Bacterial sepsis
Blood culture
Leptospirosis
Culture of blood and urine, serology
Borreliosis (tick- or louse-borne 
relapsing fever)
Blood lm
Amoebic liver abscess
Ultrasound
Normal white cell count and differential
Malaria (may have low platelets or 
anaemia)
Blood lm, antigen test
Typhoid fever
Blood and stool culture
Typhus
Serology
Lymphocytosis
Viral fevers, including VHF
Serology, PCR
Infectious mononucleosis
Monospot test, serology
Malaria
Blood lm, antigen test
Rickettsial fevers
Serology
Atypical lymphocytes
Dengue and other VHF
Serology, antigen, PCR
Infectious mononucleosis-like 
syndromes
Serology, PCR
HIV (acute retroviral syndrome)
Serology, antigen
Hepatitis viruses
Serology, antigen, PCR
Parasitic, malaria, trypanosomiasis
Blood lm, antigen test, PCR
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; VHF = viral 
haemorrhagic fever)
No
Yes
Signs of organ failure
or
epidemiological
risk factors*
Isolation with full
barrier protection
Discuss with regional
level 4 biosafety
specialist unit
PCR
positive
Proceed to standard
investigation, isolation
and treatment of
traveller with fever
or malaria
Malaria
positive
Malaria
negative
PCR negative
No
Yes
Patient has travelled
within 7–21 days to an
area endemic for VHF
and has a fever
Isolation with full
barrier protection
Take blood film for
malaria test
Send PCR to
regional laboratory
for VHF
Fig. 13.7 Approach to the patient with suspected viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF). See Box 13.35 *Epidemiological risk factors: staying with a febrile individual, caring 
for a sick individual, or contact with body uids from a suspected human or animal case of VHF. (PCR = polymerase chain reaction)
13.19 Most common causes of travellers’ diarrhoea
 Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
 Shigella spp.
 Campylobacter jejuni
 Salmonella serovars
 Plesiomonas shigelloides
 Non-cholera Vibrio spp.
 Aeromonas spp.

[[p317]]
278    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
During the investigation of skin lesions, enquiry should be made 
about habitation, activities undertaken and regions visited (see 
Box 13.15). Examples of skin lesions in tropical disease are shown in 
Figure 13.8
Skin biopsies are helpful in diagnosing aetiology. Culture of biopsy 
material may be needed to diagnose bacterial, fungal, parasitic and 
mycobacterial infections.
Infections in adolescence 
Particular issues of relevance in adolescent patients are shown in 
Box 13.23
13.20 Parasite infections that cause eosinophilia
Infestation
Pathogen
Clinical syndrome 
with eosinophilia
Strongyloidiasis
Strongyloides stercoralis
Larva currens
Soil-transmitted helminthiases
Hookworm
Necator americanus
Anaemia
Ancylostoma duodenale
Anaemia
Ascariasis
Ascaris lumbricoides
Löfer syndrome
Toxocariasis
Toxocara canis
Visceral larva migrans
Schistosomiasis
Schistosoma 
haematobium
Katayama fever
S. mansoni, S. 
japonicum
Chronic infection
Filariases
Loiasis
Loa loa
Skin nodules
Wuchereria bancrofti
W. bancrofti
Lymphangitis, 
lymphadenopathy, 
orchitis, intermittent 
bouts of cellulitis, 
lymphoedema and 
elephantiasis
Brugia malayi
B. malayi
Brugian elephantiasis 
similar but typically 
less severe than that 
caused by W. bancrofti
Mansonella perstans
M. perstans
Asymptomatic 
infection, occasionally 
subconjunctival 
nodules
Onchocerciasis
Onchocerca volvulus
Visual disturbance, 
dermatitis
Other nematode 
infections
Trichinella spiralis
Myositis
Gnathostoma 
spinigerum
Pruritus, migratory 
nodules, eosinophilic 
meningitis
Cestode infections
Taenia saginata, T. 
solium
Usually asymptomatic; 
eosinophilia associated 
with migratory phase
Echinococcus 
granulosus
Lesions in liver 
or other organ; 
eosinophilia associated 
with leakage from cyst
Liver ukes
Fasciola hepatica
Hepatic symptoms; 
eosinophilia associated 
with migratory phase
Clonorchis sinensis
As for fascioliasis
Opisthorchis felineus
As for fascioliasis
Lung uke
Paragonimus 
westermani
Lung lesions
13.21 Initial investigation of eosinophilia
Investigation
Pathogens sought
Stool microscopy
Ova, cysts and parasites
Terminal urine
Ova of Schistosoma haematobium
Duodenal aspirate
Filariform larvae of Strongyloides, liver uke 
ova
Day bloods
Microlariae Brugia malayi, Loa loa
Night bloods
Microlariae Wuchereria bancrofti
Skin snips
Onchocerca volvulus
Slit-lamp examination
Onchocerca volvulus
Serology
Schistosomiasis, lariasis, strongyloidiasis, 
hydatid, trichinosis, gnathostomiasis etc.
13.22 Rash in tropical travellers/residents
Maculopapular rash
 Dengue
 HIV-1
 Typhoid
 Spirillum minus
 Rickettsial infections
 Measles
Petechial or purpuric rash
 Viral haemorrhagic fevers
 Yellow fever
 Meningococcal sepsis
 Leptospirosis
 Rickettsial spotted fevers
 Malaria
Vesicular rash
 Monkeypox
 Insect bites
 Rickettsial pox
Urticarial rash
 Katayama fever (schistosomiasis)
 Toxocara spp.
 Strongyloides stercoralis
 Fascioliasis
Ulcers
 Leishmaniasis
 Mycobacterium ulcerans (Buruli 
ulcer)
 Dracunculosis
 Anthrax
 Rickettsial eschar
 Tropical ulcer (Fusobacterium 
ulcerans and Treponema vincentii)
 Ecthyma (staphylococci, 
streptococci)
Papules
 Scabies
 Insect bites
 Prickly heat
 Ringworm
 Onchocerciasis
Nodules or plaques
 Leprosy
 Chromoblastomycosis
 Dimorphic fungi
 Trypanosomiasis
 Onchocerciasis
 Myiasis (larvae of tumbu y or 
boty)
 Tungiasis (Tunga penetrans)
Migratory linear rash
 Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM; dog 
hookworms)
 Strongyloides stercoralis (larva 
currens, more rapid than CLM)
Migratory papules/nodules
 Loa loa
 Gnathostomiasis
 Schistosomiasis
Thickened skin
 Mycetoma (actinomycetoma/
eumycetoma)
 Elephantiasis (lariasis)
(CLM = cutaneous larva migrans; HIV-1 = human immunodeciency virus-1)

[[p318]]
Viral infections     279
13
to the high basic reproduction number (R0 value; see p. 108). Clusters of 
infection in young adults are associated with mass gatherings, e.g. music 
festivals and sub-populations with lower vaccination coverage. Natural 
illness produces life-long immunity.
Clinical features 
Infection is by respiratory droplets with an incubation period of 6–19 days. 
A prodromal illness occurs, 1–3 days before the rash, with upper respiratory 
symptoms, conjunctivitis and the presence of the pathognomonic Koplik’s 
spots: small white spots surrounded by erythema on the buccal mucosa 
(Fig. 13.9A). As natural antibody develops, the maculopapular rash appears, 
spreading from the face to the extremities (Fig. 13.9B). Generalised lymphad-
enopathy and diarrhoea are common. Complications are more common in 
older children and adults, and include otitis media, bacterial pneumonia, 
transient hepatitis, pancreatitis and clinical encephalitis (approximately 0.1% 
of cases). A rare late complication is subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
(SSPE), which occurs up to 7 years after infection (see Ch. 28).
Measles is a serious disease in the malnourished, vitamin-decient or 
immunocompromised. Persistent infection with a giant cell pneumonitis 
or encephalitis may occur but rash may be absent. In tuberculosis infec-
tion, measles suppresses cell-mediated immunity and may exacerbate 
disease; for this reason, measles vaccination should be deferred until 
after commencing antituberculous treatment. Measles does not cause 
congenital malformation but may be more severe in pregnant women.
Mortality clusters at the extremes of age and is highly dependent on 
health economic status. In 2018 there were approximately 15 deaths per 
1000 cases globally, ranging from 0.2 : 1000 in Europe to 30 : 1000 in the 
Africa region (WHO data). Death usually results from a bacterial super-
infection, occurring as a complication of measles: most often pneumo-
nia, diarrhoeal disease or noma/cancrum oris, a gangrenous stomatitis. 
Death may also result from complications of measles encephalitis.
Diagnosis 
Clinical diagnosis is challenging but supported by detection of antibodies 
(immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG) and/or measles RNA in oral uid. It is a 
notiable disease in the UK.
Management and prevention 
Immunoglobulin therapy attenuates the disease in the immunocompro-
mised (regardless of vaccination status) and in non-immune pregnant 
women, but must be given within 6 days of exposure. Vaccination can be 
used in outbreaks and vitamin A may improve the outcome in uncompli-
cated disease. Antibiotic therapy is reserved for bacterial complications. 
In the UK children are offered vaccination with a combined measles, 
mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR; a live attenuated vaccine) at 1 year of 
age, with a pre-school booster at 3 years 4 months.
Rubella (German measles) 
Rubella causes exanthem in the non-immunised.
Clinical features 
Rubella is spread by respiratory droplet, with infectivity from up to 10 days 
before to 2 weeks after the onset of the rash. The incubation period is 15–20 
days. In childhood, most cases are subclinical, although clinical features may 
include fever, maculopapular rash spreading from the face, and lymphad-
enopathy. Complications are rare but include thrombocytopenia and hep-
atitis. Encephalitis and haemorrhage are occasionally reported. In adults, 
arthritis involving hands or knees is relatively common, especially in women.
If transplacental infection takes place in the rst trimester or later, per-
sistence of the virus is likely and severe congenital disease may result 
(Box 13.25). Even if normal at birth, there is an increased incidence of 
other diseases, e.g. diabetes mellitus, later in life.
Diagnosis 
Laboratory conrmation of rubella is required if there has been contact 
with a pregnant woman. This is achieved either by detection of rubella 
Infections in pregnancy 
Box 13.24 shows some of the infections encountered in pregnancy.
Viral infections 
Systemic viral infections with exanthem 
Childhood exanthems are characterised by fever and widespread rash. 
Maternal antibody usually gives protection for the rst 6–12 months 
of life. Comprehensive immunisation programmes have dramatically 
reduced the number of paediatric infections but incomplete uptake 
results in infections in later life.
Measles 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has set the objective of eradicating 
measles globally using the live attenuated vaccine. However, vaccination 
of more than 95% of the population is required to prevent outbreaks due 
C
D
Fig. 13.8 Examples of skin lesions in patients with fever in the tropics. 
(A, B and D) 
Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld. (C) Courtesy of 
Dr Rattanaphone Phetsouvanh, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, PDR Laos.
13.23 Key issues in infectious diseases in adolescence
 Common infectious syndromes: infectious mononucleosis, bacterial 
pharyngitis, whooping cough, pneumonia, staphylococcal skin/soft tissue 
infections, urinary tract infections, acute gastroenteritis.
 Life-threatening infections: meningococcal infection (sepsis and/or meningitis).
 Sexually transmitted infections: human papillomavirus (HPV), human 
immunodeciency virus-1 (HIV-1), hepatitis B virus and chlamydia. These may 
reect either voluntary sexual activity or sexual coercion/abuse.
 Travel-related infections: diarrhoea, malaria etc. are relatively common.
 Infections in susceptible groups: patients with cystic brosis, congenital 
immunodeciency, acute leukaemia and other adolescent malignancies are 
vulnerable to specic groups of infections.
 Infections requiring prolonged antimicrobial use: adherence to chronic 
therapy is challenging, for both oral (antituberculous or antiretroviral) and 
systemic (osteomyelitis, septic arthritis or post-operative infections) treatments. 
Outpatient antimicrobial therapy is preferred to minimise hospitalisation.
 Vaccination: engagement with age-specic vaccine programmes should be 
ensured, e.g. HPV, childhood booster vaccines and meningococcal vaccine.
 Risk reduction: education relating to sexual health and alcohol and recreational 
drug usage is important.

[[p319]]
280    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
13.24 Infections of specic importance in pregnancy
Infection
Consequence
Prevention and management
Rubella
Congenital malformation
Childhood vaccination and vaccination of non-immune mothers post-
delivery
Cytomegalovirus
Neonatal infection, congenital malformation
Limited prevention strategies
Zika virus
Congenital malformation
Avoidance of travel, delay in pregnancy if infected
Varicella zoster (VZ) virus
Neonatal infection, congenital malformation, 
severe infection in mother
VZ immunoglobulin, antiviral prophylaxis (see Box 13.29)
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
Congenital or neonatal infection
Aciclovir and consideration of caesarean section for mothers who shed 
HSV from genital tract at time of delivery. Aciclovir for infected neonates
Hepatitis B virus
Chronic infection of neonate
Hepatitis B immunoglobulin and active vaccination of newborn
Hepatitis E virus
Fulminant hepatitis, pre-term delivery, fetal loss
Maintenance of standard food hygiene practices
Human immunodeciency 
virus-1 (HIV-1)
Chronic infection of neonate
Antiretroviral drugs for mother and infant and consideration of 
caesarean section if HIV-1 viral load detectable. Avoidance of 
breastfeeding
Parvovirus B19
Congenital infection
Avoidance of individuals with acute infection if pregnant
Measles
More severe infection in mother and neonate, 
fetal loss
Childhood vaccination, human normal immunoglobulin in non-immune 
pregnant contacts and vaccination post-delivery
Dengue
Neonatal dengue if mother has infection <5 
weeks prior to delivery
Vector (mosquito) control
Syphilis
Congenital malformation
Serological testing in pregnancy with prompt treatment of infected 
mothers
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neonatal conjunctivitis (ophthalmia neonatorum, 
see Ch. 15)
Treatment of infection in mother and neonate
Listeriosis
Neonatal meningitis or bacteraemia, bacteraemia 
or pyrexia of unknown origin in mother
Avoidance of unpasteurised cheeses and other dietary sources
Brucellosis
Possibly increased incidence of fetal loss
Avoidance of unpasteurised dairy products
Group B streptococcal infection
Neonatal meningitis and sepsis. Sepsis in mother 
after delivery
Risk- or screening-based antimicrobial prophylaxis in labour 
(recommendations vary between countries)
Toxoplasmosis
Congenital malformation
Diagnosis and prompt treatment of cases, avoidance of under-cooked 
meat while pregnant
Malaria
Fetal loss, intrauterine growth retardation, severe 
malaria in mother
Avoidance of insect bites. Intermittent preventative treatment during 
pregnancy to decrease incidence in high-risk countries
Fig. 13.9 Measles.
IgM in serum or by IgG seroconversion. In the exposed pregnant woman, 
absence of rubella-specic IgG conrms the potential for congenital 
infection.
Prevention 
All children should be immunised with MMR vaccine. Congenital rubella 
syndrome may be controlled by testing women of child-bearing age for 
rubella antibodies and offering vaccination if seronegative. Antenatal 
rubella screening for pregnant mothers in the UK ceased in 2016 
because of the rarity of rubella in the target population.
Parvovirus B19 
Parvovirus B19 causes exanthem and other clinical syndromes. Some 50% 
of children and 60%–90% of adults are seropositive. Most infections are 
spread by the respiratory route, although spread via contaminated blood is 
also possible. The virus has particular tropism for red cell precursors.
Clinical features 
Many infections are subclinical. Clinical manifestations result after an 
incubation period of 14–21 days (Box 13.26). The classic exanthem 

[[p320]]
Viral infections     281
13
(erythema infectiosum) is preceded by a prodromal fever and coryzal 
symptoms. A ‘slapped cheek’ rash is characteristic (Fig. 13.10) but 
the rash is very variable, including ‘glove and stocking’. In adults, poly-
arthropathy is common. Infected individuals have a transient block in 
erythropoiesis for a few days. This is of no clinical consequence except 
in individuals with increased red cell turnover due to haemoglobinop-
athy or haemolytic anaemia, who develop an acute anaemia that may be 
severe (transient aplastic crisis). Erythropoiesis usually recovers sponta-
neously after 10–14 days. Immunocompromised individuals can develop 
a more sustained block in erythropoiesis in response to the chronic virae-
mia that results from their inability to clear the infection. Infection during 
the rst two trimesters of pregnancy can result in intrauterine infection 
and impact on fetal bone marrow; it causes 10%–15% of non-immune 
(non-Rhesus-related) hydrops fetalis, a rare complication of pregnancy.
Diagnosis 
IgM to parvovirus B19 suggests recent infection but may persist for 
months and false positives occur. Seroconversion to IgG positivity con-
rms infection but in isolation a positive IgG is of little diagnostic utility. 
Detection of parvovirus B19 DNA in blood is particularly useful in immu-
nocompromised patients. Giant pronormoblasts or haemophagocytosis 
may be demonstrable in the bone marrow.
Management 
Infection is usually self-limiting. Symptomatic relief for arthritic symptoms 
may be required. Severe anaemia requires transfusion. Persistent virae-
mia in immunocompromised hosts may require immunoglobulin therapy 
to clear the virus.
Pregnant women should avoid contact with parvovirus B19 infection; 
if they are exposed, serology should be performed to establish whether 
they are immune (IgG-positive).
Passive prophylaxis with immunoglobulin therapy has been suggested 
for non-immune pregnant women exposed to infection but there are lim-
ited data to support this recommendation. Pregnancy should be closely 
monitored by ultrasound scanning, so that hydrops fetalis can be treated 
by fetal transfusion.
Human herpesvirus 6 and 7 
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) is a lymphotropic virus that causes a 
childhood viral exanthem (exanthem subitum), rare cases of an infec-
tious mononucleosis-like syndrome and infection in the immunocom-
promised host. Infection is almost universal, with approximately 95% 
of children acquiring this virus by 2 years of age. Transmission is via 
saliva.
HHV-7 is very closely related to HHV-6 and is believed to be respon-
sible for a proportion of cases of exanthem subitum. Like HHV-6, 
HHV-7 causes an almost universal infection in childhood, with subse-
quent latent infection and occasional infection in the immunocompro-
mised host.
Clinical features 
Exanthem subitum is also known as roseola infantum or sixth disease 
(Box 13.27). A high fever is followed by a maculopapular rash as the fever 
resolves. Fever and/or febrile convulsions may also occur without a rash. 
Rarely, older children or adults may develop an infectious mononucleo-
sis-like illness, hepatitis or rash. In the immunocompromised, infection 
is rare but can cause fever, rash, hepatitis, pneumonitis, cytopenia or 
encephalitis.
Diagnosis and management 
Exanthem subitum is usually a clinical diagnosis but can be conrmed by 
antibody and/or DNA detection. The disease is self-limiting. Treatment 
with ganciclovir or foscarnet is used in immunocompromised hosts 
infected with HHV-6.
13.26 Clinical features of parvovirus B19 infection
Affected age group
Clinical manifestations
Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
Small children
Three clinical stages: a ‘slapped cheek’ 
appearance, followed by a maculopapular 
rash progressing to a reticulate eruption 
on the body and limbs, then a nal stage 
of resolution. Often the child is quite well 
throughout
Gloves and socks syndrome
Young adults
Fever and an acral purpuric eruption with 
a clear margin at the wrists and ankles. 
Mucosal involvement also occurs
Arthropathies
Adults and occasionally 
children
Symmetrical small-joint polyarthropathy. In 
children it tends to involve the larger joints 
in an asymmetrical distribution
Impaired erythropoiesis
Adults, those with 
haematological disease,  
the immunosuppressed
Mild anaemia; in an individual with an 
underlying haematological abnormality it can 
precipitate transient aplastic crisis, or in the 
immunocompromised a more sustained but 
often milder pure red cell aplasia
Hydrops fetalis
Transplacental fetal infection
Asymptomatic or symptomatic maternal 
infection that can cause fetal anaemia with 
an aplastic crisis, leading to non-immune 
hydrops fetalis and spontaneous abortion
13.25 Rubella infection: risk of congenital malformation
Stage of gestation
Likelihood of malformations
1–2 months
65%–85% chance of illness, multiple defects/
spontaneous abortion
3 months
30%–35% chance of illness, usually a single 
congenital defect (most frequently deafness, 
cataract, glaucoma, mental retardation or 
congenital heart disease, especially pulmonary 
stenosis or patent ductus arteriosus)
4 months
10% risk of congenital defects, most commonly 
deafness
> 20 weeks
Occasional deafness
Fig. 13.10 Slapped cheek syndrome. The typical facial rash of parvovirus B19 infection.

[[p321]]
282    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Chickenpox (varicella) 
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a dermotropic and neurotropic virus that 
produces primary infection, usually in childhood, which may reactivate in 
later life. VZV is spread by aerosol and direct contact. It is highly infec-
tious to non-immune individuals. Disease in children is usually well toler-
ated. Manifestations are more severe in adults, pregnant women and the 
immunocompromised.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is 11–20 days, after which a vesicular eruption 
begins (Fig. 13.11), often on mucosal surfaces rst, followed by rapid dis-
semination in a centripetal distribution (most dense on trunk and sparse 
on limbs). New lesions occur every 2–4 days and each crop is associated 
with fever. The rash progresses from small pink macules to vesicles and 
pustules within 24  hours. Infectivity lasts from up to 4 days (but usually 
48  hours) before the lesions appear until the last vesicles crust over. Due 
to intense itching, secondary bacterial infection from scratching is the 
most common complication of primary chickenpox. Self-limiting cerebel-
lar ataxia and encephalitis are rare complications.
Adults, pregnant women and the immunocompromised are at 
increased risk of visceral involvement, which presents as pneumonitis, 
hepatitis or encephalitis. Pneumonitis can be fatal and is more likely to 
occur in smokers. Maternal infection in early pregnancy carries up to 2% 
risk of neonatal damage with developmental abnormalities of eyes, CNS 
and limbs. Chickenpox within 5 days of delivery leads to severe neonatal 
varicella with visceral involvement and haemorrhage.
Diagnosis 
Diagnosis is primarily by recognition of the rash. If necessary, this can be 
conrmed by detection of antigen (direct immunouorescence) or DNA 
in aspirated vesicular uid. Serology is used to identify seronegative indi-
viduals at risk of infection.
Management and prevention 
The benet of antivirals for uncomplicated primary VZV infec-
tion in children is marginal, shortening the duration of rash by only 
1 day, and is not normally required. Antivirals are, however, used 
for uncomplicated chickenpox in adults when the patient presents 
within 24–48  hours of onset of vesicles, in all patients with complica-
tions, and in those who are immunocompromised, including pregnant 
women, regardless of duration of vesicles (Box 13.28). More severe 
disease, particularly in immunocompromised hosts, requires initial par-
enteral therapy. Immunocompromised patients may have prolonged 
viral shedding and may require prolonged treatment until all lesions 
crust over.
Post-exposure prophylaxis is used to attenuate infection in people 
who have had signicant contact with VZV, are susceptible to infection 
(i.e. have no history of chickenpox or shingles and are seronegative for 
VZV IgG) and are at risk of severe disease (e.g. immunocompromised 
or pregnant) (Box 13.29). Shortages of human VZ immunoglobulin 
(VZIG) have resulted in greater use of antiviral prophylaxis. Ideally, where 
indicated, VZIG should be given within 7 days of exposure, but it may 
attenuate disease even if given up to 10 days afterwards. Susceptible 
contacts who develop severe chickenpox after receiving VZIG should be 
treated with antiviral therapy.
A live, attenuated VZV vaccine is available and in routine use in the 
USA and other countries, but in the UK its use is restricted to non-im-
mune health-care workers and household contacts of immunocompro-
mised individuals. Children receive one dose after 1 year of age and a 
second dose at 4–6 years of age; seronegative adults receive two doses 
at least 1 month apart. The vaccine may also be used prior to planned 
iatrogenic immunosuppression, e.g. before transplant and for people 
aged over 70 to prevent shingles.
Shingles (herpes zoster) 
After initial infection, VZV persists in latent form in the dorsal root ganglion 
of sensory nerves and can reactivate in later life.
Clinical features 
Burning discomfort occurs in the affected dermatome following reacti-
vation and discrete vesicles appear 3–4 days later. Brief viraemia can 
produce distant satellite ‘chickenpox’ lesions. Occasionally, paraesthe-
sia occurs without rash (‘zoster sine herpete’). Severe disease, a pro-
longed duration of rash, multiple dermatomal involvement or recurrence 
suggests underlying immune deciency. Chickenpox may be contracted 
from a case of shingles but not vice versa.
Although thoracic dermatomes are most commonly involved (see 
Fig. 13.11B), the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is also fre-
quently affected; vesicles may appear on the cornea and lead to ulcer-
ation. This condition can lead to blindness and urgent ophthalmology 
review is required. Geniculate ganglion involvement causes the Ramsay 
Hunt syndrome of facial palsy, ipsilateral loss of taste and buccal ulcera-
tion, plus a rash in the external auditory canal. This may be mistaken for 
Bell’s palsy, which is discussed on page 1140. Bowel and bladder dys-
function occur with sacral nerve root involvement. The virus occasionally 
causes cranial nerve palsy, myelitis or encephalitis. Granulomatous cer-
ebral angiitis is a cerebrovascular complication that leads to a stroke-
like syndrome in association with shingles, especially in an ophthalmic 
distribution.
In post-herpetic neuralgia, pain from shingles persists for 3 months or 
longer following healing of the rash. It is more common with advanced age.
13.27 Herpesvirus infections
Virus
Infection
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
HSV-1
Herpes labialis (‘cold sores’)
Stomatitis, pharyngitis
Corneal ulceration
Finger infections (‘whitlows’)
Eczema herpeticum
Encephalitis
HSV-2
Genital ulceration and neonatal infection 
(acquired during vaginal delivery)
Acute meningitis or transverse myelitis; 
rarely, encephalitis
Varicella zoster virus (VZV)
Chickenpox (varicella)
Shingles (herpes zoster)
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Congenital infection
Infectious mononucleosis (heterophile 
antibody-negative)
Hepatitis
Disease in immunocompromised patients: 
retinitis, encephalitis, pneumonitis, 
hepatitis, enteritis
Fever with abnormalities in haematological 
parameters
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
Infectious mononucleosis
Burkitt and other lymphomas
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Oral hairy leucoplakia (AIDS patients)
Other lymphomas, post-transplant 
lymphoproliferative disorder
Human herpesvirus 6 and 7 
(HHV-6, HHV-7)
Exanthem subitem
Disease in immunocompromised patients
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8)
Kaposi’s sarcoma, primary effusion 
lymphoma, multicentric Castleman’s 
disease

[[p322]]
Viral infections     283
13
Management 
Early therapy with aciclovir or related antivirals has been shown to reduce 
both early- and late-onset pain, especially in patients over 65 years. Post-
herpetic neuralgia requires aggressive analgesia, along with agents such as 
amitriptyline 25–100 mg daily, gabapentin (commencing at 300 mg daily and 
building slowly to 300 mg twice daily or more) or pregabalin (commencing 
at 75 mg twice daily and building up to 100 mg or 200 mg 3 times daily if 
tolerated). Capsaicin cream (0.075%) may be helpful. Glucocorticoids have 
not been demonstrated to reduce post-herpetic neuralgia.
The zoster vaccine is a live attenuated vaccine with a higher dose of 
VZV than the chickenpox vaccine. It reduces the incidence of shingles 
and of post-herpetic neuralgia. It is recommended in the UK for people 
aged over 70 years. A recombinant vaccine is available in the USA.
Enteroviral exanthems 
Coxsackievirus or echovirus infections can lead to a maculopapular 
eruption or roseola-like rash that occurs after fever falls. Enteroviral 
infections are discussed further under viral infections of the skin 
(see below).
Systemic viral infections without exanthem 
Other systemic viral infections present with features other than a rash 
suggestive of exanthem. Rashes may occur in these conditions but 
differ from those seen in exanthems or are not the primary presenting 
feature.
B
A
Fig. 13.11 Varicella zoster virus infection.
13.28 Therapy for herpes simplex and varicella zoster virus infection
Disease state
Treatment options
Primary genital HSV
Famciclovir 250 mg 3 times daily for 7–10 days
Valaciclovir 1 g twice daily for 7–10 days
Oral aciclovir 200 mg 5 times daily or 400 mg 3 times daily for 7–10 days
Severe and preventing oral intake
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV until patient can tolerate oral therapy
Recurrent genital HSV-1 or 2
Oral aciclovir 200 mg 5 times daily or 400 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
Famciclovir 125 mg twice daily for 5 days
Valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily for 3–5 days or 2 g twice daily for 1 day. Shorter durations 
increasingly favoured
Primary or recurrent oral HSV
Usually no treatment
If required, usually short duration, e.g. valaciclovir 2 g twice daily for 1 day
Mucocutaneous HSV infection in immunocompromised host
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV for 7–10 days
Oral aciclovir 400 mg 4 times daily for 7–10 days
Famciclovir 500 mg 3 times daily for 7–10 days
Valaciclovir 1 g twice daily for 7–10 days
Chickenpox in adult or child
Oral aciclovir 800 mg 5 times daily for 5 days
Famciclovir 500 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
Valaciclovir 1 g 3 times daily for 5 days
Immunocompromised host/pregnant woman
Aciclovir 5 mg/kg 3 times daily IV until patient is improving, then complete therapy with oral 
therapy until all lesions are crusting over
Shingles
Treatment and doses as for chickenpox but duration typically 7–10 days
Visceral involvement (non-CNS) in HSV
Aciclovir IV 5 mg/kg 3 times daily for 14 days
Visceral involvement (non-CNS) in VZV
Aciclovir IV 5 mg/kg 3 times daily for 7 days
Severe complications (encephalitis, disseminated infection)
Aciclovir IV 10 mg/kg 3 times daily (up to 20 mg/kg in neonates) for 14–21 days
HSV disease suppression
Aciclovir 400 mg twice daily
Famciclovir 250 mg twice daily
Valaciclovir 500 mg daily
(CNS = central nervous system; HSV = herpes simplex virus; IV = intravenous; VZV = varicella zoster virus)

[[p323]]
284    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Mumps 
Mumps is a systemic viral infection characterised by swelling of the 
parotid glands. Infection is endemic worldwide and peaks at 5–9 years 
of age. Vaccination has reduced the incidence in children but incomplete 
coverage and waning immunity with time have led to outbreaks in young 
adults. Infection is spread by respiratory droplets.
Clinical features 
The median incubation period is 19 days, with a range of 15–24 days. 
Classical tender parotid enlargement, which is bilateral in 75%, follows a 
prodrome of pyrexia and headache (Fig. 13.12). Meningitis complicates 
up to 10% of cases. The cerebrospinal uid (CSF) reveals a lymphocytic 
pleocytosis or, less commonly, neutrophils. Rare complications include 
encephalitis, transient hearing loss, labyrinthitis, electrocardiographic 
abnormalities, pancreatitis and arthritis.
Approximately 25% of post-pubertal males with mumps develop 
epididymo-orchitis but, although testicular atrophy occurs, sterility is 
unlikely. Oophoritis is less common. Abortion may occur if infection takes 
place in the rst trimester of pregnancy. Complications may occur in the 
absence of parotitis.
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis is usually clinical. In atypical presentations without parotitis, 
serology for mumps-specic IgM or IgG seroconversion (fourfold rise in IgG 
convalescent titre) conrms the diagnosis. Virus can also be cultured from 
urine in the rst week of infection or detected by PCR in urine, saliva or CSF.
Management and prevention 
Treatment is with analgesia. There is no evidence that glucocorticoids 
are of value for orchitis. Mumps vaccine is one of the components of the 
combined MMR vaccine.
Inuenza 
Inuenza is an acute systemic viral infection that primarily affects the res-
piratory tract and carries a signicant mortality. It is caused by inuenza A 
virus or, in milder form, inuenza B virus. Infection is seasonal, and varia-
tion in the haemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) glycoproteins on the 
surface of the virus leads to disease of variable intensity each year. Minor 
changes in haemagglutinin are known as ‘genetic drift’, whereas a switch 
in the haemagglutinin or neuraminidase antigen is termed ‘genetic shift’. 
Nomenclature of inuenza strains is based on these glycoproteins, e.g. 
H1N1, H3N2 etc. Genetic shift results in the circulation of a new inu-
enza strain within a community to which few people are immune, poten-
tially initiating an inuenza epidemic or pandemic in which there is a high 
attack rate and there may be increased disease severity. Re-assortment 
of swine, avian and human inuenza strains can occur in pigs and lead 
to outbreaks of swine ‘u’ in humans, as occurred in 2009, with the out-
break of H1N1pdm2009 inuenza.
Clinical features 
After an incubation period of 1–3 days, uncomplicated disease leads 
to fever, malaise and cough. Viral pneumonia may occur, although pul-
monary complications are most often due to superinfection with Strep. 
pneumoniae, Staph. aureus or other bacteria. Rare extrapulmonary 
manifestations include myositis, myocarditis, pericarditis and neurolog-
ical complications (Reye syndrome in children, encephalitis or transverse 
myelitis). Mortality is greatest in older people, those with medical comor-
bidities and pregnant women. Polymorphisms in the gene encoding an 
antiviral protein, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), 
are associated with more severe inuenza.
Diagnosis 
Acute infection is diagnosed by viral antigen or RNA detection in a naso-
pharyngeal sample. The disease may also be diagnosed retrospectively 
by serology.
Management and prevention 
Management involves early microbiological identication of cases and 
good infection control, with an emphasis on hand hygiene and prevent-
ing dissemination of infection by coughing and sneezing. Administration 
of a neuraminidase inhibitor, e.g. oral oseltamivir, inhaled zanamivir, 
intravenous peramivir or the oral cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor 
13.29 Indications for varicella zoster post-exposure prophylaxis 
(UK guidance)
An adult should satisfy all three of the following conditions:
1. Signicant contact
Contact with chickenpox (any time from 48 hrs before the rash until crusting of 
lesions) or zoster (exposed, disseminated or, with immunocompromised contacts, 
localised zoster; between development of the rash until crusting) dened as:
 Prolonged household contact, sharing a room for ≥15 mins or face-to-face 
contact (includes direct contact with zoster lesions)
 Hospital contact with chickenpox in another patient, health-care worker or visitor
 Intimate contact (e.g. touching) with person with shingles lesions
 Newborn whose mother develops chickenpox no more than 5 days before 
delivery or 2days after delivery
2. Susceptible contact
 Individual with no history of chickenpox, ideally conrmed by negative test for 
VZV IgG
3. Predisposition to severe chickenpox
 Immunocompromised due to disease (e.g. acute leukaemia, human 
immunodeciency virus, other primary or secondary immunodeciency)
 Medically immunosuppressed (e.g. following solid organ transplant; current or 
recent (<6 months) cytotoxic chemotherapy or radiotherapy; current or recent 
(<3 months) high-dose glucocorticoids; haematopoietic stem cell transplant)
 Pregnant (any stage)
 Infants: newborn whose mother has had chickenpox as above; premature 
infants <28 weeks
Choice of prophylaxis*
 Immunocompromised adults: acyclovir 800 mg four times a day orally or 
valaciclovir 1 g three times daily orally, started 7 days after exposure or 7 days 
after rst day of rash in person exposed to. Consider varicella zoster immune 
globulin (VZIG) only if renal impairment or malabsorption.
 Pregnant women (rst 20 weeks): VZIG 1 g by slow intramuscular injection
 Pregnant women (after 20 weeks): VZIG (same dose as rst 20 weeks) or 
aciclovir. Valaciclovir as alternative, all antiviral doses as above.
 Neonate VZIG, dose adjusted
*Based on revised UK 2019 Public Health England Guidelines. https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/le/811544/VZIG_
issuing_guidance.pdf.
B
A
Fig. 13.12 Typical unilateral mumps.

[[p324]]
Viral infections     285
13
baloxavir, can reduce the severity of symptoms if started within 48  hours 
of symptom onset (or possibly later in immunocompromised individuals). 
Antiviral drugs can also be used as prophylaxis in high-risk individuals 
during the ‘u’ season. Resistance can emerge to neuraminidase inhib-
itors and so updated local advice should be followed with regard to the 
sensitivity to antivirals of the circulating strain.
Prevention relies on seasonal vaccination of older age groups, chil-
dren 2–7 years of age and individuals with chronic medical illnesses that 
place them at increased risk of the complications of inuenza, such as 
chronic cardiopulmonary diseases or immune compromise, as well as 
their health-care workers. The vaccine composition changes each year 
to cover the ‘predicted’ seasonal strains but vaccination may fail when a 
new pandemic strain emerges.
Avian inuenza 
Avian inuenza is caused by transmission of avian inuenza A viruses to 
humans. Avian viruses, such as H5N1, possess alternative haemaggluti-
nin antigens to seasonal inuenza strains. Most cases have had contact 
with sick poultry, predominantly in South-east Asia, and person-to-per-
son spread has been limited to date. Infections with H5N1 viruses have 
been severe, with enteric features and respiratory failure. Treatment 
depends on the resistance pattern but often involves oseltamivir. 
Vaccination against seasonal ‘u’ does not adequately protect against 
avian inuenza. There is a concern that adaptation of an avian strain to 
allow effective person-to-person transmission is likely to lead to a global 
pandemic of life-threatening inuenza.
Infectious mononucleosis and Epstein–Barr virus 
Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is a clinical syndrome characterised by 
pharyngitis, cervical lymphadenopathy, fever and lymphocytosis (known 
colloquially as glandular fever). It is most often caused by Epstein–Barr 
virus (EBV) but other infections can produce a similar clinical syndrome 
(Box 13.30).
EBV is a gamma herpesvirus. In lower- or middle-income countries 
(LMIC), subclinical infection in childhood is virtually universal. In high 
income countries, primary infection may be delayed until adolescence 
or early adult life. Under these circumstances, about 50% of infections 
result in typical IM. The virus is usually acquired from asymptomatic 
excreters via saliva, either by droplet infection or environmental contami-
nation in childhood, or by kissing among adolescents and adults. EBV is 
not highly contagious and isolation of cases is unnecessary.
Clinical features 
EBV infection has a prolonged but undetermined incubation period, fol-
lowed in some cases by a prodrome of fever, headache and malaise. 
This is followed by IM with severe pharyngitis, which may include ton-
sillar exudates and non-tender anterior and posterior cervical lymphad-
enopathy. Palatal petechiae, periorbital oedema, splenomegaly, inguinal 
or axillary lymphadenopathy and macular, petechial or erythema multi-
forme rashes may occur. In most cases, fever resolves over 2 weeks, 
and fatigue and other abnormalities settle over a further few weeks. 
Complications are listed in Box 13.31. Death is rare but can occur due 
to respiratory obstruction, haemorrhage from splenic rupture, thrombo-
cytopenia or encephalitis.
The diagnosis of EBV infection outside the usual age in adolescence 
and young adulthood is more challenging. In children under 10 years the 
illness is mild and short-lived, but in adults over 30 years of age it can be 
severe and prolonged. In both groups, pharyngeal symptoms are often 
absent. EBV may present with jaundice, as a PUO or with a complication.
Long-term complications of EBV infection 
Lymphoma complicates EBV infection in immunocompromised hosts 
(e.g. post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder), and some forms of 
Hodgkin lymphoma are EBV-associated. The endemic form of Burkitt 
lymphoma complicates EBV infection in areas of sub-Saharan Africa 
where falciparum malaria is endemic. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is a 
geographically restricted tumour seen in China and Alaska that is associ-
ated with EBV infection. X-linked lymphoproliferative (Duncan) syndrome 
is a familial lymphoproliferative disorder that follows primary EBV infec-
tion in boys without any other history of immunodeciency; it is due to 
mutation of the SAP gene, causing failure of T-cell and NK-cell activation 
and inability to contain EBV infection.
Investigations 
Atypical lymphocytes are common in EBV infection but also occur in 
other causes of IM, acute retroviral syndrome with HIV infection, viral 
hepatitis, mumps and rubella (Fig. 13.13A). They are also a feature of 
dengue, malaria and other geographically restricted infections (see Box 
13.18). A ‘heterophile’ antibody is present during the acute illness and 
convalescence, which is detected by the Paul–Bunnell or ‘Monospot’ 
test. A heterophile antibody is an antibody that has afnity for antigens 
other than the specic one, in this case animal immunoglobulins; the 
Paul–Bunnell and Monospot tests exploit this feature by detecting the 
ability of test serum to agglutinate sheep and horse red blood cells, 
respectively. Sometimes antibody production is delayed, so an initially 
negative test should be repeated. However, many children and 10% of 
adolescents with IM do not produce heterophile antibody at any stage.
Specic EBV serology conrms the diagnosis. Acute infection is char-
acterised by IgM antibodies against the viral capsid, antibodies to EBV 
early antigen and the initial absence of antibodies to EBV nuclear anti-
gen (anti-EBNA). Seroconversion of anti-EBNA at approximately 1 month 
after the initial illness may conrm the diagnosis in retrospect. CNS infec-
tions may be diagnosed by detection of viral DNA in CSF.
13.30 Causes of infectious mononucleosis syndrome
 Epstein–Barr virus infection
 Cytomegalovirus
 HHV-6 or 7
 HIV-1 primary infection
 Toxoplasmosis
(HHV = human herpes virus; HIV = human immunodeciency virus)
13.31 Complications of Epstein–Barr virus infection
Common
 Severe pharyngeal oedema
 Antibiotic-induced rash  
(80%–90% with ampicillin)
 Hepatitis (80%)
 Prolonged post-viral fatigue  
(10%)
 Jaundice (< 10%)
Uncommon
Neurological
 Cranial nerve palsies
 Polyneuritis
 Transverse myelitis
 Meningoencephalitis
Haematological
 Haemolytic anaemia
 Thrombocytopenia
Renal
 Abnormalities on urinalysis
 Interstitial nephritis
Cardiac
 Myocarditis
 ECG abnormalities
 Pericarditis
Rare
 Ruptured spleen
 Respiratory obstruction
 Agranulocytosis
 X-linked lymphoproliferative 
syndrome
EBV-associated malignancy
 Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
 Burkitt lymphoma
 Hodgkin lymphoma (certain 
subtypes only)
 Primary CNS lymphoma
 Lymphoproliferative disease in 
immunocompromised

[[p325]]
286    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Management 
Treatment is symptomatic. If a throat culture yields a β-haemolytic 
streptococcus, penicillin should be given. Administration of ampicillin or 
amoxicillin in this condition commonly causes an itchy macular rash and 
should be avoided (Fig. 13.13B). When pharyngeal oedema is severe, a 
short course of glucocorticoids, e.g. prednisolone 30 mg daily for 5 days, 
may help. Current antiviral drugs are not active against EBV.
Return to work or school is governed by physical tness rather than 
laboratory tests; contact sports should be avoided until splenomegaly 
has resolved because of the danger of splenic rupture. Unfortunately, 
about 10% of patients with IM suffer a chronic relapsing syndrome.
Cytomegalovirus 
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), like EBV, circulates readily among children. A 
second period of virus acquisition occurs among adolescents and young 
adults, peaking between the ages of 25 and 35 years, rather later than 
with EBV infection. CMV infection is persistent, and is characterised by 
subclinical cycles of active virus replication and by persistent low-level 
virus shedding. Most post-childhood infections are therefore acquired 
from asymptomatic excreters who shed virus in saliva, urine, semen and 
genital secretions. Sexual transmission and oral spread are common 
among adults but infection may also be acquired through caring for chil-
dren with asymptomatic infections.
Clinical features 
Most post-childhood CMV infections are subclinical, although some 
young adults develop an IM-like syndrome and some have a prolonged 
inuenza-like illness lasting 2 weeks or more. Physical signs resemble 
IM but in CMV infections hepatomegaly is more common, while lym-
phadenopathy, splenomegaly, pharyngitis and tonsillitis occur less 
often. Jaundice is uncommon and usually mild. Complications include 
meningoencephalitis, Guillain–Barré syndrome, autoimmune haemo-
lytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia, myocarditis and skin eruptions, such 
as ampicillin-induced rash. Immunocompromised patients can develop 
hepatitis, oesophagitis, colitis, pneumonitis, retinitis, encephalitis and 
polyradiculitis.
Women who develop a primary CMV infection during pregnancy have 
about a 40% chance of passing CMV to the fetus, causing congenital 
infection and disease at any stage of gestation. Features include pete-
chial rashes, hepatosplenomegaly and jaundice; 10% of infected infants 
will have long-term CNS sequelae, such as microcephaly, cerebral calci-
cations, chorioretinitis and deafness. Infections in the newborn usually 
are asymptomatic or have features of an IM-like illness, although subtle 
sequelae affecting hearing or mental development may occur.
Investigations 
Atypical lymphocytosis is not as prominent as in EBV infection and heter-
ophile antibody tests are usually negative. LFTs are often abnormal, with 
an alkaline phosphatase level raised out of proportion to transaminases. 
Serological diagnosis depends on the detection of CMV-specic IgM 
antibody plus a fourfold rise or seroconversion of IgG. In the immuno-
compromised, antibody detection is unreliable and detection of CMV in 
an involved organ by PCR, antigen detection, culture or histopathology 
establishes the diagnosis. Detection of CMV in the blood may be useful 
in transplant populations but not in HIV-positive individuals, since in HIV 
infection CMV reactivates at regular intervals, but these episodes do not 
correlate well with episodes of clinical disease. Detection of CMV in urine 
is not helpful in diagnosing infection, except in neonates, since CMV is 
intermittently shed in the urine throughout life following infection.
Management 
Only symptomatic treatment is required in the immunocompetent patient. 
Immunocompromised individuals are treated with intravenous ganciclovir 
5 mg/kg twice daily or with oral valganciclovir 900 mg twice daily for at 
least 14 days. Foscarnet or cidofovir is also used in CMV treatment of 
immunocompromised patients who are resistant to or intolerant of ganci-
clovir-based therapy. They can be given intravitreally if required. Maribavir 
is an investigational agent also being studied for resistant strains of CMV. 
Letermovir is a newer antiviral used in the prevention of CMV in high-
risk transplant patients, e.g. some haematopoietic stem cell transplant 
recipients.
Dengue 
Dengue is a febrile illness caused by a avivirus transmitted by mos-
quitoes. It is endemic in Asia, the Pacic, Africa and the Americas 
(Fig. 13.14). Approximately 400 million infections and 100 million clin-
ically apparent infections occur annually, and dengue is the most rap-
idly spreading mosquito-borne viral illness. The principal vector is the 
mosquito Aedes aegypti, which breeds in standing water; collections of 
water in containers, water-based air coolers and tyre dumps are a good 
environment for the vector in large cities. Aedes albopictus is a vector in 
some South-east Asian countries. There are four serotypes of dengue 
virus, all producing a similar clinical syndrome; type-specic immunity 
is life-long but immunity against the other serotypes lasts only a few 
months. Dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome 
(DSS) occur in individuals immune to one dengue virus serotype who are 
subsequently infected with a different serotype. Prior immunity results in 
increased uptake of virus by cells expressing the antibody Fc receptor 
and increased T-cell activation with resultant cytokine release, causing 
capillary leak and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC; Ch. 25). 
Previously, dengue was seen in small children and DHF/DSS in children 
2–15 years old, but these conditions are now being seen in children less 
than 2 years old, and most frequently in those 16–45 years of age or 
older, in whom severe organ dysfunction is more common. Other epide-
miological changes include the spread of dengue into rural communities 
and greater case fatality in women.
A
B
Fig. 13.13 Features of infectious mononucleosis.

[[p326]]
Viral infections     287
13
Clinical features 
Many cases of dengue infection are asymptomatic in children. Clinical 
disease presents with undifferentiated fever termed ‘dengue-like illness’. 
When dengue infection occurs with characteristic symptoms or signs 
it is termed ‘dengue’ (Box 13.32). A rash frequently follows the initial 
febrile phase as the fever settles. Laboratory features include leucopenia, 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and elevated alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST). The differential diagnosis 
of thrombocytopenia with fever in dengue endemic areas is shown in 
Box 13.33. Many symptomatic infections run an uncomplicated course 
but complications or a protracted convalescence may ensue. Warning 
signs justify intense medical management and monitoring for progression 
to severe dengue. Atypical clinical features of dengue are increasingly 
common, especially in infants or older patients, and in rural locations 
(Box 13.34). These, along with DHF or DSS, are recognised as features 
of severe dengue in the 2015 case denition and contribute to mortality, 
mandating urgent medical management.
The period 3–7 days after onset of fever is termed the ‘critical’ phase, 
during which signs of DHF or DSS may develop. In mild forms, petechiae 
occur in the arm when a blood pressure cuff is inated to a point between 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure and left for 5 minutes (the positive 
‘tourniquet test’) – a non-specic test of capillary fragility and thrombo-
cytopenia. As the extent of capillary leak increases, DSS develops, with 
a raised haematocrit, tachycardia and hypotension, pleural effusions and 
ascites. This may progress to metabolic acidosis and multi-organ failure, 
including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Minor (petechiae, 
ecchymoses, epistaxis) or major (gastrointestinal or vaginal) haemor-
rhage, a feature of DHF, may occur. Cerebrovascular bleeding may be a 
complication of severe dengue.
Diagnosis 
In endemic areas, mild dengue must be distinguished from other viral 
infections. The diagnosis can be conrmed by seroconversion of IgM or a 
fourfold rise in IgG antibody titres. Serological tests may detect cross-re-
acting antibodies from infection or vaccination against other aviviruses, 
including yellow fever virus, Japanese encephalitis virus and West Nile 
Dengue
Yellow fever
Dengue + yellow fever 
Fig. 13.14 Endemic zones of yellow fever and dengue.
13.32 Clinical features of dengue fever
Incubation period
 2–7 days
Prodrome
 2 days of malaise and headache
Acute onset
 Fever, backache, arthralgias, headache, generalised pains (‘break-bone fever’), 
pain on eye movement, lacrimation, scleral injection, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, 
pharyngitis, upper respiratory tract symptoms, relative bradycardia, prostration, 
depression, hyperaesthesia, dysgeusia, lymphadenopathy
Fever
 Continuous or ‘saddle-back’, with break on 4th or 5th day and then 
recrudescence; usually lasts 7–8 days
Rash
 Initial ushing faint macular rash in rst 1–2 days. Maculopapular, scarlet 
morbilliform blanching rash from days 3–5 on trunk, spreading centrifugally 
and sparing palms and soles; onset often with fever defervescence. May 
desquamate on resolution or give rise to petechiae on extensor surfaces
Convalescence
 Slow and may be associated with prolonged fatigue syndrome, arthralgia or 
depression
Complications
 Dengue haemorrhagic fever and disseminated intravascular coagulation
 Dengue shock syndrome
 Severe organ involvement
 Vertical transmission if infection within 5 weeks of delivery
13.33 Differential diagnosis of thrombocytopenia with fever in 
dengue endemic areas
Common
Less frequent
 Malaria
 Sepsis
 Typhoid
 Rickettsial infection
 Leptospirosis
 Other viruses, e.g. chikungunya, viral haemorrhagic fevers, 
yellow fever
13.34 WHO case denitions of dengue, 2015
Probable dengue fever
 Exposure in an endemic area
 Fever
 Two of:
Nausea/vomiting
Rash
Aches/pains
Positive tourniquet test
Leucopenia
Any warning sign
Laboratory conrmation important
Needs regular medical observation and instruction in observing for the ‘warning signs’
If there are no ‘warning signs’, need for hospitalisation is inuenced by age, 
comorbidities, pregnancy and social factors
Dengue with warning signs
 Probable dengue plus one of:
Abdominal pain or tenderness
Persistent vomiting
Signs of uid accumulation, e.g. pleural effusion or ascites
Mucosal bleed
Hepatomegaly >2 cm
Rapid increase in haematocrit with fall in platelet count
Needs medical intervention, e.g. intravenous uid
Severe dengue
 Severe plasma leakage leading to:
Shock (dengue shock syndrome)
Fluid accumulation with respiratory distress
 Severe haemorrhagic manifestations, e.g. gastrointestinal haemorrhage
 Severe organ involvement (atypical features):
Liver AST or ALT ≥1000 U/L
CNS: impaired consciousness, meningoencephalitis, seizures
Cardiomyopathy, conduction defects, arrhythmias
 Other organs, e.g. acute kidney injury, pancreatitis, acute lung injury, 
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, rhabdomyolysis
Needs emergency medical treatment and specialist care with intensive  
care input
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; CNS = central nervous 
system; WHO = World Health Organization)
Adapted from https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/dengue-virus-infections/case-
denition/2015/

[[p327]]
288    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
virus. Isolation of dengue virus or detection of dengue virus RNA by 
PCR in blood or CSF is available in specialist laboratories. Commercial 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits to detect the NS1 viral 
antigen, although less sensitive than PCR, are available in many endemic 
areas.
Management and prevention 
Treatment is supportive, emphasising uid replacement and appropriate 
management of shock and organ dysfunction, which is a major determinant 
of morbidity and mortality. With intensive care support, mortality rates are 
1% or less. Aspirin should be avoided due to bleeding risk. Glucocorticoids 
have not been shown to help. No existing antivirals are effective.
Breeding places of Aedes mosquitoes should be eliminated and the 
adults destroyed by insecticides. A live attenuated tetravalent chimeric 
vaccine was licensed in 2019 for children. It is recommended only for 
children who have already had a rst infection and live in a dengue 
endemic area. Other vaccines are also in development.
Yellow fever 
Yellow fever is a haemorrhagic fever of the tropics, caused by a avivi-
rus. It is a zoonosis of monkeys in West and Central African, and South 
and Central American tropical rainforests, and may cause epidemics (see 
Fig. 13.14). Transmission is by tree-top mosquitoes, Aedes africanus
(Africa) and Haemagogus spp. (America). The infection is introduced to 
humans either by infected mosquitoes when trees are felled, or by mon-
keys raiding human settlements. In towns, yellow fever may be transmit-
ted between humans by Aedes aegypti, which breeds efciently in small 
collections of water. The distribution of this mosquito is far wider than 
that of yellow fever, threatening geographical spread.
Yellow fever causes up to 170 000 infections each year, mainly in 
sub-Saharan Africa. Mortality varies but is approximately 15%. Humans 
are infectious during the viraemic phase, which starts 3–6 days after the 
bite of the infected mosquito and lasts for 4–5 days.
Clinical features 
After an incubation period of 3–6 days, yellow fever is often a mild 
febrile illness lasting less than 1 week, with headache, myalgia, con-
junctival erythema and bradycardia. This is followed by fever resolution 
(defervescence) but, in some cases, fever recurs after a few hours to 
days. In more severe disease, fever recrudescence is associated with 
lower back pain, abdominal pain and somnolence, prominent nausea 
and vomiting, bradycardia and jaundice. Liver damage and DIC lead to 
bleeding with petechiae, mucosal haemorrhages and gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Shock, hepatic failure, renal failure, seizures and coma may 
ensue.
Diagnosis 
The differential diagnosis includes malaria, typhoid, viral hepatitis, lep-
tospirosis, haemorrhagic fevers and aatoxin poisoning. Diagnosis of 
yellow fever can be conrmed by detection of virus in the blood in the 
rst 3–4 days of illness by culture or reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR), by the presence of IgM or by a fourfold rise in 
IgG antibody titre. Leucopenia is characteristic. Liver biopsy should be 
avoided due to the risk of fatal bleeding. Postmortem features, such as 
acute mid-zonal necrosis and Councilman bodies with minimal inam-
mation in the liver, are suggestive but not specic. Immunohistochemistry 
for viral antigens improves specicity.
Management and prevention 
Treatment is supportive, with meticulous attention to uid and elec-
trolyte balance, urine output and blood pressure. Blood transfusions, 
plasma expanders and peritoneal dialysis may be necessary. Patients 
should be isolated, as their blood and body products may contain 
virus particles.
A single vaccination with a live attenuated vaccine gives full pro-
tection and travellers do not require a booster unless specied by 
individual countries’ travel requirements. Potential side-effects include 
hypersensitivity, acute neurotropic disease (encephalitis) (YEL-NVD) 
and systemic features of yellow fever with acute viscerotropic disease 
(YEL-AVD) caused by the attenuated virus. Vaccination is not recom-
mended in people who are signicantly immunosuppressed or aged 
over 60 years. The risk of vaccine side-effects must be balanced 
against the risk of infection for less immunocompromised hosts, preg-
nant women and older patients. An internationally recognised certi-
cate of vaccination is sometimes necessary when crossing borders. 
The Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics strategy was launched in 2017 
and aims to protect a billion people living in at-risk countries in Africa 
and the Americas by 2026.
Viral haemorrhagic fevers 
Viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) are zoonoses caused by several differ-
ent viruses (Box 13.35). They are geographically restricted and previously 
occurred in rural settings or in health-care facilities. The largest outbreak 
of VHF to date started in 2014, with Ebola circulating in Guinea, Liberia 
and Sierra Leone. The outbreak resulted in more than 28 000 cases by 
2016. Since 2018–19 there has been an ongoing Ebola outbreak in the 
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
Serological surveys have shown that Lassa fever is widespread in 
West Africa and may lead to up to 500 000 infections annually. Mortality 
overall may be low, as 80% of cases are asymptomatic, but in hospi-
talised cases mortality averages 15%. Marburg has been documented 
less frequently, with outbreaks in the DRC and Uganda, but the largest 
outbreak to date involved 163 cases in Angola in 2005. Mortality rates of 
Ebola and Marburg vary but are high.
VHFs have extended into Europe, with an outbreak of Congo–
Crimean haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) in Turkey in 2006, and cases of 
haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in the Balkans and Russia. 
An outbreak of CCHF in 2011 in Gujarat, India, involved several 
health-care workers and emphasised the importance of maintaining a 
high index of suspicion for VHF and implementing appropriate infec-
tion control measures at the rst opportunity. Kyasanur forest disease 
is a tick-borne VHF currently conned to a small focus in Karnataka, 
India; there are about 500 cases annually. Monkeys are the princi-
pal hosts but, with forest felling, there are fears that this disease will 
increase. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a 
tick-borne VHF that has emerged in rural China, South Korea and 
Japan since 2009.
New outbreaks and new agents are identied sporadically. Details on 
recent disease outbreaks can be found at the WHO website (see ‘Further 
information’).
Clinical features 
VHFs present with non-specic fever, malaise, body pains, sore throat 
and headache. On examination, conjunctivitis, throat injection, an ery-
thematous or petechial rash, haemorrhage, lymphadenopathy and 
bradycardia may be noted. Endothelial dysfunction causes capillary 
leak. Bleeding is due to endothelial damage and platelet dysfunction. 
Hypovolaemic shock and ARDS may develop
Haemorrhage is a late feature of most VHFs and many patients pres-
ent with earlier features. In Lassa fever, joint and abdominal pain is prom-
inent. A macular blanching rash may be present but bleeding is unusual, 
occurring in only 20% of hospitalised patients. Encephalopathy may 
develop and deafness affects 30% of survivors. In CCHF, bleeding, man-
ifest by haematemesis or bleeding per rectum, may be an early feature, 
accompanied by derangement of LFTs.
The clue to the viral aetiology comes from the travel and exposure 
history. Travel to an outbreak area, activity in a rural environment and 
contact with sick individuals or animals within 21 days all increase the 
risk of VHF. Enquiry should be made about insect bites, hospital visits 
and attendance at ritual funerals (Ebola virus infection). For Lassa fever, 
retrosternal pain, pharyngitis and proteinuria have a positive predictive 
value of 80% in West Africa.

[[p328]]
Viral infections     289
13
Investigations and management 
Non-specic ndings include leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and protein-
uria. In Lassa fever, an AST of >150 U/L is associated with a 50% mor-
tality. It is important to exclude other causes of fever, especially malaria, 
typhoid and respiratory tract infections. In the UK, most patients sus-
pected of having a VHF turn out to have malaria.
A febrile patient from an endemic area within the 21-day incubation 
period, who has specic epidemiological risk factors (see Fig. 13.7) or 
signs of organ failure or haemorrhage, should be treated as being at 
high risk of VHF; appropriate infection control measures must be imple-
mented and the patient transferred to a centre with biosafety level (BSL) 
4 facilities if they test positive. Individuals with a history of travel within 
21 days and fever, but without the relevant high-risk epidemiological 
features or signs of VHF, are classied as medium-risk and should have 
an initial blood sample tested to exclude malaria. If this is negative, rele-
vant specimens (blood, throat swab, urine and pleural uid, if available) 
are collected and sent to an appropriate reference laboratory for nucleic 
acid detection (PCR), virus isolation and serology. If patients are still felt 
to be at signicant risk of VHF or if infection is conrmed, they should be 
transferred to a specialised HCID unit. All further laboratory tests should 
be performed at BSL 4. Transport requires an ambulance with BSL 3 
facilities.
In addition to general supportive measures, ribavirin is given intrave-
nously (100 mg/kg, then 25 mg/kg daily for 3 days and 12.5 mg/kg daily 
for 4 days) when Lassa fever or South American haemorrhagic fevers 
are suspected.
13.35 Viral haemorrhagic fevers
Disease
Reservoir
Transmission
Incubation period
Geography
Mortality rate
Clinical features of severe 
disease1
Lassa fever
Multimammate 
rats (Mastomys 
natalensis)
Urine from rat
Body uids from 
patients
6–21 days
West Africa
15%
Haemorrhage, shock, 
encephalopathy, ARDS 
(responds to ribavirin), deafness 
in survivors
Ebola fever
Fruit bats 
(Pteropodidae 
family) and bush 
meat
Body uids from 
patients
Handling infected 
primates
2–21 days
Central Africa 
Outbreaks as far 
north as Sudan
25%–90%
Haemorrhage and/or diarrhoea, 
hepatic failure and acute kidney 
injury
Marburg fever
Undened
Body uids from 
patients
Handling infected 
primates
3–9 days
Central Africa 
Outbreak in Angola
25%–90%
Haemorrhage, diarrhoea, 
encephalopathy, orchitis
Yellow fever
Monkeys
Mosquitoes
3–6 days
See Fig. 13.14
~15%
Hepatic failure, acute kidney 
injury, haemorrhage
Dengue
Humans
Aedes aegypti
2–7 days
See Fig. 13.14
<10%2
Haemorrhage, shock
Crimean–Congo 
haemorrhagic 
fever
Small vertebrates
Ixodes tick
1–3 days up to 
9 days
Africa, Asia, 
Eastern Europe
30%
Encephalopathy, early 
haemorrhage, hepatic failure, 
acute kidney injury, ARDS
Domestic and wild 
animals
Body uids
3–6 days up to 
13 days
Rift Valley fever
Domestic livestock
Contact with 
animals, mosquito 
or other insect 
bites
2–6 days
Africa, Arabian 
peninsula
1%
Haemorrhage, blindness, 
meningoencephalitis 
(complications only in a 
minority)
Kyasanur fever
Monkeys
Ticks
3–8 days
Karnataka State, 
India
5%–10%
Haemorrhage, pulmonary 
oedema, neurological features, 
iridokeratitis in survivors
Bolivian and 
Argentinian 
haemorrhagic 
fever (Junin and 
Machupo viruses)
Rodents (Calomys
spp.)
Urine, aerosols
Body uids from 
case (rare)
5–19 days 
(3–6 days for 
parenteral)
South America
15%–30%
Haemorrhage, shock, cerebellar 
signs (may respond to ribavirin)
Haemorrhagic 
fever with 
renal syndrome 
(Hantaan fever)
Rodents
Aerosols from 
faeces
5–42 days 
(typically 14 days)
Northern Asia, 
northern Europe, 
Balkans
5%
Acute kidney injury, 
cerebrovascular accidents, 
pulmonary oedema, 
shock (hepatic failure and 
haemorrhagic features only in 
some variants)
Severe fever with 
thrombocytopenia 
syndrome (SFTS)
Domestic and wild 
animals
Ixodes ticks
5–14 days, 
average 9 days
China, South 
Korea, Japan
7%
Organ failure (liver, heart, 
kidney, lungs), haemorrhage 
and disseminated intravascular 
coagulopathy, neuropsychiatric, 
prominent thrombocytopenia
1All potentially have circulatory failure. 2Mortality of uncomplicated and haemorrhagic dengue fever, respectively.
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome)

[[p329]]
290    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Prevention 
Ribavirin has been used as prophylaxis in close contacts in Lassa fever 
but there are no formal trials of its efcacy.
Ebola virus disease (EVD) 
Ebola virus disease (EVD) is thought to spread to human populations 
from fruit bats, sometimes indirectly via contact with infected primates or 
other animals. Person-to-person spread, via contact with blood, secre-
tions or body parts, establishes EVD in populations. Family members, 
health-care workers and people performing traditional burials are at par-
ticular risk. The 2014 outbreak involved the Zaire strain of Ebola virus.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is 2–21 days but typically 8–10 days. Fever and 
non-specic signs are accompanied by abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vom-
iting and hiccups. A maculopapular rash occurs after 5–7 days in some. 
Although bleeding from the gums or venepuncture sites or in the stool 
occurs, haemorrhage may be less prominent than in other VHFs and is 
often a terminal event. In contrast, uid losses from diarrhoea are more 
marked and reach 10 L per day. Complications include meningoenceph-
alitis, uveitis and miscarriages in pregnant women.
Investigations 
Lymphopenia occurs, followed by neutrophilia, atypical lymphocytosis, 
thrombocytopenia and coagulation abnormalities. Elevations of AST/ALT, 
features of acute kidney injury, electrolyte disturbances and proteinuria 
are also observed. The virus is detected by a PCR in blood or body uids, 
but may need retesting if the duration of symptoms is less than 3 days. 
Antigen detection has also been used in rural settings. Serology provides 
a retrospective diagnosis.
Management 
Treatment is supportive and aimed at uid replacement. Bacterial 
super-infections should be promptly treated. Mortality varies but is 
approximately 50% (range 25%–90%). Survivors recover from the sec-
ond week of illness but experience late sequelae, including arthritis (76%), 
uveitis (60%) and deafness (24%), while skin sloughing is common. 
Relapse with meningitis is reported months after recovery. Monoclonal 
antibodies are a promising therapeutic approach.
Prevention 
Ebola virus may be detected in the semen months after recovery. Male sur-
vivors are therefore encouraged to practise safe sex for 12 months after 
symptom onset or until two negative semen tests, but recommendations 
vary. Public health measures are essential for outbreak control and involve 
contact surveillance and monitoring through the incubation period, separat-
ing healthy from sick individuals, practising safe burial methods and ensuring 
appropriate infection control measures to protect health-care and labora-
tory workers, including provision of personal protective equipment such as 
gloves, gowns and full-face protection (face shield or masks combined with 
goggles). An Ebola glycoprotein vaccine, rVZV-ZEBOV, was shown to be 
effective in 2016 after a trial in West Africa and has been used in DRC as well 
as another viral vector vaccine, Ad26.ZEBOV/MVA-BN-Filo.
Zika virus 
Zika virus is a avivirus spread from primate hosts by Aedes aegypti and 
Aedes albopictus, which bite during the day. Described in Africa and 
Asia since 2015, it has been epidemic in the Americas, where a mos-
quito–man–mosquito transmission cycle is established. It also can be 
transmitted in semen.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is 3–12 days. Infection is asymptomatic or mild, 
resembling dengue with fever, arthralgia, conjunctivitis and maculopapular 
rash. Complications include increased reports of Guillain–Barré syn-
drome. Zika-related complications occur in 5%–15% of pregnant women 
with infection. The major concern has been a marked increase in micro-
cephaly in pregnant women infected with Zika virus, as well as increased 
rates of cerebral calcication, deafness, visual problems such as chorio-
retinal scarring, joint contractures (arthrogryposis), hydrops fetalis and 
growth retardation.
Investigations 
Routine blood tests are usually normal but may show leucopenia, throm-
bocytopenia or increased transaminases. PCR detects virus in the rst 
week of illness or in urine up to 14 days. Serology provides a retrospec-
tive diagnosis but cross-reacts with other aviviruses. Plaque-reduction 
neutralisation testing can be used to detect virus-specic neutralising 
antibodies and distinguish between cross-reacting antibodies in primary 
avivirus infections.
Prevention 
Prevention focuses on avoiding mosquito bites. Since Zika virus may be 
found in the semen or genital secretions for prolonged periods, infected 
individuals should practise safe sex for at least 6 months and planned 
pregnancy should be postponed for at least 6 months. WHO guidance 
recommends individuals who have travelled to an endemic area but 
are asymptomatic should practise safe sex for 6 months in men and 
2 months in women, but updated guidance should be sought. There is 
currently no vaccine.
Viral infections of the skin 
Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 
Herpes simplex viruses (HSVs) cause recurrent mucocutaneous infec-
tion; HSV-1 typically involves the mucocutaneous surfaces of the head 
and neck (Fig. 13.15), while HSV-2 predominantly involves the genital 
mucosa (see p. 380), although there is overlap (see Box 13.27). The 
seroprevalence of HSV-1 is 30%–100%, varying by socioeconomic sta-
tus, while that of HSV-2 is 20%–60%. Infection is acquired by inoculation 
of viruses shed by an infected individual on to a mucosal surface in a 
susceptible person. The virus infects sensory and autonomic neurons 
and establishes latent infection in the nerve ganglia. Primary infection is 
followed by life-long episodes of reactivation.
Clinical features 
Primary HSV-1 or 2 infection is more likely to be symptomatic later 
in life, causing gingivostomatitis, pharyngitis or painful genital tract 
lesions. The primary attack may be associated with fever and regional 
lymphadenopathy.
Recurrence 
Recurrent attacks occur, most often in association with concomitant 
medical illness, menstruation, mechanical trauma, immunosuppression, 
psychological stress or, for oral lesions, ultraviolet light exposure. HSV 
reactivation in the oral mucosa produces the classical ‘cold sore’ or ‘her-
pes labialis’. Prodromal hyperaesthesia is followed by rapid vesiculation, 
pustulation and crusting. Recurrent HSV genital disease is a common 
cause of recurrent painful ulceration. An inoculation lesion on the nger 
may cause a paronychia, termed a ‘whitlow’, in contacts of patients with 
herpetic lesions (Fig. 13.15B).
Complications 
Disseminated cutaneous lesions can occur in individuals with under-
lying dermatological diseases, such as eczema (eczema herpeticum) 
(Fig. 13.15C). Herpes keratitis presents with pain and blurring of 
vision; characteristic dendritic ulcers are visible on slit-lamp exam-
ination and may produce corneal scarring and permanent visual 
impairment.

[[p330]]
Viral infections     291
13
Primary HSV-2 can cause meningitis or transverse myelitis. HSV is the 
leading cause of sporadic viral encephalitis; this follows either primary or 
secondary disease, usually with HSV-1. A haemorrhagic necrotising tempo-
ral lobe cerebritis produces temporal lobe epilepsy and altered conscious-
ness/coma. Without treatment, mortality is 80%. HSV is also implicated in 
the pathogenesis of Bell’s palsy with a lower motor neuron 7th nerve palsy, 
although antivirals have not been demonstrated to improve outcome.
Neonatal HSV disease is usually associated with primary infection of 
the mother at term (see Box 13.24). In excess of two-thirds of cases 
develop disseminated disease with cutaneous lesions, hepatitis, pneu-
monitis and, frequently, encephalitis.
Immunocompromised hosts can develop visceral disease with 
oesophagitis, hepatitis, pneumonitis, encephalitis or retinitis.
Diagnosis 
Differentiation from other vesicular eruptions is achieved by demonstra-
tion of virus in vesicular uid, usually by direct immunouorescence or 
PCR. HSV encephalitis is diagnosed by a positive PCR for HSV in CSF. 
Serology is of limited value.
Management 
Therapy of localised disease must commence in the rst 48  hours of 
clinical disease (primary or recurrent); thereafter it is unlikely to inuence 
clinical outcome. Oral lesions in an immunocompetent individual may be 
treated with topical aciclovir. All severe manifestations should be treated, 
regardless of the time of presentation (see Box 13.28). Suspicion of HSV 
encephalopathy requires immediate antiviral therapy. Aciclovir resistance 
is encountered occasionally in immunocompromised hosts, in which 
case foscarnet is recommended.
Human herpesvirus 8 
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) (see Box 13.27) causes Kaposi’s sarcoma 
in both AIDS-related and endemic non-AIDS-related forms. HHV-8 is 
spread via saliva, and men who have sex with men have an increased 
incidence of infection. Seroprevalence varies widely, being highest 
in sub-Saharan Africa. HHV-8 also causes two rare haematological 
malignancies: primary effusion lymphoma and multicentric Castleman’s 
disease. Kaposi’s sarcoma inammatory cytokine syndrome is an HHV-
8- associated syndrome that mimics sepsis. Current antivirals are not 
effective and treatment is with rituximab plus chemotherapy.
Enterovirus infections 
Hand, foot and mouth disease 
This systemic infection is caused by enteroviruses (mainly coxsackie-
virus A16 and enterovirus 71) and echoviruses. It affects children and 
occasionally adults, resulting in local or household outbreaks, particu-
larly in the summer months, with recent epidemics in South-east Asia. 
A relatively mild illness with fever and lymphadenopathy develops after 
an incubation period of approximately 10 days; 2–3 days later, a painful 
papular or vesicular rash appears on palmoplantar surfaces of the hands 
and feet, with associated oral lesions on the buccal mucosa and tongue 
that ulcerate rapidly. A papular erythematous rash may appear on the 
buttocks and thighs. Enterovirus A71 and coxsackie A6 have been asso-
ciated with more severe illness, including acute accid paralysis. Antiviral 
treatment is not available, and management consists of symptom relief 
with analgesics.
Herpangina 
This infection, mainly caused by coxsackieviruses, primarily affects chil-
dren and adolescents in the summer months. It is characterised by a small 
number of vesicles at the soft/hard palate junction, often associated with 
high fever, an extremely sore throat and headache. The lesions are short-
lived, rupturing after 2–3 days and rarely persisting for more than 1 week. 
Treatment is with analgesics if required. Culture of the virus from vesicles or 
DNA detection by PCR differentiates herpangina from HSV.
Poxviruses 
These DNA viruses are rare but potentially important pathogens.
Smallpox (variola) 
Smallpox, which has high mortality, was eradicated worldwide by a 
global vaccination programme but remains a potential bioweapon. The 
virus is spread by the respiratory route or contact with lesions, and is 
highly infectious.
The incubation period is 7–17 days. A prodrome with fever, headache 
and prostration leads, in 1–2 days, to the rash, which develops through 
macules and papules to vesicles and pustules, worst on the face and 
distal extremities. Lesions in one area are all at the same stage of devel-
opment with no cropping (unlike chickenpox). Vaccination can lead to a 
modied course of disease with milder rash and lower mortality.
If a case of smallpox is suspected, national public health authorities 
must be contacted. Electron micrography (like Fig. 13.16) and DNA 
detection tests (PCR) are used to conrm diagnosis.
Monkeypox 
Despite the name, the animal reservoirs for this virus are small squirrels 
and rodents. It causes a rare zoonotic infection in communities in the 
rainforest belt of Central Africa, producing a vesicular rash that is indistin-
guishable from smallpox, but differentiated by the presence of lymphade-
nopathy. Little person-to-person transmission occurs. Outbreaks outside 
Africa have been linked to importation of African animals as exotic pets. 
Diagnosis is by electron micrography or DNA detection (PCR).
Fig. 13.15 Cutaneous manifestations of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1).

[[p331]]
292    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Cowpox 
Humans in contact with infected cows develop large vesicles, usually on 
the hands or arms and associated with fever and regional lymphadenitis. 
The reservoir is thought to be wild rodents.
Vaccinia virus 
This laboratory strain is used as the smallpox vaccine. Widespread 
vaccination is no longer recommended due to the likelihood of local 
spread from the vaccination site (potentially life-threatening in those with 
eczema (eczema vaccinatum) or immune deciency) and of encephalitis. 
However, vaccination may still be recommended for key medical staff.
Other poxviruses: orf and molluscum contagiosum 
See page 1091 and Figure 13.16
Gastrointestinal viral infections 
Norovirus 
Norovirus is the most common UK cause of infectious gastroenter-
itis and causes outbreaks in hospital wards, cruise ships and mili-
tary camps. Food handlers may transmit this virus, which is relatively 
resistant to decontamination procedures. The incubation period is 
24–48 hours. High attack rates and prominent vomiting are character-
istic. Diagnosis may be achieved by antigen or DNA detection (PCR) in 
stool samples, although the characteristic clinical and epidemiological 
features mean that microbiological conrmation is not always neces-
sary. The virus is highly infectious and cases should be isolated and 
environmental surfaces cleaned with detergents and disinfected with 
bleach.
Astrovirus 
Astroviruses cause diarrhoea in small children and occasionally in immu-
nocompromised adults.
Rotavirus 
Rotaviruses infect enterocytes and are a major cause of diarrhoeal illness 
in young children worldwide. Winter epidemics are common in high-in-
come countries, particularly in nurseries. Adults in close contact with 
cases may develop disease. The incubation period is 48 hours and 
patients present with watery diarrhoea, vomiting, fever and abdominal 
pain. Dehydration is prominent. Diagnosis is aided by commercially 
available enzyme immunoassay kits, which require fresh or refrigerated 
stool samples. Immunity develops to natural infection. Monovalent and 
multivalent vaccines have been licensed in many countries and have now 
demonstrated efcacy in large trials in Africa and the Americas.
Hepatitis viruses (A–E) 
See Chapter 24
Other viruses 
Adenoviruses are frequently identied from stool culture and implicated 
as a cause of diarrhoea in children. They have also been linked to cases 
of intussusception.
Respiratory viral infections 
These infections are described further on page 512.
Adenoviruses, rhinoviruses and enteroviruses (coxsackieviruses 
and echoviruses) often produce non-specic upper respiratory tract 
symptoms but may cause viral pneumonia. Parainuenza and respira-
tory syncytial viruses cause upper respiratory tract disease, croup and 
bronchiolitis in small children and pneumonia in the immunocompro-
mised. Respiratory syncytial virus also causes pneumonia in nursing 
home residents and may be associated with nosocomial pneumonia. 
Metapneumovirus and bocavirus cause upper and occasionally lower 
respiratory tract infection, especially in immunosuppressed individuals.
Coronaviruses 
Coronaviruses are single-strand positive-sense RNA viruses that cause 
widespread infection in animals and humans.
Coronaviruses 
HCoV-229E, 
HCoV-NL63, 
HCoVH-KU1 
and 
HCoV-OC43 have a worldwide distribution. They usually cause mild 
upper respiratory tract infection, but occasionally more serious respira-
tory infection at extremes of age or in immunocompromised hosts.
Three coronaviruses have emerged in recent years that cause more 
serious infections. These are SARS-CoV (severe acute respiratory syn-
drome coronavirus), MERS-CoV (Middle East respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus) and SARS-CoV-2 (the cause of coronavirus disease 2019; 
COVID-19). These coronaviruses have emerged as zoonoses from bats 
and potentially intermediate hosts. The intermediate hosts for SARS-CoV 
and MERS-CoV include palm civets and camels respectively, but the 
identity of the intermediate host(s) for SARS-CoV-2 remains elusive.
It has been suggested that both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 may 
have been spread to humans through contact with wild animals in wild 
food markets.
Pathogenesis 
The coronaviruses contain non-structural proteins including RNA-
polymerases and proteases and structural proteins including the envelope, 
spike (S) glycoprotein and nucleocapsid protein. RNA replication occurs in 
double membrane vesicles originating from the endoplasmic reticulum and is 
incorporated into virions which are released from infected cells. The corona-
viruses infect a range of cells, including respiratory and gastrointestinal epi-
thelial cells. Initial interactions involve the S glycoprotein, which binds to the 
surface receptor. For SARS, SARS-CoV-2 and HCoV-NL63 the receptor is 
the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2). Infection with SARS-
CoV-2 results in reduced expression of hACE2, a protein that normally plays 
important anti-inammatory roles in the lung, and it is thought that reduced 
expression may contribute to pathogenesis. In SARS-CoV-2 infection the 
S glycoprotein requires priming by the human serine protease TMPRSS2 
to allow optimal engagement with its receptor, hACE2. For MERS-CoV 
the receptor is the dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4). The receptor-binding 
domain of the S glycoprotein undergoes mutation to allow adaptation dur-
ing cross-species transmission from bats to other species, including man.
Coronaviruses induce suboptimal early interferon responses, 
in part thought to be because the RNA is shielded from pattern 
Fig. 13.16 Electron micrograph of molluscum contagiosum, a poxvirus. Courtesy 
of Prof. Goura Kudesia, Northern General Hospital, Shefeld.

[[p332]]
Viral infections     293
13
recognition receptors, since it is contained in the double membrane ves-
icles. Furthermore, several coronaviruses contain a nucleocapsid pro-
tein that suppresses interferon production. However, despite suppression 
of interferon in some cells, other cells such as macrophages and dendritic 
cells do produce interferon, and excessive production of interferon and other 
pro-inammatory cytokines by these cells is associated with failure to clear 
virus and poor outcomes. Antiviral immunity requires production of neutral-
ising antibody and effective CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses. These same 
antiviral responses, however, also appear to cause tissue injury. In SARS-
CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection pulmonary complications typically emerge 
after 1–2 weeks and are thought to result from dysregulation of innate and 
adaptive immune responses. For SARS-CoV-2 it is suggested that subopti-
mal innate immune responses and recruitment of pro-inammatory CCR2+
monocytes contribute to inammation, while apoptotic cell death of CD8+
T-cells is prominent. Disease is more severe in older individuals and it is 
thought this may correlate with suboptimal T-cell responses and enhanced 
pro-inammatory responses with ageing. Skewing of immune responses 
away from early protective interferon responses and suboptimal antivi-
ral immunity may lead to dysregulated immune responses and prolonged 
inammatory responses that lead to tissue injury in multiple organs. For 
SARS-CoV-2, activation of the clotting cascade in association with marked 
inammation appears to be a distinct feature. Microthrombi occur around 
the body and both venous thromboembolism and arterial clots in the heart 
and brain may be prominent features.
SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) 
SARS-CoV emerged as a major respiratory pathogen during an outbreak 
of SARS in 2002–2003, in which there were approximately 8000 cases. 
The virus originated in Guangdong, China, and spread to several other 
countries, with secondary transmission reported in Canada (Toronto), 
Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Vietnam during the outbreak. SARS 
presented as a u-like illness with non-specic symptoms, including 
fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, diarrhoea and shivering. In severe 
cases these progressed to pneumonia, requiring intensive care admis-
sion. The case fatality rate was approximately 11%.
According to the World Health Organization, SARS infection has been 
recorded only four times since the global epidemic, three times from lab-
oratory accidents and once in southern China from an unknown source.
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
(MERS-CoV) 
In 2012, a novel coronavirus, distantly related to SARS-CoV, caused several 
deaths connected with pneumonia in patients originating from the Middle 
East. The Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) 
appears to be a zoonosis, involving transmission from bats to camels and 
then to humans. Over 20 countries have reported cases, although most 
cases have a history of travel to Saudi Arabia or other countries in the Arabian 
Peninsula. By 2020 there had been over 2500 reported cases. MERS-CoV 
remains an important but still geographically restricted coronavirus.
Clinical features 
The incubation period in person-to-person transmission is 2–14 (average 
5) days. Any age may be infected but the patients over 50 with med-
ical comorbidities are particularly susceptible to severe disease. Initial 
symptoms are fever, chills, headache, myalgia, dry cough and dyspnoea. 
Abdominal pain and diarrhoea may be prominent. The mean period from 
symptom onset to hospitalisation is 4 days, and 5 days to intensive care 
unit admission. Illness is complicated by rapid development of respiratory 
failure and features of ARDS and multi-organ failure. Mortality is 35%.
Diagnosis and management 
Laboratory features include lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and raised 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Diagnosis is conrmed by detection of 
virus RNA (PCR) in serum, nasopharyngeal or other respiratory sam-
ples. Antibody detection may also be useful. Treatment is supportive. 
Strict infection control measures should be implemented for anyone with 
fever, severe respiratory illness and epidemiological risk factors. Patients 
should be managed in an airborne infection isolation room with contact 
and airborne infection control measures, including personal protective 
equipment for health-care workers.
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2 was rst identied in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, 
where it caused an outbreak that spread rapidly to other parts of China 
and then the rest of the world. The virus is believed to have been trans-
mitted to humans via horseshoe bats (Rhinolophus sinicus) and poten-
tially other intermediate hosts, to whom individuals may have been 
exposed at wild food markets.
SARS-CoV-2 appears to be more easily transmissible than SARS-CoV 
and MERS-CoV. Consequently, early efforts to contain the virus were 
unsuccessful and it spread rapidly. The earliest secondary outbreaks were 
identied in Iran, Italy and Spain, but most of the world was affected within 
a few weeks (Fig. 13.17). The World Health Organization declared COVID-
19 to be a global pandemic in March 2020, just 3 months after it was 
rst identied in China. By late 2020 new variants had emerged carrying 
several amino acid substitutions. As the virus mutates variants of interest 
and variants of concern have been identied to aid public health measures 
to monitor transmission and research. The nomenclature of new variants 
developed alongside the pandemic. The variants were initially assigned 
‘Pango’ lineage codes (letters and numbers) or identied with designations 
associated with clade (GISAID or Nexstrain), although as these were dif-
cult for the public to use the variants tended to be referred to according to 
the geographic location where they were rst identied, e.g. B1.1.7 (‘Kent’, 
United Kingdom), B1.351 (South Africa) and P.1 (Brazil). In May 2021, to 
both simplify the nomenclature and avoid the pejorative connotations of 
geographic associations, the WHO started to assign Greek characters 
to the variants, and these strains were named Alpha (e.g. B1.1.7), Beta 
(e.g. B1.351), Gamma (e.g. P.1) and Delta (e.g. B1.617.2). The Greek let-
ter names are designed to facilitate discussion in non-scientic audiences 
and do not replace the scientic names. The variants have higher R num-
bers than the native virus and are more transmissible due to mutations in 
the receptor-binding domain of the S protein, such as the replacement 
of asparagine with tyrosine at amino acid position 501 (N501Y). B1.1.7 
(Alpha) was found to cause increased mortality compared to previous 
SARS-CoV-2 strains in several studies. Mutation may also modify inter-
actions with antibody, as suggested for the E484K mutation (where a glu-
tamic acid residue is replaced by lysine) found in the Beta and Gamma 
variants. The highly transmissible B1.617.2 (Delta) variant emerged in 
December 2020 causing a ‘2nd wave’ in India before spreading across the 
world. The pattern was repeated in November 2021 with the B.1.1.529 
(Omicron) variant, rst reported in South Africa. However, Omicron tended 
to cause disease of less severity than earlier variants, presumably because 
of a combination of altered virulence factors and herd immunity from vac-
cination and natural infection.
As well as exhibiting differences in transmissibility, symptomatol-
ogy and case-fatality, infection by the variants is prevented to different 
extents by the separate COVID-19 vaccines available. For example, the 
Delta variant was found to have a greater propensity to infect individu-
als who had received only single doses of vaccines, most of which are 
designed to be given as a two-dose ‘course’; and the Omicron variant 
had a propensity to infect people who were fully vaccinated but had not 
had ‘booster’ doses. SARS-CoV-2 is therefore very much a ‘moving 
target’ with respect to disease prevention strategies.
Responses to control the pandemic
The rapid emergence and exponential increase in COVID-19 case 
numbers as the pandemic developed raised signicant challenges to 
the control of its transmission in both health-care settings and the 
wider community. Particular infection prevention and control (IPC) 
challenges raised by the pandemic included the rapid depletion of 
personal protective equipment (PPE), the lag between the spread of 

[[p333]]
294    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Number of confirmed
cases by area
Country, area or territory
with cases
January 2020
February 2020
March 2020
1–2
Number of
confirmed cases
Country, area or territory
with cases
1–10
11–100
101–1000
1001–5000
5001–10000
10001–30000
<30000
3–20
31–100
>100
Number of
confirmed
cases by
area
Country, area or territory
with cases
1–2
3–10
11–100
101–500
501–5000
<5000
A
1–100
101–1000
1001–10000
10001–100000
>100000
No cases reported
in the last 7 days
No reported cases
B
Fig. 13.17 Global spread of COVID-19 in 2020.
of COVID-19 from late January with an epicentre in China to foci 
in Asia and Europe in late February, with more widespread cases 
shown in July 2020. Redrawn with permission from WHO

[[p334]]
Viral infections     295
13
infection and the acquisition of evidence required to inform IPC pre-
cautions to control its spread, the requirement by health-care provid-
ers to implement frequent changes in IPC guidance in response to the 
availability of PPE, and huge uctuations in case numbers as the peri-
odic introduction and relaxation of population-based control measures 
brought about ‘waves’ of infection, which had the potential to repeat-
edly overwhelm the ability of health services to function effectively.
Infection prevention and control in health-care settings
SARS-CoV-2 is acquired predominantly from the oropharyngeal and 
respiratory secretions of infected patients. Respiratory transmission has 
traditionally been categorized into ‘airborne’ (or ‘aerosol’) and ‘droplet’ 
spread, which are distinguished by the size of respiratory particles in 
which viable organisms are carried, with a cut-off size of 5 μm. The theo-
retical basis for the distinction is that particles of 5–10 μm diameter (‘res-
piratory droplets’) tend to fall out of the air soon after being produced. 
They are therefore unlikely to travel more than 1 m or so from the source 
patient and are transmitted mainly by settling on mucous membranes 
(direct transmission) or by being transported to mucous membranes via 
fomites (indirect transmission). Conversely, particles of <5 μm (‘droplet 
nuclei’) can remain suspended in the air for prolonged periods of time 
and can therefore travel longer distances and be taken into air passages 
by inhalation. In reality, both the size of respiratory particles produced 
by an infected person and the distance they can travel is likely to fall on 
a spectrum. The range of particle sizes will be affected by factors such 
as the speed of the passage of air across the infected person’s respira-
tory tract mucous membranes, the volume and character of secretions 
being produced and the extent to which droplets are converted to drop-
let nuclei by evaporation; and the duration of airborne suspension and 
distance travelled will be inuenced by environmental factors such as 
temperature, humidity and prevailing air currents. Therefore, the distinc-
tion between airborne/aerosol and droplet transmission is not absolute, 
and different precautions may be required for the same infection in dif-
ferent circumstances.
SARS-CoV-2 is believed to be predominantly transmitted by droplet 
spread in most circumstances (e.g. when an infected patient is breathing 
rapidly or coughing) but can be transmitted by the airborne route when 
the patient is subjected to an ‘aerosol-generating procedure’ (AGP). 
AGPs include (but are not limited to) tracheal intubation, manual ventila-
tion, non-invasive ventilation and the use of certain high ow oxygenation 
treaments. For this reason, in the UK (at the time of writing) ‘droplet’ 
precautions are considered adequate for the management of patients 
with COVID-19 (and other infections transmitted in a similar manner, 
such as inuenza) in most circumstances, but ‘airborne’ precautions are 
used when an infected (or suspected) patient is subjected to an AGP. 
Unfortunately, the evidence-base for the distinction between airborne 
and droplet transmission in any given circumstance is weak and subject 
to repeated interpretation, so precautions used for COVID-19 tend to 
vary with time and geographical location.
The control of COVID-19 in health-care settings therefore requires a 
combination of measures, as shown in Box 13.36
Public health measures
A major strategy for limiting spread of SARS-CoV-2 has been the intro-
duction of physical distancing measures, the most extreme of which have 
been termed ‘lockdowns’. The components and restrictiveness of lock-
downs vary between countries, but they have typically included: the closure 
of schools, workplaces, non-essential shops, sporting and entertainment 
venues; a move to remote (i.e. computer- based) working where possible; 
banning mass gatherings; curfews; stay-at-home orders; and other local, 
national and international travel restrictions. Not all countries have employed 
lockdowns. Physical distancing measures are designed to slow the spread 
of the virus and limit the burden of serious illness on overstretched health 
services, rather than to eradicate the virus. However, in some countries 
where they were employed early (e.g. New Zealand), they resulted in com-
plete, although temporary, eradication of virus in the community.
Other important measures in limiting virus spread are ensuring high 
levels of case identication, ramping up testing to identify cases, ensur-
ing public health follow-up of potential cases and enforcing quarantine 
measures for cases, contacts and travellers from high-incidence coun-
tries. The combination of such strategies has been termed ‘test, trace 
and isolate’ (TTI). Countries have tended to increase TTI measures as 
they have eased lockdowns, in an attempt to prevent rebound increases 
in cases and the need for subsequent lockdowns, which are economi-
cally damaging. Novel approaches to TTI have been developed, including 
the use of mobile phone apps, CCTV footage and tracking of a con-
tact’s digital signature, depending on jurisdiction and legal constraints. 
Surveillance sampling of all adults combined with advice to stay at home 
have been implemented as measures against emerging variant viruses.
Social distancing strategies employed when lockdown is not con-
sidered necessary have included keeping people physically separate 
(a target of ≥2 metres has been used in the UK), promoting frequent 
13.36 Infection prevention and control strategies used for COVID-19 in the health-care setting*
‘Standard’ precautions
 Hand hygiene
 Use of personal protective equipment (PPE), e.g. masks, gloves, aprons, gowns and eye protection, according to the 
clinical circumstances
 Spillage, sharps, laundry and clinical waste management
 Environmental cleaning and disinfection
Transmission-based precautions
 A combination of airborne, contact and droplet precautions (see Box 6.9) with airborne precautions often reserved for 
situations in which aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs) are carried out
 Different precautions may be applied depending on the level of patient risk (e.g. conrmed vs. suspected COVID-19)
Isolation, cohorting and quarantining
 Isolation or cohorting to minimise the risk of onward transmission (cohorting should be reserved for conrmed cases, or 
it carries the risk of uninfected patients being exposed to infected patients)
 Quarantining patients prior to elective procedures
 Quarantining staff who test positive for SARS-CoV-2
Screening
 Admission screening to identify asymptomatic infected patients
 Interval screening of inpatients to identify and prevent health care-acquired COVID-19
 Pre-procedure screening for patients having elective procedures
 Staff screening to identify asymptomatic infected staff
Visitor restriction
 To minimise the possibility of uninfected patients being infected by visitors, and vice versa
Contact tracing
 Detection (and subsequent isolation) of uninfected patients who have been exposed to infected patients (e.g. in a bay/
hospital ward) and staff
*Infection prevention and control measures vary with time, in different countries and according to resource availability.

[[p335]]
296    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
hand hygiene and enforcing the use of face coverings in places where 
close contact is likely.
Vulnerable adults, including older and immunocompromised people, 
have been advised to limit social interactions, a strategy termed ‘shield-
ing’ in the UK.
Clinical features
The incubation period for COVID-19 is 5-6 days on average but can range 
from 2-14 days. Many infections, probably between 80% and 90%, are 
asymptomatic. Where patients do experience symptoms, these are very 
variable and depend on the vaccination status of the patient and the 
SARS-CoV-2 variant with which they are infected.
In unvaccinated patients and with variants predominating in the rst 
year of the pandemic, typical symptoms include high fever, persistent 
cough, shortness of breath and loss of taste or smell. Myalgia, fatigue, 
dizziness or headache are also frequent, as are chest pain, vomiting 
and diarrhoea. Vomiting and diarrhoea may be prominent features 
and may precede fever, and gastrointestinal symptoms are often also 
prominent in children. Confusion or delirium occur, particularly in older 
people. Variant strains seen in the UK are associated with a greater 
range of symptoms, for example cough, sore throat, fatigue, myal-
gia and headaches appear more common, whereas loss of smell or 
taste are less common, than with the original virus. Variant B1.617.2 
(Delta) became the dominant variant in many countries by summer 
2021, and commonly presented with coryzal symptoms, myalgia and 
headache, with cough and loss of taste or smell being a less common 
presentation.
Before the introduction of vaccination, approximately 15% of symp-
tomatic patients would develop severe symptoms and 5% critical 
illness. Physical examination of such patients may reveal tachycardia, 
hypotension, cyanosis, hypoxia or bilateral crackles in the lung elds. 
Bronchial breath sounds and focal consolidation may suggest bacte-
rial superinfection. Skin lesions are common and include maculopapular 
lesions, vesicles, pustules and urticarial lesions. Chilblain-like lesions with 
oedema or haemorrhage under the skin are also described. The differ-
ential diagnosis with a predominant respiratory presentation will include 
community-acquired pneumonia, inuenza and other severe respiratory 
virus infections, including MERS-CoV.
If complications occur they usually develop in the second week. These 
are most commonly due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). 
Bacterial pneumonia complicates a minority of infections and sepsis may 
occur. Superinfections occur, in particular in those with critical illness, 
including fungal infection due to Aspergillus, for which prolonged intuba-
tion is a risk factor. In India especially, mucormycosis (p. 345) emerged 
as a specic complication, especially in patients with pre-existing diabe-
tes mellitus who were treated with steroids. Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation is seen in the majority of those who do not survive and is 
associated with severe disease and multi-organ failure. Venous throm-
boembolism occurs in 20%–30% of critically ill patients but may occur 
in any patients.
Microthrombi can form in the lung and some have proposed the 
term ‘microvascular COVID-19 lung vessels obstructive thrombo-
inammatory syndrome’ (MicroCLOTS) to distinguish this syndrome 
from conventional pulmonary embolism. Acute myocardial injury is 
reported in 5%–31% and acute coronary syndromes, myocarditis 
or arrhythmia occur. Acute kidney injury is common in hospitalised 
patients and up to a third of those requiring mechanical ventilation 
may require renal dialysis. Neurological complications are diverse and 
include cerebrovascular disease, cerebral venous thrombosis, menin-
gitis, encephalitis, seizures, impaired consciousness, ataxia, neuropa-
thies and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Rhabdomyolysis and secondary 
bacterial infections can occur. Hypothyroidism can be a long-term 
complication.
A striking characteristic of SARS-CoV-2 is its varying severity in dif-
ferent age groups. In broad terms the severity of infection ranges from 
mild or asymptomatic in children (in whom a fatal outcome is exceed-
ingly rare) to severe and life-threatening in older adults. A specic but 
rare manifestation in children is the ‘paediatric inammatory multisystem 
syndrome: temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2’ (PIMS-TS), also 
referred to as multisystem inammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). 
This severe complication consists of fever, abdominal symptoms, rash, 
conjunctivitis and markers of a high inammatory response. Myocardial 
dysfunction, shock and respiratory failure are common complications, 
and some children meet a clinical denition of Kawasaki disease with 
features such as coronary artery dilatation or vascular aneurysms. This 
syndrome appears distinct from Kawasaki disease, however, since it 
involves an older age group with more marked elevation of inammatory 
biomarkers, and is associated with COVID-19. There is also a variant of 
MIS in adults.
The true case fatality rate for SARS-CoV-2 infection is not known 
because the apparent incidence of disease is inuenced by many dif-
ferent factors. These factors include sampling strategies (i.e. testing a 
larger number of asymptomatic individuals will reduce the apparent mor-
tality); the denition of a COVID-19-associated death (which varies with 
both time and jurisdiction); the period of follow-up or extent to which late 
deaths are attributed to COVID-19; the stage of the pandemic at which 
sampling was carried out (as mortality has fallen with the introduction of 
specic treatments); and the proportion of vaccinated vs. unvaccinated 
cases (as mortality is much lower in patients infected post-vaccination). 
However, at the time of writing there have been 4.6 million deaths and 
222 million conrmed cases (2.1% overall mortality). The case fatality rate 
is therefore lower than for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, which have 11% 
and 34% mortality, respectively. Where death occurs, it is most often in 
the third week due to respiratory failure.
Virus is shed in respiratory secretions for approximately 17–24 
days. Infection rates appear higher in urban or socially deprived areas. 
Mortality is higher with male gender, age and frailty (Box 13.37) and 
medical comorbidity (e.g. diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, 
chronic lung disease). In the UK mortality is higher in people with 
African Caribbean and South Asian origin, compared to individuals who 
have primarily European ancestry. A genome-wide association study 
linked severity to blood group A as opposed to blood group O, as well 
as a gene cluster in chromosome 3 that includes several chemokine 
receptors. The role of immunocompromise on COVID-19 is still being 
established. Immunocompomised patients may have atypical pres-
entations and prolonged viral shedding, but may be less susceptible 
to severe COVID-19 if they are on anti-inammatory treatments that 
modify COVID-19 pathogenesis. Early data suggested that patients 
immunosuppressed due to cancer or organ transplant recipients may 
present with more severe disease, while those receiving biologics do 
not. Increased age and medical comorbidity are associated with severe 
disease and mortality, and care homes have experienced outbreaks 
with high mortality.
‘Long COVID’ is a term that has been used to describe both prolonged 
COVID-19 and a post-COVID-19 syndrome that may involve almost 
any body system. In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) has dened acute COVID-19 as ‘signs and symptoms 
of COVID-19 for up to 4 weeks’, ongoing symptomatic COVID-19 as 
13.37 Features of COVID-19 in older age and frailty
 Pathogenesis: reduced expression of hACE2 may predispose to more severe 
respiratory presentation
 Immunity: increased inammatory responses in general and reduced antiviral 
responses may reduce viral clearance and increase complications
 Clinical features: atypical presentations with confusion, delirium and falls
 Complications: increased complication rates
 Mortality: case fatality rate doubled in those > 65 years and increases with age
 Investigations: lack of data on PCR sensitivity in older age
 Treatment: may be less likely to be admitted to intensive care
 Preventative strategies: more likely to be asked to ‘shield’ (minimise social 
interaction), with consequences for general well-being. Older adults are 
associated with lower vaccine responses in other diseases

[[p336]]
Viral infections     297
13
‘signs and symptoms of COVID-19 from 4 to 12 weeks’ and the post-
COVID-19 syndrome as ‘signs and symptoms that develop during or 
after an infection consistent with COVID-19, continue for more than 
12 weeks and are not explained by an alternative diagnosis’. ‘Long 
COVID’ would encompass the latter two scenarios. The World Health 
Organization has developed a denition for ‘post COVID-19 condition’ 
that species a symptom duration of at least two months, with symptoms 
being either a continuation of the initial infection or new symptoms after 
initial recovery. This too would accord with the popular understanding of 
‘long COVID’. Whatever denition is used, the most common unifying 
feature of long COVID/the post-COVID syndrome is fatigue, which can 
be prolonged and extreme. Other common presentations have included 
multisystem inammatory symptoms, persistent fevers and evidence of 
organ dysfunction affecting almost any organ, but particularly the heart 
and lungs. Persistent headache, memory problems, insomnia and men-
tal health symptoms such as depression are frequently reported, as are 
loss of taste and smell, deafness and tinnitus, arthralgia, skin rashes and 
paraesthaesias. In reality, the post-COVID syndrome is likely to be a con-
ation of different conditions, not all of which are specic to COVID-19 
(e.g. COVID-19 itself, the sequelae of complications of COVID-19 and the 
various causes of ICU acquired weakness, p. 215). Optimal management 
strategies for long COVID have not yet been established.
Investigations
Laboratory abnormalities can include an increased neutrophil to lympho-
cyte ratio; elevated ALT, D-dimer and inammatory markers, including 
C-reactive protein (CRP) and ferritin; hypoalbuminaemia and lympho-
penia. However, these ndings are non-specic and of very little help in 
distinguishing COVID-19 from other infections. Procalcitonin (PCT) may 
be elevated and may raise suspicion of secondary bacterial infection, 
though there is currently insufcient evidence to recommend its routine 
use or on which to base decisions on whom to give antimicrobials on 
this test. Acute kidney injury is common in severe disease. Hypokalaemia 
and hypocalcaemia are common. Hyperglycaemia is also reported and 
may be observed in patients not known to be diabetic. Hypoxia may 
be accompanied by hypocapnia so that it appears inappropriately well 
tolerated (‘happy hypoxia’).
Chest radiology shows bilateral predominantly basal and peripheral 
inltrates, or in a minority, unilateral inltrates. CT scan of the chest 
shows ‘ground glass’ abnormalities, consolidation, septal thickening or 
crazy-pavement patterning (Fig. 13.18). Lesions are most often basal, 
peripheral and bilateral. Pulmonary vascular enlargement, pleural or per-
icardial effusions may be observed in a minority. CT changes may occur 
in those with negative chest radiography and negative PCR and can be 
used in patients in whom COVID-19 is strongly suspected but not con-
rmed. In general CT is reserved for severe cases or those with other 
indications for performing a CT.
Microbiological diagnosis is by nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal 
swab and reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR) to detect viral RNA. 
Sensitivity is approximately 60%–70% and specicity is high (approxi-
mately 98%). Nasotracheal aspirates or deep sputum samples may have 
greater sensitivity. Antibody detection can conrm prior exposure but 
may cross-react with antibodies from other coronaviruses. Lateral ow 
immunochromatography (p. 106) is also used to detect SARS-CoV-2 
antigens. It is rapid (around 30 minutes) and can be used at home but is 
less sensitive and specic than PCR.
Management
Treatment is supportive, with high ow oxygen and proning. Non-invasive 
ventilation or mechanical ventilation are required for those with more 
severe respiratory failure. Fluid resuscitation is frequently required for 
hospitalised patients and antimicrobials are added if there are signs or 
symptoms suggestive of secondary infection. Inotropic support may be 
required for shock. Renal replacement therapy may be required for acute 
kidney injury, and anticoagulation if there is evidence of venous throm-
boembolism. Dexamethasone improves survival and is recommended 
for hospitalised patients requiring supplemental oxygen or mechanical 
ventilation. Anti-interleukin (IL)-6 monoclonal antibodies (e.g. tocilizumab) 
reduce mortality and reduce time to recovery in critically ill patients if 
administered within 24 hours of admission to an intensive care unit. In the 
UK tocilizumab is also used in patients with oxygen saturations <92% 
on repeated measurement on room air with a CRP ≥75 mg/L. An initial 
randomised clinical trial of the nucleotide analogue remdesivir (Chapter 
6) found that it decreased the time to recovery when used within 10 
days of symptom onset in patients requiring supplemental oxygen but 
not mechanical ventilation. However, it has not been found to signicantly 
improve survival and is not currently recommended by the WHO. Antiviral 
agents are being developed with the goal of administering these early 
after symptom onset to prevent the later inammatory complications. 
Preliminary trial results indicate that the oral antiviral agents molnupiravir 
and Paxlovid reduce hospitalisation and death if given within the rst 3-5 
days of symptoms. Molnupiravir is a prodrug, which is metabolised into 
a form that causes viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase to introduce 
fatal mutations into nascent RNA strands. Paxlovid is a combination of 
two protease inhibitors, the investigational compound PF-07321332, 
and ritonavir; PF-07321332 is targeted against SARS-CoV-2 3CL pro-
tease and ritonavir inhibits the breakdown of PF-07321332. However, 
both drugs remain experimental at the time of writing, and there are 
many other potential SARS-CoV-2 antiviral agents at various stages of 
development. An alternative antiviral strategy is to use antibodies against 
the virus. The use of single monoclonal antibodies to variable regions 
of the S protein is limited by rapid emergence of viral resistance and 
they have not demonstrated efcacy. In contrast, combinations of two 
monoclonal antibodies (e.g. casirivimab and imdevimab (REGEN-COV) 
B
A
Fig. 13.18 Chest computerised tomography (CT) scan of a patient with COVID-19. The images show widespread areas of consolidation in both lungs.

[[p337]]
298    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
13.38 SARS-CoV-2 vaccines licensed or at a late stage of development*
Manufacturer
Vaccine type
Number of doses administered
Reported efcacy
Storage requirements
Oxford/AstraZeneca
Viral vector, ChAdOx (chimpanze adenovirus)
2
62%–90%
4°C
Moderna
mRNA
2
95%
20°C
Pzer–BioNTech
mRNA
2
95%
70°C
Gamaleya (Sputnik V)
Viral vector, Ad5 and Ad26 (human 
adenoviruses)
2
92%
4°C
Janssen (Johnson & 
Johnson)
Viral vector, Ad26 (human adenovirus)
1
66%
4°C
Novovax
Protein subunit
2
95%
4°C
Sinopharm
Inactivated virus
2
80%
4°C
Sinovac
Inactivated virus
2
50%
4°C
Sinopharm–Wuhan
Inactivated virus
2
70%
4°C
Bharat Biotech
Inactivated virus
2
80%
4°C
*This list was accurate at the time of writing (mid-2021). However, because of the rapid speed of vaccine development this is not a complete list of available SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.
or bamlanivimab and etesevimab) are anticipated to represent a 
greater barrier to escape mutants and preserve efcacy. Initial studies 
demonstrate these reduce viral load and medical visits in outpatients 
and reduce hospital stay length and mortality in patients who have not 
mounted a natural antibody response following vaccination. The efcacy 
of monoclonal antibodies against the S protein may be challenged by the 
emergence of variants with mutations such as E484K, and approaches 
being developed in response include the use of ‘broadly neutralizing’ 
antibodies that target more conserved regions of the S protein. Trials 
using convalescent serum have not shown efcacy.
Vaccination
Because of the global impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic vaccine devel-
opment started very soon after the virus was identied and sequenced. 
Vaccines approved or in development include inactivated vaccines, RNA 
and DNA vaccines, protein subunit vaccines and recombinant RNA vac-
cines delivered in virus vectors (Box 13.38). The SARS-CoV-2 vaccines 
induce T-cell immunity in addition to neutralizing antibody but the extent 
and longevity as well as the ability to block transmission are still being 
assessed. In general, vaccines have been shown to be efcacious and 
some have reported efcacy against variant strains after single doses, 
although the efcacy of single dose vaccination is markedly reduced for 
the B1.617.2 (Delta) variant. Vaccines have a more dramatic effect on 
reduction of hospitalised cases than they do on reduction of overall infec-
tion but they still play a major role in reducing community transmission. 
Vaccines are being developed to combat variant strains, including poten-
tially addition of booster doses with modied RNA vaccines. Vaccines have 
demonstrated safety after billions of administered doses. Side-effects have 
been minimal and dwarfed by the ongoing mortality of COVID-19 in those 
without vaccination. Reported severe complications have occurred at 
incidences approximating 1 per million or less. At least two of the ade-
noviral vector COVID-19 vaccines have been linked to very rare cases of 
thrombosis with thrombocytopenia (‘vaccine-induced thrombosis with 
thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS)’), a condition with some similarities to 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (p. 948). Guillain-Barré syndrome is 
also reported after the adenoviral vaccines. The RNA vaccines have been 
linked to rare cases of myocarditis and pericarditis.
Vaccination programmes were rolled out at different rates in differ-
ent countries. The strategy of rollout used in the UK and some other 
countries was to target the highest-risk demographic groups rst (e.g. 
older people and those with underlying health conditions). As infection 
is less severe in patients who have been vaccinated, this strategy grad-
ually converted COVID-19 from a severe disease with high mortality 
affecting the older population to a predominantly non-severe disease 
with low mortality affecting younger people. Other strategies may have 
been used in different countries. The duration of immunity conferred by 
vaccines and natural infection is not yet known, and booster doses are 
likely to be required depending on the evidence that emerges.
The need to maintain the ‘cold chain’ from manufacture to adminis-
tration is vital for any vaccine. However, it is a particular challenge the 
pure RNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, as they need to be stored at either 
−20°C or −70°C at all times. This is likely to reduce their use in low- and 
middle-income countries, where the logistical infrastructure required to 
maintain the cold chain is less likely to be available.
‘Vaccine hesitancy’ refers to a heterogenous process in which individu-
als may refuse or delay vaccination. Vaccine hesitancy has been encoun-
tered in many countries and may be more prominent in populations with 
demographics that vary in different regions. This can represent a major 
challenge to ensuring high levels of vaccine uptake in a population.
Other considerations
The COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated changes in the law, e.g. to 
enable governments to mandate the use of masks in public, enforce 
lockdowns and streamline the processes of death certication to deal 
with surges in deaths. It has caused health services to become over-
whelmed with acutely ill patients, with a knock-on effect of delaying the 
treatment of less urgent cases. An as yet unquantied problem is the 
burden of psychological illness in staff who work in patient-facing roles 
with COVID-19 patients and face issues such as physical exhaustion, 
burnout and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Viral infections with neurological involvement 
See also page 1175.
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) 
This avivirus is an important cause of endemic encephalitis in Japan, 
China, Russia, South-east Asia, India and Pakistan; outbreaks also 
occur elsewhere. There are 10000–20000 cases reported to the WHO 
annually. Pigs and aquatic birds are the reservoirs and transmission is by 
Culex mosquitoes. Exposure to rice paddies is a recognised risk factor.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is 4–21 days. Most infections are subclinical in 
childhood and 1% or less of infections lead to encephalitis. Initial sys-
temic illness with fever, malaise and anorexia is followed by headache, 

[[p338]]
Bacterial infections     299
13
photophobia, vomiting and changes in brainstem function. Other neuro-
logical features include meningism, seizures, cranial nerve palsies, ac-
cid or spastic paralysis and extrapyramidal syndromes. Mortality with 
neurological disease is 25%. Some 50% of survivors have neurological 
sequelae.
Investigations, management and prevention 
Other infectious causes of encephalitis should be excluded. There is 
neutrophilia and often hyponatraemia. CSF analysis reveals lymphocy-
tosis and elevated protein. Serological testing of serum and CSF aids 
diagnosis but may cross-react with dengue and other aviviruses.
Treatment is supportive. Vaccination is recommended for travellers to 
endemic areas during the monsoon. Some endemic countries include 
vaccination in their childhood schedules.
Tick-borne encephalitis virus 
This avivirus is endemic in an area from northern Europe (including the 
UK) that extends across Siberia to China and Japan. Its incidence is 
increasing, and it is transmitted from domestic or wild animals by Ixodes
ticks or sometimes by unpasteurised dairy products. The incubation 
period is up to 28 days but averages 7 days. A third of cases cause 
symptoms, with fever, myalgia and headache followed by an interval of 
up to a month before meningitis, encephalitis or radiculitis occur. The Far 
Eastern sub-type tends to be more severe. Diagnosis is by IgM ELISA 
or detection of viral RNA by RT-PCR of blood or CSF. IgG serology 
cross-reacts with other aviviruses. Treatment is supportive. Prevention 
is by avoidance of tick bites. A vaccine is also available.
West Nile virus 
This avivirus is an important cause of neurological disease throughout 
Australia, India and Russia through Africa and Southern Europe and across 
to North America. The disease has an avian reservoir and a Culex mos-
quito vector. Older people are at increased risk of neurological disease.
Clinical features 
Most infections are asymptomatic. After 2–6 days’ incubation, a mild 
febrile illness and arthralgia may occur. A prolonged incubation may 
be seen in immunocompromised individuals. Children may develop a 
maculopapular rash. Neurological disease is seen in 1% and is charac-
terised by encephalitis, meningitis or asymmetric accid paralysis with 
10% mortality.
Diagnosis and management 
Diagnosis is by serology or detection of viral RNA in blood or CSF. 
Serological tests may show cross-reactivity with other aviviruses, 
including vaccine strains. Treatment is supportive.
Nipah virus encephalitis 
Nipah virus is a paramyxovirus in the Henipavirus genus, which caused 
an epidemic of encephalitis in Malaysia and subsequently outbreaks in 
Bangladesh and India. Mortality is around 30%. Diagnosis is by PCR or 
serology.
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I 
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1) is a retrovirus that 
causes chronic infection with development of adult T-cell leukaemia/
lymphoma (ATL) or HTLV-1-associated myelopathy (HAM) in a sub-
set of those infected (see Box 25.57). It is found mainly in Japan, the 
Caribbean, Central and South America, and the Seychelles. The life-
time risk of ATL in those with chronic HTLV-1 infection is estimated 
at 2.5%–4%. HAM or tropical spastic paraparesis occurs in less than 
5% of those with chronic infection, and presents with gait disturbance, 
spasticity of the lower extremities, urinary incontinence, impotence and 
sensory disturbance. Myositis and uveitis may also occur with HTLV-1 
infection. Serology, sometimes conrmed with PCR, establishes the 
diagnosis. Treatment is supportive.
Viral infections with rheumatological involvement 
Rheumatological syndromes characterise a variety of viral infections 
ranging from exanthems, such as rubella and parvovirus B19, to blood-
borne viruses, such as HBV and HIV-1 and the sequelae of EVD.
Chikungunya virus 
Chikungunya is an alphavirus that causes fever, rash and arthropathy. 
The disease occurs mainly in Africa and throughout Asia, but is becoming 
commoner in other areas, including South America and the Carribbean. 
Cases occur sporadically or in epidemics, with notable epidemics occur-
ring in Réunion and Mauritius (>272 000 cases in 2005–06) and India 
(1 400 000 cases in 2006). Humans and non-human primates are the 
main reservoir. The vectors are Aedes mosquitoes including Ae. aegyptii
and Ae. albopictus.
The incubation period is 2–12 days. A period of fever may be followed 
by an afebrile phase and then recrudescence of fever. Children may 
develop a maculopapular rash. Adults are susceptible to arthritis, which 
causes early morning pain and swelling, most often in the small joints. 
Arthritis can persist for months and may become chronic in individuals 
who are positive for human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-B27. Related alpha-
viruses causing similar syndromes include Sindbis virus (Scandinavia and 
Africa), O’nyong-nyong virus (Central Africa), Ross River virus (Australia) 
and Mayaro virus (Caribbean and South America).
Diagnosis is by serology but cross-reactivity between alphaviruses 
occurs. Treatment is symptomatic. The disease may be debilitating but 
is rarely fatal.
Prion diseases 
Prions cause transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and are dis-
cussed in Chapter 28.
Bacterial infections 
Bacterial infections of the skin, soft tissues and 
bones 
Most infections of the skin, soft tissues and bone are caused by either 
Staph. aureus or streptococci (mainly Strep. pyogenes) (see pp. 1025 
and 1090).
Staphylococcal infections 
Staphylococci are usually found colonising the anterior nares and skin. 
Some staphylococci produce coagulase, an enzyme that converts brin-
ogen to brin in rabbit plasma, causing it to clot. Staph. aureus is coagu-
lase-positive, and most other species are coagulase-negative.
Staph. aureus is the main cause of staphylococcal infections. 
Staphylococcus intermedius is another coagulase-positive staph-
ylococcus, which causes infection following dog bites. Among 
coagulase-negative organisms, Staphylococcus epidermidis is the 
predominant commensal organism of the skin, and can cause severe 
infections in those with central venous catheters or implanted pros-
thetic materials. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is part of the normal 
vaginal ora and causes urinary tract infections in sexually active young 
women. Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Staphylococcus schleiferi, 
Staphylococcus haemolyticus and Staphylococcus caprae are also 
human pathogens.
Staphylococcal blood-stream infections can disseminate widely 
(Fig. 13.19). In any patient with staphylococcal bacteraemia, especially 

[[p339]]
300    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
injection drug-users, the possibility of endocarditis must be considered 
(see p. 462). Growth of Staph. aureus in blood cultures should not be 
dismissed as a ‘contaminant’. Spreading cellulitis mandates the urgent 
need for an antistaphylococcal antibiotic, such as ucloxacillin, cefazo-
lin or a glycopeptide if MRSA is suspected. This is particularly true for 
mid-facial cellulitis, which can result in cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis.
In addition, Staph. aureus can cause severe systemic disease due to 
the effects of toxin produced at supercial sites in the absence of tissue 
invasion by bacteria.
Skin infections 
Staphylococci cause ecthyma, folliculitis, furuncles, carbuncles, bul-
lous impetigo and the scalded skin syndrome, which are discussed in 
Chapter 27. They may also be involved in necrotising infections of the 
skin and subcutaneous tissues.
Wound infections 
Many wound infections, which prolong post-operative care, are caused 
by staphylococci (Fig. 13.20A). Prevention involves careful attention to 
hand hygiene, skin preparation and aseptic technique, and the use of 
topical and systemic antibiotic prophylaxis.
Treatment is by early drainage of any abscesses, removal of pros-
thetic materials if possible, plus adequate dosage of antistaphylococcal 
antibiotics.
Cannula-related infection 
Staphylococcal infection associated with cannula sepsis (Fig. 13.20B) 
and thrombophlebitis is an important and common reason for morbidity 
following hospital admission. The visual infusion phlebitis (VIP) score aids 
cannula evaluation (Box 13.39). Staphylococci have a predilection for 
plastic, rapidly forming a biolm on cannulae, which is a source of bac-
teraemia. Local poultice application may relieve symptoms but cannula 
removal and antibiotic treatment with ucloxacillin (or a glycopeptide) are 
necessary if there is spreading infection.
Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
Resistance to meticillin is due to a penicillin-binding protein mutation in 
Staph. aureus, which confers resistance to almost all ß-lactam antibiotics. 
Resistance to vancomycin/teicoplanin (glycopeptides) in either glycopep-
tide intermediate Staph. aureus (GISA) or, rarely, vancomycin-resistant 
(VRSA) strains threatens management of serious staphylococcal infec-
tions. Meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA) is now a major worldwide 
health care-acquired pathogen, accounting for up to 40% of staphylo-
coccal bacteraemia in high-income countries. Community-acquired 
MRSA (c-MRSA) currently accounts for 50% of all MRSA infections in the 
USA. These organisms have also acquired other toxins, such as Panton–
Valentine leukocidin (PVL), and can cause rapidly fatal infection in young 
people. Clinicians must be aware of the potential danger of these infections 
and implement appropriate locally approved infection control measures.
Treatment options for MRSA are shown in Box 6.16. Treatment should 
always be based on the results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing, since 
resistance to all these agents occurs. Milder MRSA infections may be 
CNS
Meningitis
Brain abscess
(neurosurgical 
infections in
particular)
Respiratory
Pneumonia
Lung abscess
Empyema
Cardiac
Endocarditis
Pericarditis
Blood stream
Blood-stream
infection
Metastatic
abscesses
Bone and joint
Osteomyelitis
Septic arthritis
Intestinal 
Enterocolitis
Multisystem
Toxic shock
syndrome
Skin 
Wound 
infections
Boils, styes, 
carbuncles,
abscesses
Fig. 13.19 Infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus  (CNS = central 
nervous system)
B
A
Fig. 13.20 Manifestations of skin infection with Staphylococcus aureus
13.39 How to assess an intravenous (IV) cannula using the visual 
infusion phlebitis (VIP) score
Clinical features
Score
Assessment and 
management
IV site appears healthy
0
No signs of phlebitis
Observe cannula
One of the following is evident:
Slight pain near IV site
Slight redness near IV site
1
Possible rst signs of 
phlebitis
Observe cannula
Two of the following are evident:
Pain near IV site
Erythema
Swelling
2
Early stage of phlebitis
Resite cannula
ALL of the following are evident 
and extensive:
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
3
Medium stage of phlebitis
Resite cannula
Consider treatment
ALL of the following are evident 
and extensive:
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
Palpable venous cord
4
Advanced stage of 
phlebitis or start of 
thrombophlebitis
Resite cannula
Consider treatment
ALL of the following are evident:
Pain along path of cannula
Erythema
Induration
Palpable venous cord
Pyrexia
5
Advanced stage of 
thrombophlebitis
Initiate treatment
Resite cannula
Adapted from Jackson A. Infection control: a battle in vein infusion phlebitis. Nursing Times 
1997; 94:68–71.

[[p340]]
Bacterial infections     301
13
treated with clindamycin, tetracyclines or co-trimoxazole. Glycopeptides, 
linezolid and daptomycin are reserved for treatment of more severe infec-
tions. Toxin-producing MRSA infections should be treated with the addi-
tion of protein-inhibiting antibiotics (clindamycin, linezolid).
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome 
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is a life-threatening disease 
associated with infection by Staph. aureus producing a specic toxin 
(toxic shock syndrome toxin 1, TSST1). Formerly seen in young women 
in association with the use of highly absorbent intravaginal tampons, it 
can occur with any infection involving a TSST1-producing Staph. aureus
strain. The toxin acts as a ‘super-antigen’, triggering signicant T-cell 
activation and massive cytokine release.
TSS has an abrupt onset with high fever, generalised systemic upset 
(myalgia, headache, sore throat and vomiting), a widespread erythematous 
blanching rash resembling scarlet fever, and hypotension. It rapidly pro-
gresses over a few hours to multi-organ failure, leading to death in 10%–
20%. Recovery is accompanied at 7–10 days by desquamation (Fig. 13.21).
The diagnosis is clinical and may be conrmed in menstrual cases by 
nding a retained tampon with staphylococci on Gram stain. Subsequent 
culture and demonstration of toxin production are conrmatory.
Management 
Treatment is with immediate and aggressive uid resuscitation and an intra-
venous antistaphylococcal antimicrobial, usually with the addition of a protein 
synthesis inhibitor (e.g. clindamycin) to inhibit toxin production. Intravenous 
immunoglobulin is occasionally added in the most severe cases. Women 
who recover from tampon-associated TSS should avoid tampons for at 
least 1 year and they should be advised that the condition can recur.
Streptococcal infections 
Streptococci are oropharyngeal and gut commensals, which appear as 
Gram-positive cocci in chains (see Fig. 6.3). They were classied by the 
pattern of haemolysis they produce on blood agar (see Fig. 6.4), by their 
‘Lanceeld serogroups’ (Box 13.40) but are now usually identied and 
classied by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-ight 
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry. Some streptococci (e.g. Strep. milleri
group) defy simple classication.
Strep. pyogenes (group A streptococcus, GAS) is the leading cause of 
bacterial pharyngitis. Although the presence of fever, tender anterior lym-
phadenopathy and purulent tonsillar exudate and the absence of cough 
make streptococcal pharyngitis more likely than viral infection, clinical fea-
tures alone are unreliable for diagnosing streptococcal pharyngitis. GAS 
are the major cause of cellulitis, erysipelas and impetigo. They also cause 
the post-streptococcal syndromes of glomerulonephrits and rheumatic 
fever, which are described in Chapters 14 and 16, respectively. The closely 
related Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis (SDSE) (formerly 
groups C and G) cause cellulitis, particularly in older people, diabetic or 
immunocompromised patients. Streptococcus agalactiae (group B strep-
tococci (GBS)) colonise the gut and vagina. They cause post-partum and 
neonatal sepsis, as well as other deep infections (infective endocarditis, 
septic arthritis, osteomyelitis etc.), especially in older people.
Streptococcal scarlet fever 
Strep. pyogenes (or occasionally SDSE) causing pharyngitis, tonsillitis 
or other infection may lead to scarlet fever, if the infecting strain pro-
duces a streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin. Scarlet fever is most common 
in school-age children, but can also occur in young adults who have 
contact with young children. A diffuse erythematous rash occurs, which 
blanches on pressure (Fig. 13.22A), classically with circumoral pallor. The 
tongue, initially coated, becomes red and swollen (‘strawberry tongue’, 
Fig. 13.22B). The disease lasts about 7 days, the rash disappearing in 
7–10 days, followed by a ne desquamation. Residual petechial lesions 
in the antecubital fossa, ‘Pastia’s sign’, can occur (Fig. 13.22C).
Treatment involves intravenous benzylpenicillin or an oral penicillin plus 
symptomatic measures.
Fig. 13.21 Full-thickness desquamation after staphylococcal toxic shock 
syndrome.
13.40 Streptococcal and related infections
β-haemolytic group A (Streptococcus pyogenes)
 Skin and soft tissue infection 
(including erysipelas, impetigo, 
necrotising fasciitis)
 Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
 Puerperal sepsis
 Scarlet fever
 Glomerulonephritis
 Rheumatic fever
 Bone and joint infection
 Tonsillitis
β-haemolytic streptococci group B (Strep. agalactiae)
 Neonatal infections, including 
meningitis
 Female pelvic infections
 Cellulitis
β-haemolytic streptococci groups C and G
 Cellulitis
 Endocarditis
 Pharyngitis
 Septic arthritis
α-, β- or non-haemolytic group D (Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium)
 Endocarditis
 Intra-abdominal infections
 Urinary tract infection
α- or non-haemolytic group D (Strep. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus/S. 
bovis biotype I)
 Bacteraemia/endocarditis associated  
with large bowel malignancy
α-haemolytic optochin-resistant (viridans streptococci – Strep. mitis, Strep. 
sanguis, Strep. mutans, Strep. salivarius)
 Sepsis in immunosuppressed
 Endocarditis
α-haemolytic optochin-sensitive (Strep. pneumoniae)
 Pneumonia
 Meningitis
 Endocarditis
 Otitis media
 Sepsis
 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
 Sinusitis
Variable haemolysis (Strep. milleri group – Strep. anginosus, Strep. 
intermedius, Strep. constellatus)
 Endocarditis
 Intra-abdominal infections
 Urinary tract infection
Anaerobic streptococci (Peptostreptococcus spp.)
 Sepsis in immunosuppressed
 Endocarditis
N.B. All streptococci can cause sepsis.

[[p341]]
302    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome 
Strep. pyogenes and SDSE can produce one of a variety of toxins, such 
as streptococcal pyogenic exotoxin A. Like staphylococcal TSST1 (see 
above), these act as super-antigens. Initially, an inuenza-like illness 
occurs, with signs of localised infection in 50% of cases, most often 
involving the skin and soft tissues. A faint erythematous rash, mainly on 
the chest, rapidly progresses to circulatory shock. Without aggressive 
management, multi-organ failure will develop.
Judicious uid resuscitation is combined with parenteral antistrepto-
coccal antibiotic therapy, usually with benzylpenicillin and clindamycin, 
to inhibit toxin production. Intravenous immunoglobulin is often adminis-
tered. If necrotising fasciitis is present, it should be treated as described 
on page 272 with urgent débridement.
Treponematoses 
Syphilis 
This disease is described in Chapter 15.
Endemic treponematoses 
Yaws 
Yaws is a granulomatous disease, mainly involving the skin and bones, 
caused by Treponema pertenue. It is morphologically and serologically 
indistinguishable from the microorganisms causing syphilis and pinta. 
The geographical origin and sexual history of patients helps exclude 
false-positive syphilis serology due to endemic treponemal infections. 
Between 1950 and 1960, WHO campaigns treated over 60 million peo-
ple and eradicated yaws from many areas, but the disease has persisted 
throughout the tropics. A resurgence occurred in the 1980s and 1990s 
in West and Central Africa and the South Pacic.
Organisms are transmitted by bodily contact from a patient with infec-
tious yaws through minor skin abrasions of the recipient, usually a child. 
After 3–4 weeks’ incubation, a proliferative granuloma containing numer-
ous treponemes develops at the inoculation site. This primary lesion is 
followed by secondary eruptions. In addition, there may be hypertrophic 
periosteal bone lesions, with underlying cortical rarefaction. Lesions of 
late yaws are characterised by destructive changes that closely resemble 
the osteitis and gummas of tertiary syphilis. These heal with scarring and 
deformity. Investigations and management are outlined in Box 13.41. 
Improved housing and hygiene, combined with mass chemotherapy 
programmes, have achieved dramatic success in the control of yaws.
Pinta and bejel 
These two treponemal infections occur in poor rural populations with low 
standards of domestic hygiene but are found in separate parts of the 
world. They have features in common, notably that they are transmitted 
by contact, usually within the family and not sexually, and in the case of 
bejel, through common eating and drinking utensils. Their diagnosis and 
management are as for yaws (see Box 13.41).
 Pinta. Pinta is found only in South and Central America, where its 
incidence is declining. The infection is conned to the skin. The early 
lesions are scaly papules or dyschromic patches on the skin. The 
late lesions are often depigmented and disguring.
 Bejel. Bejel is the Middle Eastern name for non-venereal syphilis, 
which has a patchy distribution across sub-Saharan Africa, the 
Middle East, Central Asia and Australia. It has been eradicated from 
Eastern Europe. Transmission is most commonly from the mouth of 
the mother or child and the primary mucosal lesion is seldom seen. 
The early and late lesions resemble those of secondary and tertiary 
syphilis but cardiovascular and neurological disease is rare.
Tropical ulcer 
Tropical ulcer is due to a synergistic bacterial infection caused by a fuso-
bacterium (Fusobacterium ulcerans, an anaerobe) and Treponema vin-
centii. It is common in hot, humid regions. The ulcer commonly involves 
the lower legs, developing as a papule that rapidly breaks down to form a 
sharply dened, painful ulcer. The ulcer base has a foul slough. Penicillin 
and metronidazole are useful in the early stages but rest, elevation and 
dressings are the mainstays of treatment.
Buruli ulcer 
Mycobacterium ulcerans causes Buruli ulcer in tropical rainforests. Cases 
were declining until 2016 but have risen since, with 2713 cases reported 
in 2018. Outside West and Central Africa occasional cases have been 
reported in Australia.
The initial lesion is a small subcutaneous nodule on the arm or leg. This 
breaks down to form a shallow, necrotic ulcer with deeply undermined 
edges, which extends rapidly. Healing may occur after 6 months but 
granuloma formation and the accompanying brosis cause contractures 
and deformity. Clumps of acid-fast bacilli are detected in the ulcer oor.
C
B
A
Fig. 13.22 Clinical features of scarlet fever.
13.41 Diagnosis and treatment of yaws, pinta and bejel
Diagnosis of early stages
 Detection of spirochaetes in exudate of lesions by dark ground microscopy
Diagnosis of latent and early stages
 Positive serological tests, as for syphilis (see Box 15.8)
Treatment of all stages
 Single intramuscular injection of 1.2 g long-acting penicillin, e.g. benzathine 
benzylpenicillin

[[p342]]
Bacterial infections     303
13
A combination of rifampicin and clarithromycin can cure the infection. 
Infected tissue should be removed surgically. Wound and lymphoedema 
management, surgery, including skin grafting, and physiotherapy all play a 
role in management and prevention of disability.
Systemic bacterial infections 
Brucellosis 
Brucellosis is an enzootic infection (i.e. endemic in animals) caused by Gram-
negative coccobacilli. The four species causing human disease and their 
animal hosts are: Brucella melitensis (goats, sheep and camels in Europe, 
especially the Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, Africa, India, Central 
Asia and South America), B. abortus (cattle, mainly in Africa, Asia and South 
America), B. suis (pigs in South Asia) and B. canis (dogs). B. melitensis causes 
the most severe disease; B. suis is often associated with abscess formation.
Infected animals may excrete Brucella spp. in their milk for prolonged 
periods and human infection is acquired by ingesting contaminated dairy 
products (especially unpasteurised milk), uncooked meat or offal. Animal 
urine, faeces, vaginal discharge and uterine products may transmit infec-
tion through abraded skin or via splashes and aerosols to the respiratory 
tract and conjunctiva.
Clinical features 
Brucella spp. are intracellular organisms that survive for long peri-
ods within the reticulo-endothelial system. This favours chronicity and 
relapse, even after antimicrobial therapy.
Acute illness is characterised by a high swinging temperature, rigors, leth-
argy, headache, arthralgia, myalgia and scrotal pain. Occasionally, there is 
delirium, abdominal pain and constipation. Physical signs are non-specic, 
e.g. enlarged lymph nodes. Splenomegaly may cause thrombocytopenia.
Localised infection (Fig. 13.23) occurs in approximately 30% of 
patients, particularly if treatment is delayed.
Diagnosis 
Denitive diagnosis depends on culture of the organism. Blood cul-
tures are positive in 75%–80% of B. melitensis and 50% of B. abortus
infections. Bone marrow culture is not routine but may increase the diag-
nostic yield if antibiotics have been used prior to culture. CSF culture in 
neurobrucellosis is positive in about 30% of cases. The laboratory should 
be informed of suspected brucellosis, to allow appropriate laboratory 
steps to prevent laboratory worker infection.
Serology may aid diagnosis. In endemic areas, a single high antibody 
titre of more than 1/320 or a fourfold rise in titre supports a diagnosis of 
acute infection. The test usually takes several weeks to become positive 
but should eventually detect 95% of acute infections.
Management 
Aminoglycosides show synergistic activity with tetracyclines and treatment 
regimens for different forms of brucellosis are outlined in Box 13.42
Borrelia infections 
Borrelia are agellated spirochaetal bacteria that infect humans after 
bites from ticks or lice. They cause a variety of human infections world-
wide (Box 13.43).
Lyme disease 
Lyme disease is caused by B. burgdorferi, which occurs in the USA, 
Europe, Russia, China, Japan and Australia. In Europe, two additional 
genospecies are also encountered, B. afzelii and B. garinii. The reservoir 
of infection is ixodid (hard) ticks that feed on a variety of large mammals, 
particularly deer. Birds spread ticks over a wide area. The organism is 
transmitted to humans via the bite of larval, nymphal or adult ticks.
Ehrlichiosis is a common co-infection with Lyme disease. Two forms 
occur: Anaplasma phagocytophilum, human granulocytic anaplasmosis 
(HGA); and Ehrlichia chaffeensis, human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME).
Clinical features 
There are three stages of disease. Progression may be arrested at any 
stage.
 Early localised disease. The characteristic feature is a skin reaction 
around the site of the tick bite, known as erythema migrans  
(Fig. 13.24). Initially, a red ‘bull’s eye’ macule or papule appears 
2–30 days after the bite. It then enlarges peripherally with central 
Malodorous perspiration
Suppurative arthritis
Synovitis, bursitis
Osteomyelitis
Spinal spondylitis or
sacroiliitis
Paravertebral or psoas
abscess
Meningitis
Intracranial or subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Stroke
Myelopathy
Radiculopathy
Cranial nerve palsies
Uveitis
Retinal thrombophlebitis
Myocarditis
Endocarditis
Pneumonitis or
abscesses
Hilar lymphadenopathy
Splenic abscesses
or calcification
Hepatitis
Epididymo-orchitis
Pancytopenia
Fig. 13.23 Clinical features of brucellosis.

[[p343]]
304    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
13.42 Treatment of brucellosis
Adults with non-localised disease
 Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily orally for 6 weeks plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV 
once daily for 7 days
or
 Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once daily 
for 6 weeks
Bone disease
 Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg once daily orally 
for 6 weeks plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once daily for 7 days
or
 Ciprooxacin 750 mg twice daily orally plus rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once 
daily for 3 months
Neurobrucellosis
 Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily plus rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once daily 
for 6 weeks plus ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice daily until the cerebrospinal uid is 
clear (though susceptibility should be conrmed because sensitivity to third-
generation cephalosporins varies among strains)
Endocarditis
 Almost always needs surgical intervention
plus
 Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily, rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once daily 
and co-trimoxazole 5 mg/kg of trimethoprim component for 6 months plus
gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV once daily for 2–4 weeks
Pregnancy
 Rifampicin 600–900 mg orally once daily and co-trimoxazole 5 mg/kg of 
trimethoprim component for 4 weeks, but caution in last week of pregnancy due to 
displacement of bilirubin from albumin by drugs and risk of kernicterus to the fetus
(IV = intravenous)
13.43 Clinical diseases caused by Borrelia spp.
Species
Vector
Geographical distribution
Lyme disease
B. burgdorferi 
sensu stricto
Tick: Ixodes scapularis
Northern and eastern USA
I. pacicus
Western USA
B. afzelii
I. ricinus
Europe
I. persulcatus
Asia
B. garinii
I. ricinus
Europe
I. persulcatus
Asia
Louse-borne relapsing fever
B. recurrentis
Human louse: Pediculus 
humanus corporis
Worldwide
Tick-borne relapsing fever
B. hermsii
Tick: Ornithodoros 
hermsii
Western North America
B. turicatae
O. turicatae
South-western North 
America and northern 
Mexico
B. venezuelensis
O. rudis
Central America and 
northern South America
B. hispanica
O. erraticus
Iberian peninsula and  
north-western Africa
B. crocidurae
O. erraticus
North Africa and 
Mediterranean region
B. duttonii
O. moubata
Central, eastern and 
southern Africa
B. persica
O. tholozani
Western China, India,  
Central Asia, Middle East
B. latyschewii
O. tartakovskyi
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan
Fig. 13.24 Rash of erythema migrans in Lyme disease with metastatic 
secondary lesions. Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld.
clearing and may persist for months. Atypical forms are common. 
The lesion is not pathognomonic of Lyme disease since similar 
lesions can occur after tick bites. Acute manifestations, such as 
fever, headache and regional lymphadenopathy, may develop with 
or without the rash.
 Early disseminated disease. Dissemination occurs via the blood 
stream and lymphatics. There may be a systemic reaction with 
malaise, arthralgia and, occasionally, metastatic areas of erythema 
migrans (see Fig. 13.24). Neurological involvement may follow 
weeks or months after infection. Common features include lympho-
cytic meningitis, cranial nerve palsies (especially unilateral or bilateral 
facial nerve palsy) and peripheral neuropathy. Radiculopathy, often 
painful, may present a year or more after initial infection. Carditis, 
sometimes accompanied by atrioventricular conduction defects, 
occurs in the USA but is rare in Europe.
 Late disease. Late manifestations include arthritis, polyneuritis and 
encephalopathy. Prolonged arthritis, particularly affecting large 
joints, and brain parenchymal involvement, causing neuropsychiat-
ric abnormalities, may occur but are rare in the UK. Acrodermatitis 
chronica atrophicans is an uncommon late complication seen more 
frequently in Europe than North America. Doughy, patchy discolor-
ation occurs on the peripheries, eventually leading to shiny atrophic 
skin. The lesions are mistaken for those of peripheral vascular dis-
ease. In patients with facial nerve palsy coming from an endemic 
area or having risk factors, Lyme disease should be excluded.
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of early Lyme borreliosis is clinical. Culture from biopsy 
material is rarely available, has a low yield and may take over 6 weeks. 
Antibody detection is frequently negative early in the course of the disease 
but sensitivity increases to 90%–100% in disseminated or late disease. 
Immunouorescence or ELISA can give false-positive reactions in a num-
ber of conditions, including other spirochaetal infections, infectious mon-
onucleosis, rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
Immunoblot (Western blot) techniques are more specic and should be 
used to conrm the diagnosis. Microorganism DNA detection by PCR has 
been applied to blood, urine, CSF and biopsies of skin and synovium.
Management 
Asymptomatic patients with positive antibody tests do not require treat-
ment. However, erythema migrans always requires therapy because 
organisms may persist and cause progressive disease, even if the skin 
lesions resolve. Standard therapy consists of a 14-day course of doxy-
cycline (200 mg daily) or amoxicillin (500 mg 3 times daily). Some 15% of 
patients with early disease will develop a mild febrile reaction (Jarisch–
Herxheimer JHR) during the rst 24 hours of therapy. In pregnant women 
and small children with penicillin allergy, or in those allergic to amoxicillin 
and doxycycline, 14-day treatment with cefuroxime axetil (500 mg twice 
daily) or azithromycin (500 mg once daily) may be used.

[[p344]]
Bacterial infections     305
13
Disseminated disease and arthritis require therapy for a minimum of 
28 days. Arthritis may respond poorly and prolonged or repeated 
courses may be necessary. Neuroborreliosis is treated with parenteral 
β-lactam antibiotics for 3–4 weeks; third-generation cephalosporins such 
as ceftriaxone are preferred.
Prevention 
Protective clothing and insect repellents should be used in tick-infested 
areas. Since the risk of borrelial transmission is lower in the rst few hours 
of a blood feed, prompt removal of ticks is advisable. Unfortunately, lar-
val and nymphal ticks are tiny and may not be noticed. Where risk of 
transmission is high, a single 200 mg dose of doxycycline, given within 
72  hours of exposure, has been shown to prevent erythema migrans.
Louse-borne relapsing fever 
The human body louse, Pediculus humanus, causes itching. Borreliae 
(B. recurrentis) are released from infected lice when they are crushed 
during scratching, inoculating borreliae into the skin. The disease occurs 
worldwide, with epidemic relapsing fever most often seen in Central/East 
Africa and South America.
The borreliae multiply in the blood, where they are abundant in the febrile 
phases, and invade most tissues, especially the liver, spleen and meninges.
Clinical features 
Onset is sudden with fever. The temperature rises to 39.5–40.5°C, accom-
panied by a tachycardia, headache, generalised aching, injected conjunc-
tivae (Fig. 13.25) and herpes labialis. Thrombocytopenia is associated with 
a petechial rash and epistaxis. As the disease progresses tender hepat-
osplenomegaly, jaundice and elevated transaminases are common. There 
may be severe serosal and intestinal haemorrhage, delirium and meningism. 
The fever ends in crisis between the fourth and tenth days, often associated 
with profuse sweating, hypotension and circulatory and cardiac failure. Fever 
may resolve but, in a proportion of patients, after an afebrile period of about 
7 days, there are one or more febrile relapses, which are usually milder and 
less prolonged. Without specic treatment, the mortality rate is up to 40%, 
especially among older and malnourished patients.
Investigations and management 
Dark ground microscopy of a wet lm or Wright–Giemsa-stained thick 
and thin lms demonstrate the organism in blood from a febrile patient.
Treatment aims to eradicate the organism and prevent relapses, while 
minimising the severe JHR that inevitably follows successful chemotherapy. 
The safest treatment is procaine penicillin 300 mg intramuscularly, followed 
the next day by 0.5 g tetracycline. Tetracycline alone is effective and prevents 
relapse, but may give rise to a worse reaction. Doxycycline 200 mg once 
orally in place of tetracycline has the advantage of also being curative for 
typhus, which often accompanies epidemics of relapsing fever. JHR is best 
managed in a high-dependency unit with expert nursing and medical care.
The patient, clothing and all contacts must be freed from lice, as in 
epidemic typhus.
Tick-borne relapsing fever 
Soft ticks (Ornithodoros spp.) transmit B. duttonii (and other Borrelia
species) through saliva while feeding on their host. People sleeping in 
mud houses are at risk, as the tick hides in crevices during the day and 
feeds on humans during the night. Rodents are the reservoir except in 
East Africa, where humans are the reservoir. Clinical manifestations are 
similar to those seen with the louse-borne disease but microorganisms 
are detected in fewer patients on dark-eld microscopy. A 7-day course 
(due to a higher relapse rate than in louse-borne relapsing fever) of 
treatment with either tetracycline (500 mg 4 times daily) or erythromycin 
(500 mg 4 times daily) is needed.
Leptospirosis 
Microbiology and epidemiology 
Leptospirosis is one of the most common zoonotic diseases, favoured by 
a tropical climate and ooding during the monsoon but occurring world-
wide. Leptospires are tightly coiled, thread-like organisms about 5–7 µm in 
length, which are actively motile; each end is bent into a hook. Leptospira 
interrogans is pathogenic for humans. The genus can be separated into 
more than 200 serovars (subtypes) belonging to 23 serogroups.
Leptospirosis is ubiquitous in wildlife and in many domestic animals. 
The organisms persist indenitely in the convoluted tubules of the kid-
ney and are shed into the urine in massive numbers, but infection is 
asymptomatic in the host. The most frequent hosts are rodents, espe-
cially the common rat (Rattus norvegicus). Particular leptospiral sero-
groups are associated with characteristic animal hosts; for example, 
L. icterohaemorrhagiae is the classical parasite of rats and L. canicola
of dogs. There is nevertheless considerable overlap in host–serogroup 
associations.
Leptospires can penetrate intact skin or mucous membranes but 
human infection is facilitated by cuts and abrasions. Prolonged immer-
sion in contaminated water facilitates invasion, as the spirochaete sur-
vives in water for months. Leptospirosis is common in the tropics and 
also in freshwater sports enthusiasts.
Clinical features 
After a relatively brief bacteraemia, invading organisms are distributed 
throughout the body, mainly in kidneys, liver, meninges and brain. The 
incubation period averages 1–2 weeks. Four main clinical syndromes 
can be discerned and clinical features can involve multiple different organ 
systems (Fig. 13.26).
Bacteraemic leptospirosis 
Bacteraemia with any serogroup can produce a non-specic illness with 
high fever, weakness, muscle pain and tenderness (especially of the calf 
and back), intense headache and photophobia, and sometimes diar-
rhoea and vomiting. Conjunctival congestion is the only notable physical 
sign. The illness comes to an end after about 1 week, or else merges into 
one of the other forms of infection.
Aseptic meningitis 
Classically associated with L. canicola infection, this illness is very difcult 
to distinguish from viral meningitis. The conjunctivae may be congested 
but there are no other differentiating signs. Laboratory clues include a 
neutrophil leucocytosis, abnormal LFTs and the occasional presence of 
albumin and casts in the urine.
Icteric leptospirosis (Weil’s disease) 
Fewer than 10% of symptomatic infections result in severe icteric 
illness. Weil’s disease is a dramatic life-threatening event, characterised 
by fever, haemorrhages, jaundice and acute kidney injury. Conjunctival 
hyperaemia is a frequent feature. The patient may have a transient mac-
ular erythematous rash but the characteristic skin changes are purpura 
and large areas of bruising. In severe cases there may be epistaxis, 
haematemesis and melaena, or bleeding into the pleural, pericardial or 
Fig. 13.25 Louse-borne relapsing fever. Injected conjunctivae.

[[p345]]
306    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
subarachnoid spaces. Thrombocytopenia, probably related to activa-
tion of endothelial cells with platelet adhesion and aggregation, is pres-
ent in 50% of cases. Jaundice and hepatomegaly usually occur without 
hepatic failure or encephalopathy. Acute kidney injury, primarily caused 
by impaired renal perfusion and acute tubular necrosis, causes oliguria 
or anuria, with albumin, blood and casts in the urine.
Weil’s disease may also be associated with myocarditis, encephalitis 
and aseptic meningitis. Uveitis and iritis may appear months after appar-
ent clinical recovery.
Pulmonary syndrome 
This syndrome has long been recognised in the Far East and has been 
described during an outbreak of leptospirosis in Nicaragua. It is charac-
terised by haemoptysis, patchy lung inltrates on chest X-ray, and respira-
tory failure. Total bilateral lung consolidation and ARDS with multi-organ 
dysfunction may develop, with a high mortality (over 50%).
Diagnosis 
A polymorphonuclear leucocytosis is accompanied in severe infection 
by thrombocytopenia and elevated blood levels of creatine kinase. In 
jaundiced patients, there is hepatitis and the prothrombin time may be 
prolonged. The CSF in leptospiral meningitis shows a variable cellular 
response, a moderately elevated protein level and normal glucose con-
tent. Acute kidney injury due to interstitial nephritis is common.
In the tropics, dengue, malaria, typhoid fever, scrub typhus and hanta-
virus infection are important differential diagnoses.
Denitive diagnosis of leptospirosis depends on isolation of the organ-
ism, serological tests or detection of specic DNA. In general, however, it 
is probably under-diagnosed.
 Blood cultures are most likely to be positive if taken before day 10 
of illness. Special media are required and cultures may have to be 
incubated for several weeks.
 Leptospires appear in the urine during the second week of illness, 
and in untreated patients may be recovered on culture for several 
months.
 Serological tests are diagnostic if seroconversion or a fourfold 
increase in titre is demonstrated. The microscopic agglutination test 
(MAT) is the investigation of choice and can become positive by the 
end of the rst week. IgM ELISA and immunouorescent techniques 
are easier to perform, however, while rapid immunochromatographic 
tests are specic they are of only moderate sensitivity in the rst 
week of illness.
 Detection of leptospiral DNA by PCR is possible in blood in early 
symptomatic disease, and in urine from day 8 of illness and for 
many months thereafter.
Management and prevention 
The general care of the patient is critically important. Blood trans-
fusion for haemorrhage and careful attention to renal function, the 
usual cause of death, are especially important. Acute kidney injury 
is potentially reversible with adequate support, such as dialysis. 
Most infections are self-limiting. Therapy with either oral doxycycline 
(100 mg twice daily for 1 week) or intravenous penicillin (900 mg 4 
times daily for 1 week) is effective but may not prevent the develop-
ment of renal failure. Parenteral ceftriaxone (1 g daily) is as effective as 
penicillin. JHR may occur but is usually mild. Uveitis is treated with a 
combination of systemic antibiotics and local glucocorticoids. There 
is no role for the routine use of glucocorticoids in the management of 
leptospirosis.
Trials in military personnel have shown that infection with L. interrogans
can be prevented by taking prophylactic doxycycline 200 mg weekly.
Plague 
Plague is caused by Yersinia pestis, a small Gram-negative bacillus 
that is spread between rodents by their eas. If domestic rats become 
infected, infected eas may bite humans. Hunters and trappers can con-
tract plague from handling rodents. In the late stages of human plague, 
Y. pestis may be expectorated and spread between humans by droplets, 
causing ‘pneumonic plague’.
Epidemics of plague, such as the ‘Black Death’, have occurred 
since ancient times. It is often said that the rst sign of plague is the 
appearance of dead rats. Plague foci are widely distributed throughout 
the world, including the USA; human cases are reported from about 10 
countries per year (Fig. 13.27).
Headache
Photophobia
Aseptic
meningitis
Bacteraemic leptospirosis
Pulmonary
syndrome
Weil’s disease
Epistaxis
Haematemesis
Conjunctivitis
Uveitis
Jaundice
Pericarditis/
myocarditis/
vasculiitis
Myositis
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Haemoptysis
Pulmonary
haemorrhage
ARDS
Hepatomegaly
Renal failure
Transient
macular rash
Purpura
Bruising
Fig. 13.26 Clinical syndromes of leptospirosis. (ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome)

[[p346]]
Bacterial infections     307
13
Y. pestis is a potential bioweapon because of the possibility of per-
son-to-person spread and the high fatality rate associated with pneu-
monic plague.
Clinical features 
Organisms inoculated through the skin are transported rapidly to the 
draining lymph nodes, where they elicit a severe inammatory response 
that may be haemorrhagic. If the infection is not contained, sepsis ensues 
and necrotic, purulent or haemorrhagic lesions develop in many organs. 
Oliguria and shock follow, and disseminated intravascular coagulation 
may result in widespread haemorrhage. Inhalation of Y. pestis causes 
alveolitis. The incubation period is 3–6 days but shorter in pneumonic 
plague.
Bubonic plague 
In this, the most common form of the disease, onset is usually sudden, 
with a rigor, high fever, dry skin and severe headache. Soon, aching and 
swelling at the site of the affected lymph nodes begin. The groin is the 
most common site of the ‘bubo’, a collection of swollen lymph nodes 
and surrounding tissue. Some infections are relatively mild but, in the 
majority, toxaemia quickly increases, with a rapid pulse, hypotension and 
delirium. The spleen is usually palpable.
Septicaemic plague 
Those without a bubo usually deteriorate rapidly, with high associ-
ated mortality. Older people are more prone to septicaemic plague. 
The patient is toxic and may have gastrointestinal symptoms, such as 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. DIC may occur, man-
ifested by bleeding from various orices or puncture sites, along with 
ecchymoses. Hypotension, shock, renal failure and ARDS may develop. 
Meningitis, pneumonia and expectoration of blood-stained sputum con-
taining Y. pestis may complicate septicaemic, or occasionally bubonic, 
plague.
Pneumonic plague 
Following primary infection in the lung, the onset of disease is very 
sudden, with cough and dyspnoea. The patient expectorates copious 
blood-stained, frothy, highly infective sputum, becomes cyanosed and 
dies. Chest radiology reveals bilateral inltrates, which may be nodular 
and progress to an ARDS-like picture.
Investigations 
The organism may be cultured from blood, sputum and bubo aspirates. 
For rapid diagnosis, Gram, Giemsa and Wayson’s stains (the latter con-
taining methylene blue) are applied to smears from these sites. Y. pestis
is seen as bipolar staining coccobacilli, sometimes referred to as having 
a ‘safety pin’ appearance. Smears are also subjected to antigen detec-
tion by immunouorescence, using Y. pestis F1 antigen-specic antibod-
ies. The diagnosis may be conrmed by seroconversion or a single high 
titre (>128) of anti-F1 antibodies in serum. DNA detection by PCR is 
under evaluation.
Plague is a notiable disease under international health regulations.
Management 
If the diagnosis is suspected on clinical and epidemiological grounds, 
treatment must be started as soon as, or even before, samples have 
been collected for laboratory diagnosis. Streptomycin (1 g twice daily) 
or gentamicin (1 mg/kg 3 times daily) is the drug of choice. Tetracycline 
(500 mg 4 times daily) and chloramphenicol (12.5 mg/kg 4 times daily) 
are alternatives. Fluoroquinolones (ciprooxacin and levooxacin) may be 
as effective but there is less clinical experience. Treatment may also be 
needed for acute circulatory failure, DIC and hypoxia.
Prevention and infection control 
Rats and eas should be controlled. In endemic areas, people should 
avoid handling and skinning wild animals. The patient should be isolated 
for the rst 48  hours or until clinical improvement begins. Attendants 
must wear gowns, masks and gloves. Symptomatic or asymptomatic 
close contacts of cases of pneumonic plague should receive post-expo-
sure antibiotic prophylaxis (doxycycline 100 mg or ciprooxacin 500 mg 
twice daily) for 7 days.
A recombinant subunit vaccine (protein antigens F1 + V) is in development.
Listeriosis 
Listeria monocytogenes is an environmental Gram-positive bacillus 
that can contaminate food. Outbreaks have been associated with 
raw vegetables, soft cheeses, under-cooked chicken, sh, meat and 
pâtés. The bacterium demonstrates ‘cold enrichment’, outgrowing 
other contaminating bacteria during refrigeration. Although food-
borne outbreaks of gastroenteritis have been reported in immuno-
competent individuals, Listeria causes more signicant invasive 
infection, especially in pregnant women, older adults (over 55 years) 
and the immunocompromised.
In pregnancy, in addition to systemic symptoms of fever and myalgia, 
listeriosis causes chorioamnionitis, fetal deaths, abortions and neonatal 
infection. In other susceptible individuals, it causes systemic illness due 
to bacteraemia without focal symptoms. Meningitis, similar to other bac-
terial meningitis but with normal CSF glucose, is the next most common 
presentation; CSF usually shows increased neutrophils but occasionally 
only the mononuclear cells are increased (see Box 28.6).
Investigations and management 
Diagnosis is made by blood and CSF culture. The organism grows read-
ily in culture media.
The most effective regimen consists of a combination of intravenous 
amoxicillin or ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside. A sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim combination can be used in those with penicillin allergy. 
Cephalosporins are of no use in this infection, as the organism is inherently 
resistant, an important consideration when treating meningitis empirically.
Proper treatment of foods before eating is the key to preventing listeri-
osis. Pregnant women are advised to avoid high-risk products, including 
soft cheeses.
Enteric fevers (typhoid and paratyphoid) 
Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, which are transmitted by the faecal–
oral route, are important causes of fever in South Asia, sub-Saharan 
Africa and Latin America. Elsewhere, they are relatively rare. Enteric 
fevers are caused by infection with Salmonella enterica serotypes 
Typhi and Paratyphi A, B and C, but invasive disease is occasion-
ally observed with non-typhoidal Salmonella spp. After a few days 
of bacteraemia, the bacilli localise, mainly in the lymphoid tissue of 
the small intestine, resulting in typical lesions in the Peyer’s patches 
and follicles. These swell at rst, then ulcerate and usually heal. After 
clinical recovery, about 5% of patients become chronic carriers (i.e. 
continue to excrete the bacteria after 1 year); the bacilli may live in the 
gallbladder for months or years and pass intermittently in the stool 
and, less commonly, in the urine.
Frequent transmission
Infrequent or suspected
transmission
Fig. 13.27 Foci of the transmission of plague. Reproduced by permission of the 
World Health Organization.

[[p347]]
308    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Clinical features 
Typhoid fever 
Clinical features are outlined in Box 13.44. The incubation period is 
typically about 10–14 days but can be longer, and the onset may 
be insidious. The temperature rises in a stepladder fashion for 4 or 
5 days with malaise, increasing headache, drowsiness and aching in 
the limbs. Constipation may be caused by swelling of lymphoid tissue 
around the ileocaecal junction, although in children diarrhoea and vom-
iting may be prominent early in the illness. The pulse is often slower 
than would be expected from the height of the temperature, i.e. a rel-
ative bradycardia.
At the end of the rst week, a rash may appear on the upper abdo-
men and on the back as sparse, slightly raised, rose-red spots, which 
fade on pressure. Cough and epistaxis occur. Around the 7th–10th day, 
the spleen becomes palpable. Constipation is followed by diarrhoea 
and abdominal distension with tenderness. Bronchitis and delirium may 
develop. If untreated, by the end of the second week the patient may be 
profoundly ill.
Paratyphoid fever 
The course tends to be shorter than that of typhoid fever and the onset is 
often more abrupt, with acute enteritis. The rash may be more abundant 
and the intestinal complications less frequent.
Complications 
These are given in Box 13.45. Haemorrhage from, or a perforation of, 
the ulcerated Peyer’s patches may occur at the end of the second week 
or during the third week of the illness. A drop in temperature to normal 
or subnormal levels may be falsely reassuring in patients with intestinal 
haemorrhage. Additional complications may involve almost any viscus or 
system because of the bacteraemia present during the rst week. Bone 
and joint infection is common in children with sickle-cell disease.
Investigations 
In the rst week, diagnosis may be difcult because, in this invasive stage 
with bacteraemia, the symptoms are those of a generalised infection 
without localising features. Typically, there is a leucopenia. Blood culture 
establishes the diagnosis and multiple cultures increase the yield. Stool 
cultures are often positive in the second and third weeks. The Widal test 
detects antibodies to the O and H antigens but is not specic.
Management 
Antibiotic therapy must be guided by in vitro sensitivity testing. 
Chloramphenicol (500 mg 4 times daily), ampicillin (750 mg 4 times daily) 
and co-trimoxazole (960 mg PO or IV twice daily) are losing their effect 
due to resistance in many areas of the world, especially in South and 
South-east Asia. Fluoroquinolones are the drugs of choice (e.g. ciproox-
acin 500 mg twice daily), if nalidixic acid screening predicts susceptibil-
ity, but resistance is common, especially in South Asia and also in the 
UK. Extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ceftriaxone and cefotaxime) 
are useful alternatives but have a slightly increased treatment failure rate. 
Azithromycin (500 mg once daily) is an alternative when uoroquinolone 
resistance is present but has not been validated in severe disease. 
Treatment should be continued for 14 days. Extensively drug-resistant 
(‘XDR’) typhoid has been causing an ongoing outbreak in Pakistan since 
2016 and azithromycin is the only currently reliable oral therapy. Pyrexia 
may persist for up to 5 days after the start of specic therapy. Even with 
effective chemotherapy, there is still a danger of complications, recrudes-
cence of the disease and the development of a carrier state.
Chronic carriers were formerly treated for 4 weeks with ciprooxacin 
but may require an alternative agent and duration, as guided by antimi-
crobial sensitivity testing. Cholecystectomy may be necessary.
Prevention 
Improved sanitation and living conditions reduce the incidence of 
typhoid. Travellers to countries where enteric infections are endemic 
should receive typhoid vaccination. In young children a tetanus conju-
gate vaccine containing Vi polysaccharide conjugated to tetanus toxoid 
has over 80% efcacy and is superior to older inactivated injectable or 
oral live attenuated vaccines.
Tularaemia 
Tularaemia is primarily a zoonotic disease of the northern hemisphere. 
It is caused by a highly infectious Gram-negative bacillus, Francisella 
tularensis. F. tularensis is passed transovarially (ensuring transmission 
from parent to progeny) in ticks, which allows persistence in nature 
without the absolute requirement for an infected animal reservoir. It is a 
potential bioweapon. Wild rabbits, rodents and domestic dogs or cats 
are potential reservoirs, and ticks, mosquitoes or other biting ies are 
the vectors.
Infection is introduced either through an arthropod or animal bite or 
via contact with infected animals, soil or water through skin abrasions. 
The most common ‘ulceroglandular’ variety of the disease (70%–80%) 
is characterised by skin ulceration with regional lymphadenopathy. There 
is also a purely ‘glandular’ form. Alternatively, inhalation of the infected 
aerosols may result in pulmonary tularaemia, presenting as pneumonia. 
Rarely, the portal of entry of infection may be the conjunctiva, leading 
to a nodular, ulcerated conjunctivitis with regional lymphadenopathy (an 
‘oculoglandular’ form). Typhoidal tularaemia is a rare and serious form of 
tularaemia with vomiting, diarrhoea and hepatosplenomegaly, which may 
be complicated by pneumonia and meningitis.
Investigations and management 
Demonstration of a single high titre (≥1:160) or a fourfold rise in 2–3 
weeks in the tularaemia tube agglutination test conrms the diagnosis. 
Bacterial yield from the lesions is extremely poor. DNA detection meth-
ods to enable rapid diagnosis are in development.
Treatment consists of a 10–21-day course of parenteral aminoglyco-
sides, streptomycin (7.5–10 mg/kg twice daily) or gentamicin (1.7 mg/kg 
3 times daily), with doxycycline or ciprooxacin offered as alternatives.
13.44 Clinical features of typhoid fever
First week
 Fever
 Headache
 Myalgia
 Relative bradycardia
 Constipation
 Diarrhoea and vomiting in  
children
End of rst week
 Rose spots on trunk
 Splenomegaly
 Cough
 Abdominal distension
 Diarrhoea
End of second week
 Delirium, complications, then coma and death (if untreated)
13.45 Complications of typhoid fever
Bowel
 Perforation
 Haemorrhage
Septic foci
 Bone and joint infection
 Meningitis
 Cholecystitis
Toxic phenomena
 Myocarditis
 Nephritis
Chronic carriage
 Persistent gallbladder carriage

[[p348]]
Bacterial infections     309
13
Melioidosis 
Melioidosis is caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei, a saprophyte found 
in soil and water (rice paddy elds). Infection is by inoculation or inhalation, 
leading to bacteraemia, which is followed by the formation of abscesses in 
the lungs, liver and spleen. Patients with diabetes, renal stones, thalassae-
mia or severe burns are particularly susceptible. The disease is most com-
mon in South-east Asia and northern Australia, and carries a signicant 
mortality. Disease may present years or decades after the initial exposure.
Clinical features 
Pneumonia is the most common feature but localised skin nodules and 
abscesses, or sepsis, especially in diabetics, may occur. Diarrhoea and 
hepatosplenomegaly may be observed. The chest X-ray can resemble cav-
itary tuberculosis. In chronic forms, multiple abscesses occur in subcutane-
ous tissue, liver, spleen and bone, accompanied by profound weight loss.
Investigations and management 
Culture of blood, sputum or pus on selective media, e.g. Ashdown agar, 
may yield B. pseudomallei. Latex agglutination has been developed as a 
rapid diagnostic test in Thailand and PCR-based tests are also available. 
Indirect haemagglutination testing can be helpful in travellers; however, 
most people in endemic areas are seropositive.
In the acute illness, prompt initiation of empirical therapy is life-saving. 
Ceftazidime 100 mg/kg (2 g 3 times daily) or meropenem (0.5–1 g 3 times 
daily) is given for 2–3 weeks, followed by maintenance therapy of co-
trimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole 1600 mg plus trimethoprim 320 mg twice 
daily) or doxycycline 200 mg daily for 3–6 months. Abscesses should be 
drained surgically.
Actinomycete infections 
Nocardiosis 
Nocardiosis is caused by aerobic Actinomycetes of the genus Nocardia, 
found in the soil. Infection occurs follows direct traumatic inoculation or 
occasionally inhalation or ingestion. Nocardiosis can result in localised 
cutaneous ulcers or nodules, most often in the lower limbs. Chronic 
destructive infection in tropical countries can result in actinomyce-
toma, involving soft tissues with occasional penetration to the bone. 
Actinomycetoma may also be caused by other aerobic Actinomycetes, 
and a similar clinical syndrome, eumycetoma, is caused by lamentous 
fungi. Both conditions are discussed on page 344. Systemic Nocardia
infection, most commonly in immunocompromised individuals, results in 
suppurative disease with lung and brain abscesses.
On microscopy, Nocardia spp. appear as long, lamentous, branch-
ing Gram-positive rods, which are also weakly acid-fast. They are easily 
grown in culture but require prolonged incubation.
Treatment of systemic infection is guided by sensitivity testing and 
typically requires combinations of imipenem with ceftriaxone, amikacin 
or co-trimoxazole, often for 6–12 months or longer. Meropenem, tige-
cycline, linezolid and minocycline may also be used with severe disease 
or with allergy, or when intolerance prevents use of the preferred agents. 
Abscesses are drained surgically when this is feasible. Localised cuta-
neous infection is usually treated with a single agent for 1–3 months. 
Treatment of actinomycetoma is discussed on page 344.
Actinomyces spp
Actinomyces are anaerobic Actinomycetes, which are predominantly 
commensals of the oral cavity. They are capable of causing deep, sup-
purating infection in the head and neck (cervicofacial actinomycosis) 
and the lungs (thoracic actinomycosis). They also cause suppurating 
disease in the pelvis, associated with intrauterine contraceptive devices 
(IUCDs). Modern diagnostic techniques demonstrate that actinomycosis 
is caused by many different Actinomyces species, the most common of 
which is Actinomyces israelii. Treatment of established disease requires 
approximately 6–12 months of penicillin or doxycycline. Early disease 
may respond to shorter antibiotic courses.
Gastrointestinal bacterial infections 
The approach to patients presenting with acute gastroenteritis is 
described on page 272.
Staphylococcal food poisoning 
Staph. aureus is transmitted via the hands of food handlers to food-
stuffs such as dairy products, including cheese, and cooked meats. 
Inappropriate storage of these foods allows growth of the organism and 
production of one or more heat-stable enterotoxins.
Nausea and profuse vomiting develop within 1–6 hours. Diarrhoea 
may not be marked. The toxins that cause the syndrome act as ‘super-
antigens’ and induce a signicant neutrophil leucocytosis that may be 
clinically misleading. Most cases settle rapidly but severe dehydration 
can occasionally be life-threatening.
Antiemetics and appropriate uid replacement are the mainstays 
of treatment. Suspect food should be cultured for staphylococci and 
demonstration of toxin production. Public health authorities should be 
notied if food vending is involved.
Bacillus cereus food poisoning 
Ingestion of pre-formed heat-stable exotoxins of B. cereus causes rapid 
onset of vomiting and some diarrhoea within hours of food consumption, 
which resolves within 24 hours. Fried rice and freshly made sauces are 
frequent sources; the organism grows and produces enterotoxin during 
storage (Fig. 13.28). If viable bacteria are ingested and toxin formation 
takes place within the gut lumen, then the incubation period is longer 
(12–24 hours) and watery diarrhoea and cramps are the predominant 
symptoms. The disease is self-limiting but can be severe.
Appropriate uid replacement and notication of the public health 
authorities are indicated.
Spores
contaminate
uncooked
cereals,
e.g. rice
2°
contamination
Parboiled
(insufficient
to kill
spores)
Storage at warm temperature
allows germination
Rapid deep-fry kills
bacteria not toxins
Ingestion
of toxin
Ingestion of spores
or viable bacteria
Acute vomiting ± diarrhoea
2 – 4 hours after ingestion
Enterocolitis12 – 24 hours
after ingestion
Bacteria multiply in gut
and elute toxin
Inadequate reheating
Viable bacteria remain
Fig. 13.28 Bacillus cereus food poisoning.

[[p349]]
310    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Clostridium perfringens food poisoning 
Spores of C. perfringens are widespread in the guts of large animals 
and in soil. If contaminated meat products are incompletely cooked and 
stored in anaerobic conditions, C. perfringens spores germinate and via-
ble organisms multiply. Subsequent reheating of the food causes release 
of enterotoxin. Symptoms (diarrhoea and cramps) occur 6–12 hours fol-
lowing ingestion. The illness is usually self-limiting.
Clostridial enterotoxins are potent and most people who ingest them 
will be symptomatic. ‘Point source’ outbreaks, in which a number of 
cases all become symptomatic following ingestion, classically occur after 
school or canteen lunches where meat stews are served.
Clostridial necrotising enteritis (CNE) or pigbel is an often-fatal type of 
food poisoning caused by a β-toxin of C. perfringens, type C. The toxin is 
normally inactivated by certain proteases or by normal cooking. Pigbel is 
more likely in protein malnutrition or in the presence of trypsin inhibitors, 
either in foods such as sweet potatoes or during infection with Ascaris
sp. roundworms.
Campylobacter infection 
This infection (caused by Campylobacter jejuni or C. coli) is essentially 
a zoonosis, although contaminated water may be implicated, as the 
organism can survive for many weeks in fresh water. The most com-
mon sources of the infection are chicken, beef and contaminated milk 
products. Pet puppies have also been sources. Campylobacter infec-
tion is now the most common cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in the 
UK, accounting for some 100 000 cases per annum, most of which are 
sporadic.
The incubation period is 2–5 days. Colicky abdominal pain may 
be severe and mimic acute appendicitis or other surgical pathology. 
Nausea, vomiting and signicant diarrhoea, frequently containing blood, 
are common features. The majority of Campylobacter infections affect t 
young adults and are self-limiting after 5–7 days. About 10%–20% will be 
prolonged, occasionally meriting treatment with a macrolide, most often 
azithromycin, as many organisms are resistant to ciprooxacin.
Approximately 1 in 1000–2000 cases will develop bacteraemia and 
possible distant foci of infection. Campylobacter spp. have been linked 
to Guillain–Barré syndrome and post-infectious reactive arthritis (see 
Chs 26 and 28).
Salmonella spp. infection 
Salmonella enterica serovars other than Typhi and Paratyphi, of which 
there are more than 2000, are widespread in animals and can cause 
gastroenteritis. Two serovars are most important worldwide: Salmonella
Enteritidis phage type 4 and Salmonella Typhimurium dt.104. The lat-
ter may be resistant to commonly used antibiotics such as ciproox-
acin. Some strains have a clear relationship to particular animals, e.g. 
Salmonella Arizonae and pet reptiles. Transmission is by contaminated 
water or food, particularly poultry, egg products and minced beef, direct 
person-to-person spread or the handling of exotic pets such as sala-
manders, lizards or turtles. The incidence of Salmonella enteritis is falling 
in the UK due to an aggressive culling policy in broiler chicken stocks, 
coupled with vaccination.
The incubation period of Salmonella gastroenteritis is 12–72 hours 
and the predominant feature is diarrhoea, sometimes with passage of 
blood. Vomiting may be present at the outset. Approximately 5% of 
cases are bacteraemic and invasive non-typhoidal salmonellosis is a 
leading cause of bacteraemia in sub-Saharan Africa especially in peo-
ple living with HIV. Reactive (post-infective) arthritis occurs in approxi-
mately 2%.
Antibiotics are not indicated for uncomplicated Salmonella gastro-
enteritis but are prescribed for bacteraemia. Salmonellae can cause 
persistent infection and can seed endothelial surfaces such as an ather-
osclerotic aorta. Mortality, as with other forms of gastroenteritis, is higher 
in older people (see Box 13.11).
Escherichia coli infection 
Many serotypes of E. coli constitute part of the human gut microbiome. 
Clinical disease requires either colonisation with a new or previously 
unrecognised strain, or the acquisition by current colonising bacteria of a 
particular pathogenicity factor for mucosal attachment or toxin produc-
tion. Travel to unfamiliar areas of the world allows contact with different 
strains of endemic E. coli and the development of travellers’ diarrhoea. 
Enteropathogenic strains may be found in the gut of healthy individuals 
and, if these people move to a new environment, close contacts may 
develop symptoms.
At least ve different clinico-pathological patterns of diarrhoea are asso-
ciated with specic strains of E. coli with characteristic virulence factors.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) is the most common cause of travellers’ 
diarrhoea (see Box 13.19). The organisms produce either a heat-labile or 
a heat-stable enterotoxin, causing marked secretory diarrhoea and vom-
iting after 1–2 days’ incubation. The illness is usually mild and self-limiting 
after 3–4 days. Antibiotics are of questionable value.
Entero-invasive  E. coli
Illness caused by entero-invasive E. coli (EIEC) is very similar to Shigella
dysentery and is caused by invasion and destruction of colonic mucosal 
cells. No enterotoxin is produced. Acute watery diarrhoea, abdominal 
cramps and some scanty blood-staining of the stool are common. The 
symptoms are rarely severe and are usually self-limiting.
Enteropathogenic  E. coli
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) organisms are very important in infant 
diarrhoea. They are able to attach to the gut mucosa, inducing a spe-
cic ‘attachment and effacement’ lesion and causing destruction of 
microvilli and disruption of normal absorptive capacity. The symptoms 
vary from mild non-bloody diarrhoea to quite severe illness without 
bacteraemia.
Entero-aggregative  E. coli
Entero-aggregative E. coli (EAEC) strains adhere to the mucosa and 
produce a locally active enterotoxin. These demonstrate a particu-
lar ‘stacked brick’ aggregation to tissue culture cells when viewed by 
microscopy. EAEC have been associated with prolonged diarrhoea in 
children in South America, South-east Asia and India.
Enterohaemorrhagic  E. coli
A number of distinct ‘O’ serotypes of E. coli possess both the genes 
necessary for adherence (see ‘EPEC’ above) and plasmids encoding 
two distinct enterotoxins (verotoxins), which are identical to the toxins 
produced by Shigella (‘shiga toxins 1 and 2’). E. coli O157:H7 is perhaps 
the best known of these verotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC) but others, 
including types O126 and O11, are also implicated. In 2011, an outbreak 
of food-borne illness linked to fenugreek seeds occurred in Germany and 
was due to E. coli O104:H4, an EAEC strain that had acquired genes 
encoding shiga toxin 2a. Although the incidence of enterohaemorrhagic 
E. coli (EHEC) is considerably lower than that of Campylobacter and 
Salmonella infection, it is increasing in lower-income countries.
The reservoir of infection is in the gut of herbivores. The organism 
has an extremely low infecting dose (10–100 organisms). Runoff water 
from pasture lands where cattle have grazed, which is used to irrigate 
vegetable crops, as well as contaminated milk, meat products (especially 
hamburgers that have been incompletely cooked), lettuce, radish shoots 
and apple juice have all been implicated as sources (Fig. 13.29).
The incubation period is 1–7 days. Initial watery diarrhoea becomes 
uniformly blood-stained in 70% of cases and is associated with severe 
abdominal pain. There is little systemic upset, vomiting or fever.
Enterotoxins have both a local effect on the bowel and a distant effect 
on particular body tissues, such as renal glomeruli, heart and brain. The 
potentially life-threatening haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) occurs in 

[[p350]]
Bacterial infections     311
13
10%–15% of sufferers from this infection, arising 5–7 days after symp-
tom onset. It is most frequent at the extremes of age, is heralded by 
a high peripheral leucocyte count, and may be induced, particularly in 
children, by antibiotic therapy.
HUS is treated by dialysis if necessary and may be averted by plasma 
exchange. Antibiotics should be avoided since they can stimulate toxin 
release.
Clostridioides difcile infection 
Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium) difcile is the most common cause 
of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, and is an occasional constituent 
of the gut microbiome. C. difcile can produce two toxins (A and B). 
C. difcile infection (CDI) usually follows antimicrobial therapy, which 
alters the composition of the gastrointestinal ora and may facilitate col-
onisation with toxigenic C. difcile, if the patient is exposed to C. difcile
spores. The combination of toxin production and the ability to produce 
environmentally stable spores accounts for the clinical features and 
transmissibility of CDI. A hypervirulent strain of C. difcile, ribotype 027, 
has emerged, which produces more toxin and more severe disease than 
other C. difcile strains.
Clinical features 
Disease manifestations range from diarrhoea to life-threatening pseu-
domembranous colitis. Around 80% of cases occur in people over 65 
years of age, many of whom are frail with comorbid diseases. Symptoms 
usually begin in the rst week of antibiotic therapy but can occur up 
to 6 weeks after treatment has nished. The onset is often insidious, 
with lower abdominal pain and diarrhoea that may become profuse 
and watery. The presentation may resemble acute ulcerative colitis with 
bloody diarrhoea, fever and even toxic dilatation and perforation. Ileus is 
also seen in pseudomembranous colitis.
Investigations 
C. difcile can be isolated from stool culture in 30% of patients with 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and over 90% of those with pseu-
domembranous colitis, but also from 5% of healthy adults and up to 
20% of older adults in residential care. The diagnosis of CDI therefore 
rests on detection of toxins A or B in the stool. Current practice in the 
UK is to screen stool from patients with a compatible clinical syndrome 
by detection either of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), an enzyme 
produced by C. difcile, or of C. difcile nucleic acid (e.g. by PCR); if 
screening is positive, C. difcile toxin is sought, usually with a sensitive 
ELISA assay.
The rectal appearances at sigmoidoscopy may be characteris-
tic, with erythema, white plaques or an adherent pseudomembrane 
(Fig. 13.30), or may resemble ulcerative colitis. In some cases, the rec-
tum is spared and abnormalities are observed in the proximal colon. 
Patients who are ill require abdominal and erect chest X-rays to exclude 
perforation or toxic dilatation. CT may be useful when the diagnosis is 
in doubt.
Management 
The precipitating antibiotic should be stopped and the patient should 
be isolated. Supportive therapy includes intravenous uids and bowel 
rest. First-line antimicrobial therapy is usually vancomycin (125 mg 
orally 4 times daily for 7–10 days), which has replaced the use of 
metronidazole. Fidaxomicin is associated with a lower relapse rate 
than vancomycin but is more expensive. Intravenous immunoglobulin 
and/or glucocorticoids are sometimes given in the most severe or 
refractory cases, and faecal transplantation from a healthy donor is 
increasingly used to manage relapses by restoring a more advanta-
geous gut microbiome prole. Bezlotoxumab is a monoclonal anti-
body against toxin B designed to prevent recurrence but its current 
role is uncertain. Surgical intervention needs to be considered early 
in severe cases.
Yersiniosis 
Yersinia enterocolitica and pseudotuberculosis, commonly found in pork, 
cause mild to moderate gastroenteritis and can produce signicant mes-
enteric adenitis after an incubation period of 3–7 days. They predom-
inantly cause disease in children but adults may also be affected. The 
illness resolves slowly and may be mistaken for appendicitis (pseudoap-
pendicitis). Complications include reactive arthritis (10%–13% of cases), 
which may be persistent, and anterior uveitis.
Normal reservoir
2.5% British cattle
excrete VTEC
Meat products
surface
contamination
Children camping/
playing on soiled
pasture
Farm contacts/
visits
Water supplies
(runoff)
contaminated
Contaminated
milk
Poor kitchen
hygiene
Poor hand
hygiene
Lack of washing
facilities
Mincing/
processing
Irrigation of
vegetables
Inadequate
pasteurisation
Eaten unwashed
or uncooked
Disease
Very low infecting dose
< 100 organisms/g food
Fig. 13.29 Verocytotoxigenic Escherichia coli (VTEC) infections.
Fig. 13.30 Clostridioides difcile infection. Colonoscopic view showing numerous 
adherent ‘pseudomembranes’ on the mucosa.

[[p351]]
312    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Cholera 
Cholera, caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1, is the archetypal tox-
in-mediated bacterial cause of acute watery diarrhoea. The enterotoxin 
activates adenylate cyclase in the intestinal epithelium, inducing net 
secretion of chloride and water. V. cholerae O1 has two biotypes, clas-
sical and El Tor, and each of these has two distinct serotypes, Inaba 
and Ogawa. Following its origin in the Ganges valley, devastating epi-
demics have occurred, often in association with large religious festivals, 
and pandemics have spread worldwide. The seventh pandemic, due to 
the El Tor biotype, began in 1961 and spread via the Middle East to 
become endemic in Africa, subsequently spreading throughout South 
and Central America. Numbers of cases of cholera have been increasing, 
with ongoing outbreaks in Yemen and Somalia. El Tor is more resist-
ant to commonly used antimicrobials than classical Vibrio, and causes 
prolonged carriage in 5% of infections. An atypical serotype, O139, has 
been responsible for localised outbreaks in Bangladesh.
Infection spreads via the stools or vomit of symptomatic patients or of 
the much larger number of subclinical cases. Organisms survive for up to 
2 weeks in fresh water and 8 weeks in saltwater. Transmission is normally 
through infected drinking water, shellsh and food contaminated by ies, 
or on the hands of carriers.
Clinical features 
Severe diarrhoea without pain or colic begins suddenly and is followed 
by vomiting. Following the evacuation of normal gut faecal contents, typ-
ical ‘rice water’ material is passed, consisting of clear uid with ecks of 
mucus. Classical cholera produces enormous loss of uid and electro-
lytes, leading to intense dehydration with muscular cramps. Shock and 
oliguria develop. Death from acute circulatory failure may occur rapidly 
unless uid and electrolytes are replaced. Improvement is rapid with 
proper treatment.
The majority of infections, however, cause mild illness with slight diar-
rhoea. Occasionally, a very intense illness, ‘cholera sicca’, occurs, with 
loss of uid into dilated bowel, killing the patient before typical gastroin-
testinal symptoms appear. The disease is more dangerous in children.
Diagnosis and management 
Clinical diagnosis is easy during an epidemic. Otherwise, the diagno-
sis should be conrmed bacteriologically. Stool dark-eld microscopy 
shows the typical ‘shooting star’ motility of V. cholerae. Rectal swab or 
stool cultures allow identication. Cholera is notiable under international 
health regulations.
Maintenance of circulation by replacement of water and electrolytes 
is paramount. Ringer’s lactate is recommended for intravenous replace-
ment. Vomiting usually stops once the patient is rehydrated, and uid 
should then be given orally up to 500 mL hourly. Early intervention with 
oral rehydration solutions that include resistant starch, based on either 
rice or cereal, shortens the duration of diarrhoea and improves prognosis. 
Severe dehydration, as indicated by altered consciousness, skin tenting, 
very dry tongue, decreased pulses, low blood pressure or minimal urine 
output, mandates intravenous replacement. Total uid requirements may 
exceed 50 L over a period of 2–5 days. Accurate records are greatly facil-
itated by the use of a ‘cholera cot’, which has a reinforced hole under the 
patient’s buttocks, beneath which a graded bucket is placed.
Three days’ treatment with tetracycline 250 mg 4 times daily, a single 
dose of doxycycline 300 mg or ciprooxacin 1 g in adults reduces the 
duration of excretion of V. cholerae and the total volume of uid needed 
for replacement.
Prevention 
Strict personal hygiene is vital and drinking water should come from 
a clean piped supply or be boiled. Flies must be denied access to 
food. Oral vaccines containing killed V. cholerae with or without the B 
subunit of cholera toxin are used in outbreaks and in long-term control 
strategies.
In epidemics, improvements in sanitation and access to clean water, 
public education and control of population movement are vital. Mass 
single-dose vaccination and tetracycline treatment are valuable control 
measures. Disinfection of discharges and soiled clothing, and scrupulous 
handwashing by medical attendants reduce spread.
Vibrio parahaemolyticus infection 
This marine organism produces a disease similar to enterotoxigenic E. 
coli (see above). It is very common where ingestion of raw seafood is 
widespread (e.g. Japan). After an incubation period of approximately 
20 hours, explosive diarrhoea, abdominal cramps and vomiting occur. 
Systemic symptoms of headache and fever are frequent but the illness 
is self-limiting after 4–7 days. Rarely, a severe septic illness arises; in 
this case, V. parahaemolyticus can be isolated using specic halophilic 
culture.
Bacillary dysentery (shigellosis) 
Shigellae are Gram-negative rods, closely related to E. coli, that invade 
the colonic mucosa. There are four main groups: Sh. dysenteriae, ex-
neri, boydii and sonnei. In tropical regions bacillary dysentery is usually 
caused by Sh. exneri, while in the UK most cases are caused by Sh. 
sonnei. Shigellae are often resistant to multiple antibiotics, especially in 
tropical countries. The organism only infects humans and its spread is 
facilitated by a low infecting dose of around 10 organisms.
Spread may occur via contaminated food or ies, but person-to-per-
son transmission by unwashed hands after defaecation is the most 
important factor. Outbreaks occur in psychiatric hospitals, residen-
tial schools and other closed institutions, and dysentery is a constant 
accompaniment of wars and natural catastrophes, due to overcrowding 
and poor sanitation. Shigella infection may spread rapidly among men 
who have sex with men.
Clinical features 
Disease severity varies from mild Sh. sonnei infections that escape 
detection to more severe Sh. exneri infections, while those due to 
Sh. dysenteriae may be fulminating and cause death within 48 hours.
In a moderately severe illness, the patient complains of diarrhoea, 
colicky abdominal pain and tenesmus. Stools are small, and after a 
few evacuations contain blood and purulent exudate with little faecal 
material. Fever, dehydration and weakness occur, with tenderness over 
the colon. Reactive arthritis or iritis occasionally complicate bacillary dys-
entery (p. 1035).
Management and prevention 
Oral rehydration therapy or, if diarrhoea is severe, intravenous uid 
replacement is necessary. Antibiotic therapy is with ciprooxacin (500 mg 
twice daily for 3 days). Azithromycin and ceftriaxone are alternatives but 
resistance occurs to all agents, especially in Asia. The use of antidiar-
rhoeal medication should be avoided.
The prevention of faecal contamination of food and milk and 
the isolation of cases may be difcult, except in limited outbreaks. 
Handwashing is essential.
Respiratory bacterial infections 
Most of these infections are described in Chapter 17.
Diphtheria 
Infection with Corynebacterium diphtheriae occurs most commonly in 
the upper respiratory tract and is usually spread by droplet infection. 
Infection may also complicate skin lesions, especially in alcoholics. The 
organisms remain localised at the site of infection but release of a soluble 
exotoxin damages the heart muscle and the nervous system.

[[p352]]
Bacterial infections     313
13
Diphtheria has been eradicated from many parts of the world by mass 
vaccination using a modied exotoxin but remains important in areas 
where vaccination is incomplete, e.g. in Russia and South-east Asia. The 
disease is notiable in all countries of Europe and North America, and 
international guidelines have been issued by the WHO for the manage-
ment of infection.
Clinical features 
The incubation period averages 2–4 days. The disease begins insidiously 
with a sore throat (Box 13.46). Despite modest fever, there is usually 
marked tachycardia. The diagnostic feature is the ‘wash-leather’ elevated, 
greyish-green membrane on the tonsils. It has a well-dened edge, is rm 
and adherent, and is surrounded by a zone of inammation. There may 
be swelling of the neck (‘bull neck’) and tender enlargement of the lymph 
nodes. In the mildest infections, especially where there is a high degree of 
immunity, a membrane may not appear and inammation is minimal.
With anterior nasal infection there is nasal discharge, frequently blood-
stained. In laryngeal diphtheria, a husky voice and high-pitched cough signal 
potential respiratory obstruction requiring urgent tracheostomy. If infection 
spreads to the uvula, fauces and nasopharynx, the patient is gravely ill.
Death from acute circulatory failure may occur within the rst 10 days. 
Late complications arise as a result of toxin action on the heart or nervous 
system. About 25% of survivors of the early toxaemia may later develop 
myocarditis with arrhythmias or cardiac failure. These are usually reversi-
ble, with no permanent damage other than heart block in survivors.
Neurological involvement occurs in 75% of cases. After tonsillar or 
pharyngeal diphtheria, it usually starts after 10 days with palatal palsy. 
Paralysis of accommodation often follows, manifest by difculty in read-
ing small print. Generalised polyneuritis with weakness and paraesthesia 
may follow in the next 10–14 days. Recovery from such neuritis is always 
ultimately complete.
Management 
A clinical diagnosis of diphtheria must be notied to the public health 
authorities and the patient sent urgently to a specialist infectious dis-
eases unit. Empirical treatment should commence after collection of 
appropriate swabs.
Diphtheria antitoxin is produced from hyperimmune horse serum. It 
neutralises circulating toxin but not toxin already xed to tissues, so it 
must be injected intramuscularly without awaiting the result of a throat 
swab. However, reactions to this foreign protein include a potentially 
lethal immediate anaphylactic reaction and a ‘serum sickness’ with fever, 
urticaria and joint pains, which occurs 7–12 days after injection. A careful 
history of previous horse serum injections or allergic reactions should be 
taken and a small test injection of serum should be given half an hour 
before the full dose in every patient. Epinephrine (adrenaline) solution 
must be available to treat any immediate type of reaction (0.5–1.0 mL 
of 1/1000 solution intramuscularly). An antihistamine is also given. In a 
severely ill patient, the risk of anaphylactic shock is outweighed by the 
mortal danger of diphtheritic toxaemia. A dose of up to 100 000 IU of 
antitoxin is injected intravenously if the test dose is tolerated. For disease 
of moderate severity, 16 000–40 000 IU intramuscularly will sufce, and 
for mild cases 4000–8000 IU.
Penicillin (1200 mg 4 times daily IV) or amoxicillin (500 mg 3 times daily) 
should be administered for 2 weeks to eliminate C. diphtheriae. Patients 
allergic to penicillin can be given erythromycin. Due to poor immuno-
genicity of primary infection, all sufferers should be immunised with diph-
theria toxoid following recovery.
Patients must be managed in strict isolation and attended by staff with 
a clearly documented immunisation history until three swabs 24 hours 
apart are culture-negative.
Prevention 
Active immunisation is recommended for all children. If diphtheria occurs 
in a closed community, contacts should be given erythromycin, which is 
more effective than penicillin in eradicating carriage.
All contacts should also be immunised or given a booster dose of 
toxoid. Booster doses are required every 10 years to maintain immunity.
Pneumococcal infection 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is the leading cause of 
community-acquired pneumonia globally and one of the leading causes 
of infection-related mortality. Otitis media, meningitis and sinusitis are 
also frequently caused by Strep. pneumoniae. Occasional patients pres-
ent with bacteraemia without obvious focus. Asplenic individuals are at 
risk of fulminant pneumococcal disease with purpuric rash.
Increasing rates of penicillin resistance have been reported around the 
world for Strep. pneumoniae, although they remain low in the UK. Strains 
with cephalosporin resistance causing meningitis require treatment with a 
combination of cephalosporins, glycopeptides and rifampicin. Macrolide 
resistance is also increasing. Newer quinolones are also used (e.g. levo-
oxacin and moxioxacin) but rates of resistance are rising.
Vaccination of infants with the protein conjugate pneumococcal vac-
cine decreases Strep. pneumoniae infection in infants and in their rela-
tives. The polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine is used in individuals 
predisposed to Strep. pneumoniae infection and older people, but only 
modestly reduces pneumococcal bacteraemia and does not prevent 
pneumonia. All asplenic individuals should receive vaccination against 
Strep. pneumoniae
Anthrax 
Anthrax is an endemic zoonosis in many countries; it causes human dis-
ease following inoculation of the spores of Bacillus anthracis. B. anthracis
was the rst bacterial pathogen described by Koch and the model path-
ogen for ‘Koch’s postulates’ (see Box 6.1). It is a Gram-positive organism 
with a central spore. The spores can survive for years in soil. Infection is 
commonly acquired from contact with animals, particularly herbivores. The 
ease of production of B. anthracis spores makes this infection a candidate 
for biological warfare or bioterrorism. B. anthracis produces a number of 
toxins that mediate the clinical features of disease.
Clinical features 
These depend on the route of entry of the anthrax spores.
Cutaneous anthrax 
This skin lesion is associated with occupational exposure to anthrax 
spores during processing of hides and bone products. It accounts for 
the majority of clinical cases. Animal infection is a serious problem in 
Africa, India, Pakistan and the Middle East.
Spores are inoculated into exposed skin. A single lesion develops as an 
irritable papule on an oedematous haemorrhagic base. This progresses to 
a depressed black eschar. Despite extensive oedema, pain is infrequent.
Gastrointestinal anthrax 
This is associated with the ingestion of contaminated meat. The caecum 
becomes infected, which produces nausea, vomiting, anorexia and fever, 
followed in 2–3 days by severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhoea. 
Toxaemia and death can develop rapidly thereafter.
13.46 Clinical features of diphtheria
Acute infection
 Membranous tonsillitis
 or Nasal infection
 or Laryngeal infection
 or Skin/wound/conjunctival infection (rare)
Complications
 Laryngeal obstruction or paralysis
 Myocarditis
 Peripheral neuropathy

[[p353]]
314    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Inhalational anthrax 
Inhalational anthrax is extremely rare but has been associated with bio-
terrorism. Without rapid and aggressive therapy at the onset of symp-
toms, the mortality is 50%–90%. Fever, dyspnoea, cough, headache and 
sepsis develop 3–14 days following exposure. Typically, the chest X-ray 
shows only widening of the mediastinum and pleural effusions, which are 
haemorrhagic. Meningitis may occur.
Management 
B. anthracis can be cultured from skin swabs from lesions. Skin lesions 
are readily curable with early antibiotic therapy. Treatment is with cipro-
oxacin (500 mg twice daily) until penicillin susceptibility is conrmed; the 
regimen can then be changed to benzylpenicillin with doses up to 2.4 g 
IV given 6 times daily or phenoxymethylpenicillin orally 500–1000 mg 4 
times daily administered for 10 days. The addition of an aminoglycoside 
may improve the outlook in severe disease. In view of concerns about 
concomitant inhalational exposure, particularly in the era of bioterrorism, 
a further 2-month course of ciprooxacin 500 mg twice daily or doxy-
cycline 100 mg twice daily orally is added to eradicate inhaled spores. 
Inhalational anthrax is treated with ciprooxacin and clindamycin for at 
least 14 days, followed by therapy to eradicate spores. Monoclonal anti-
bodies against B. anthracis protective antigen can be added for sys-
temic infection. Prophylaxis with ciprooxacin (500 mg twice daily for 2 
months) is recommended for anyone at high risk of inhalational exposure 
to anthrax spores and is combined with three doses of anthrax vaccine 
adsorbed (AVA).
Bacterial infections with neurological involvement 
Infections affecting the CNS, including bacterial meningitis, botulism and 
tetanus, are described on page 1171.
Mycobacterial infections 
Tuberculosis 
Tuberculosis is predominantly, although by no means exclusively, a res-
piratory disease and is described in Chapter 17.
Leprosy 
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) is a chronic granulomatous disease affecting 
skin and nerves and caused by Mycobacterium leprae, a slow-growing 
mycobacterium that cannot be cultured in vitro. The clinical manifestations 
are determined by the degree of the patient’s cell-mediated immunity (CMI) 
towards M. leprae (Fig. 13.31). High levels of CMI with elimination of lep-
rosy bacilli produces tuberculoid leprosy, whereas absent CMI results in 
lepromatous leprosy. Complications arise due to nerve damage, immuno-
logical reactions and bacillary inltration. People with leprosy are frequently 
stigmatised and using the word ‘leper’ is inappropriate.
Epidemiology and transmission 
The WHO estimates there are around 200 000 new cases detected 
annually. About 70% of the world’s leprosy patients live in India, with 
the disease endemic in Brazil, Indonesia, Mozambique, Madagascar, 
Tanzania and Nepal.
Untreated lepromatous patients discharge bacilli from the nose. 
Infection occurs through the nose, followed by haematogenous spread 
to skin and nerve. The incubation period is 2–5 years for tuberculoid 
cases and 8–12 years for lepromatous cases. Leprosy incidence peaks 
at 10–14 years, and is more common in males and in household con-
tacts of leprosy cases.
Pathogenesis 
M. leprae has tropism for Schwann cells and skin macrophages. 
In tuberculoid leprosy, effective CMI controls bacillary multiplication 
(‘paucibacillary’) and organised epithelioid granulomata form. In leproma-
tous leprosy, there is abundant bacillary multiplication (‘multibacillary’), 
e.g. in Schwann cells and perineurium. Between these two extremes is 
a continuum, varying from patients with moderate CMI (borderline tuber-
culoid) to patients with little cellular response (borderline lepromatous).
Immunological reactions evolve as the immune response develops and 
the bacillary antigenic stimulus varies, particularly in borderline patients. 
Delayed hypersensitivity reactions produce type 1 (reversal) reactions, 
while immune complexes contribute to type 2 (erythema nodosum lep-
rosum) reactions.
HIV/leprosy co-infected patients have typical lepromatous and tuber-
culoid leprosy skin lesions and typical leprosy histology and granuloma 
formation. Surprisingly, even with low circulating CD4 counts, tuberculoid 
leprosy may be observed and there is not an obvious shift to leproma-
tous leprosy.
Clinical features 
Box 13.47 gives the cardinal features of leprosy. Types of leprosy are 
compared in Box 13.48
 Skin. The most common skin lesions are macules or plaques. 
Tuberculoid patients have few, hypopigmented lesions (Fig. 13.32A). 
In lepromatous leprosy, papules, nodules or diffuse inltration of 
the skin occur. The earliest lesions are ill dened; gradually, the skin 
becomes inltrated and thickened. Facial skin thickening leads to 
the characteristic leonine facies (Fig. 13.32B).
 Anaesthesia. In skin lesions, the small dermal sensory and auto-
nomic nerve bres are damaged, causing localised sensory loss 
and loss of sweating. Anaesthesia can occur in the distribution of 
a damaged large peripheral nerve. A ‘glove and stocking’ sensory 
neuropathy is also common in lepromatous leprosy.
 Nerve damage. Peripheral nerve trunks are affected at ‘sites of 
predilection’. These are the ulnar (elbow), median (wrist), radial 
(humerus), radial cutaneous (wrist), common peroneal (knee), pos-
terior tibial and sural nerves (ankle), facial nerve (zygomatic arch) 
and great auricular nerve (posterior triangle of the neck). Damage to 
peripheral nerve trunks produces characteristic signs with regional 
6
0
High
Zero
Cell-mediated immunity
Bacillary index
Chronic
exaggerated
cellular
hypersensitivity
Nerves, skin
Acute
changes
in cellullar
hypersensitivity
(type 1 lepra reactions)
Nerves, skin
Complications of nerve damage
(anaesthesia, dryness, paralysis, contracture,
misuse, tissue destruction)
Face, hands, feet
Lepromatous       Borderline      Tuberculoid
LL
BL
BT
TT
Bacillary
invasion
Nerves, skin,
muscle, bone,
mucosae, eye, testis
Immune complexes
(type 2 lepra
reactions)
Nerves, skin,
eye, testis,
kidney
Fig. 13.31 Leprosy: mechanisms of damage and tissue affected. Mechanisms 
under the broken line are characteristic of disease near the lepromatous end of 
the spectrum, and those under the solid line are characteristic of the tuberculoid 
end. They overlap in the centre where, in addition, instability predisposes to type 1 
lepra reactions. At the peak in the centre, neither bacillary growth nor cell-mediated 
immunity has the upper hand. (BL = borderline lepromatous; BT = borderline 
tuberculoid; LL = lepromatous leprosy; TT = tuberculoid leprosy) Adapted from 
Bryceson ADM, Pfaltzgraff RE. Leprosy, 3rd edn. Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 
1990.

[[p354]]
Bacterial infections     315
13
sensory loss and muscle dysfunction (Fig. 13.32C). All these nerves 
should be examined for enlargement and tenderness, and tested for 
motor and sensory function. The CNS is not affected.
 Eye involvement. Blindness is a devastating complication for a 
patient with anaesthetic hands and feet. Eyelid closure is impaired 
when the facial nerve is affected. Damage to the trigeminal nerve 
causes anaesthesia of the cornea and conjunctiva. The cornea is 
then susceptible to trauma and ulceration.
 Other features. Many organs can be affected. Nasal collapse occurs 
secondary to bacillary destruction of the nasal cartilage and bone. 
Diffuse inltration of the testes causes testicular atrophy and the 
acute orchitis that occurs with type 2 reactions. This results in azoo-
spermia and hypogonadism.
Leprosy reactions 
Leprosy reactions (Box 13.49) are events superimposed on the cardinal 
features shown in Box 13.47
 Type 1 (reversal) reactions. These occur in 30% of borderline patients 
(BT, BB or BL – see below) and are delayed hypersensitivity reactions. 
Skin lesions become erythematous (Fig. 13.32D). Peripheral nerves 
become tender and painful, with sudden loss of nerve function. These 
reactions may occur spontaneously, after starting treatment and also 
after completion of multidrug therapy (MDT).
 Type 2 (erythema nodosum leprosum, ENL) reactions. These are 
partly due to immune complex deposition and occur in BL and LL 
patients who produce antibodies and have a high antigen load. 
They manifest with malaise, fever and crops of small pink nodules 
on the face and limbs. Iritis and episcleritis are common. Other 
signs are acute neuritis, lymphadenitis, orchitis, bone pain, dac-
tylitis, arthritis and proteinuria. ENL may continue intermittently for 
several years.
Borderline cases 
In borderline tuberculoid (BT) cases, skin lesions are more numerous than 
in tuberculoid (TT) cases, and there is more severe nerve damage and 
a risk of type 1 reactions. In borderline leprosy (BB) cases, skin lesions 
are numerous and vary in size, shape and distribution; annular lesions are 
characteristic and nerve damage is variable. In borderline lepromatous (BL) 
cases, there are widespread small macules in the skin and widespread 
nerve involvement; both type 1 and type 2 reactions occur.
Pure neural leprosy (i.e. without skin lesions) occurs principally in India 
and accounts for 10% of patients. There is asymmetrical involvement of 
peripheral nerve trunks and no visible skin lesions. On nerve biopsy, all 
types of leprosy have been found.
Investigations 
The diagnosis is clinical, made by nding a cardinal sign of leprosy and 
supported by detecting acid-fast bacilli in slit-skin smears or typical 
histology in a skin biopsy. Slit-skin smears are obtained by scraping 
dermal material on to a glass slide. The smears are then stained for 
acid-fast bacilli, the number counted per high-power eld and a score 
derived on a logarithmic scale (0–6): the bacterial index (BI). Smears 
are useful for conrming the diagnosis and monitoring response to 
treatment. Neither serology nor PCR is sensitive or specic enough for 
diagnosis.
Management 
The principles of treatment are outlined in Box 13.50. All leprosy patients 
require MDT with an approved rst-line regimen (Box 13.51).
Rifampicin is a potent bactericidal for M. leprae but should always 
be given in combination with other antileprotics, since a single-step 
mutation can confer resistance. Dapsone is bacteriostatic. It com-
monly causes mild haemolysis and rarely anaemia. Clofazimine is 
a red, fat-soluble crystalline dye, weakly bactericidal for M. leprae. 
Skin discoloration (red to purple–black) and ichthyosis are trouble-
some side-effects, particularly on pale skins. New bactericidal drugs 
against M. leprae have been identied, notably uoroquinolones (e.g. 
ooxacin). Minocycline and clarithromycin may also be used. These 
agents are second-line drugs. Minocycline causes grey pigmentation 
of skin lesions.
Single-dose combination treatment (rifampicin ooxacin and minocy-
cline) is less effective than the conventional 6-month treatment for pauci-
bacillary leprosy and has fallen out of favour.
Lepra reactions are treated as shown in Box 13.49. Chloroquine can 
also be used.
Patient education 
Patient education emphasises that, after 3 days of chemotherapy, they 
are not infectious, that gross deformities are not inevitable and that they 
can lead a normal social life.
Patients with anaesthetic hands or feet need to avoid and treat burns 
or other minor injuries. Good footwear is important. Physiotherapy helps 
maintain range of movement of affected muscles and neighbouring joints.
Prognosis 
Untreated, tuberculoid leprosy has a good prognosis; it may self-heal 
and peripheral nerve damage is limited. Lepromatous leprosy (LL) is a 
progressive condition with high morbidity if untreated.
After treatment, the majority of patients, especially those who have no 
nerve damage at the time of diagnosis, do well, with resolution of skin 
lesions. Borderline patients are at risk of developing type 1 reactions, 
which may result in devastating nerve damage.
13.47 Cardinal features of leprosy
 Skin lesions, typically anaesthetic at tuberculoid end of spectrum
 Thickened peripheral nerves
 Acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or biopsy
13.48 Clinical characteristics of the polar forms of leprosy
Clinical and  
tissue-specic 
features
Lepromatous
Tuberculoid
Skin and nerves
Number and 
distribution
Widely disseminated
One or a few sites, 
asymmetrical
Skin lesions
Denition:
Clarity of margin
Poor
Good
Elevation of margin
Never
Common
Colour:
Dark skin
Slight 
hypopigmentation
Marked 
hypopigmentation
Light skin
Slight erythema
Coppery or red
Surface
Smooth, shiny
Dry, scaly
Central healing
None
Common
Sweat and hair growth
Impaired late
Impaired early
Loss of sensation
Late
Early and marked
Nerve enlargement 
and damage
Late
Early and marked
Bacilli (bacterial 
index)
Many (5 or 6+)
Absent (0)
Natural history
Progressive
Self-healing
Other tissues
Upper respiratory 
mucosa, eye, testes, 
bones, muscle
None
Reactions
Immune complexes 
(type 2)
Cell-mediated (type 1)

[[p355]]
316    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Prevention and control 
The previous strategy of centralised leprosy control campaigns has been 
superseded by integrated programmes, with primary health-care work-
ers in many countries now responsible for case detection and provision 
of MDT. It is not yet clear how successful this will be, especially in the 
time-consuming area of disability prevention.
BCG vaccination offers protection against leprosy; adding killed 
M. leprae to BCG does not further enhance protection.
Rickettsial and related intracellular bacterial 
infections 
Rickettsial fevers 
The rickettsial fevers are the most common tick-borne infections. It is 
important to ask potentially infected patients about contact with ticks, 
lice or eas. There are two main groups of rickettsial fevers: spotted 
fevers and typhus (Box 13.52).
Pathogenesis 
The rickettsiae are intracellular Gram-negative organisms that parasitise 
the intestinal canal of arthropods. Infection of humans through the skin 
occurs from the excreta of arthropods, but the saliva of some biting vec-
tors is infected. The organisms multiply in capillary endothelial cells, pro-
ducing lesions in the skin, CNS, heart, lungs, liver, kidneys and skeletal 
muscles. Endothelial proliferation, associated with a perivascular reac-
tion, may cause thrombosis and purpura. In epidemic typhus, the brain is 
the target organ; in scrub typhus, the cardiovascular system and lungs in 
particular are attacked. An eschar, a black necrotic crusted sore, is often 
found in tick- and mite-borne typhus (see Fig. 13.8C). This is due to vas-
culitis following immunological recognition of the inoculated organism. 
Regional lymph nodes often enlarge.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 13.32 Clinical features of leprosy.
boy has several well-dened, hypopigmented, macular, anaesthetic lesions. He has severe nerve damage affecting both ulnar and median nerves bilaterally and has sustained 
13.49 Reactions in leprosy
Lepra reaction type 1 
(reversal)
Lepra reaction type 2 
(erythema nodosum 
leprosum)
Mechanism
Cell-mediated 
hypersensitivity
Immune complexes
Clinical features
Painful tender nerves, 
loss of function
Swollen skin lesions
New skin lesions
Tender papules and nodules; 
may ulcerate
Painful tender nerves, loss of 
function
Iritis, orchitis, myositis, 
lymphadenitis
Fever, oedema
Management
Prednisolone 40 mg, 
reducing over 3–6 
months1
Moderate: prednisolone 
40 mg daily
Severe: thalidomide2 or 
prednisolone 40–80 mg daily, 
reducing over 1–6 months; 
local if eye involved3
1lndicated for any new impairment of nerve or eye function. 2Contraindicated in women  
who may become pregnant. 31% hydrocortisone drops or ointment and 1% atropine drops.
13.50 Principles of leprosy treatment
 Stop the infection with chemotherapy
 Treat reactions
 Educate the patient about leprosy
 Prevent disability
 Support the patient socially and psychologically

[[p356]]
Bacterial infections     317
13
Spotted fever group 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
Rickettsia rickettsii is transmitted by tick bites. It is widely distributed and 
increasing in western and south-eastern states of the USA and also in 
Central and South America. The incubation period is about 7 days. The 
rash appears on about the third or fourth day of illness, looking at rst like 
measles, but in a few hours a typical maculopapular eruption develops. 
The rash spreads in 24–48 hours from wrists, forearms and ankles to 
the back, limbs and chest, and then to the abdomen, where it is least 
pronounced. Larger cutaneous and subcutaneous haemorrhages may 
appear in severe cases. The liver and spleen become palpable. At the 
extremes of life, the mortality is 2%–12%.
Other spotted fevers 
R. conorii (boutonneuse fever) causes Mediterranean spotted fever, 
which extends to Africa and India, while R. africae (African tick bite 
fever) causes African tick typhus. The incubation period is approximately 
7 days. Infected tick bites result from walking on grasslands or are 
acquired from pet dogs. Examination may reveal a diagnostic eschar, 
and the maculopapular rash on the trunk, limbs, palms and soles. There 
may be delirium and meningeal signs in severe infections, but recovery 
is usual. R. africae may cause multiple eschars. Some cases, particu-
larly those with R. africae, present without rash (‘spotless spotted fever’). 
Other spotted fevers are shown in Box 13.52
Typhus group 
Scrub typhus fever 
Scrub typhus is caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi, transmitted by 
mites. It occurs in the Far East, Myanmar, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
India, Indonesia, the South Pacic islands and Queensland, particu-
larly where patches of forest cleared for plantations have attracted 
rats and mites.
In many patients, one or more eschars develop, surrounded by cellu-
litis (see Fig. 13.8C), with regional lymph node enlargement. The incuba-
tion period is about 9 days.
Mild or subclinical cases are common. The onset of symptoms is usu-
ally sudden, with headache (often retro-orbital), fever, malaise, weakness 
and cough. In severe illness, the general symptoms increase, with apathy 
and prostration. An erythematous maculopapular rash often appears on 
about the 5th–7th day and spreads to the trunk, face and limbs, including 
the palms and soles, with generalised painless lymphadenopathy. The 
13.51 World Health Organization 2018 guidelines for multidrug 
therapy (MDT) regimens in leprosy
Type of leprosy1
Monthly 
supervised 
treatment
Daily self-
administered 
treatment
Duration of 
treatment
Paucibacillary
Rifampicin 
600 mg
Dapsone 
100 mg
6 months
Clofazimine 
300 mg
Clofazimine 
50 mg
Multibacillary
Rifampicin 
600 mg
Dapsone 
100 mg
12 months
Clofazimine 
300 mg
Clofazimine 
50 mg
Rifampicin 
resistant
Clofazimine 
50 mg
plus two 
second-line 
agents2 ×6 
months, then
plus one second 
line ×18 month
24 months
1Classication uses the number of skin lesions: paucibacillary (1–5 skin lesions); 
multibacillary (>5 skin lesions, nerve involvement or positive slit-skin smear). 2Second-line 
agents minocycline 100 mg, clarithromycin 500 mg, or a uoroquinolone (e.g. ooxacin 
400 mg, levooxacin 500 mg or moxioxacin 400 mg) but only use a uoroquinolone if TB 
excluded and no uoroquinolone resistance.
From WHO. Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Leprosy. New Delhi: World 
Health Organization, Regional Ofce for South-East Asia; 2018.
13.52 Features of rickettsial infections
Disease
Organism
Reservoir
Vector
Geographical 
area
Rash
Gangrene
Target 
organs
Mortality
Spotted fever group
Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever
R rickettsii
Rodents, dogs, ticks
Ixodes tick
North, Central 
and South 
America
Morbilliform
Haemorrhagic
Often
Bronchi, 
myocardium, 
brain, skin
2%–12%2
Boutonneuse fever
R. conorii
Rodents, dogs, ticks
Ixodes tick
Mediterranean, 
Africa, South-
west Asia, India
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
2.5%3
Siberian tick typhus
R. sibirica
Rodents, birds, 
domestic animals, 
ticks
Various ticks
Siberia, 
Mongolia, 
northern China
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Australian tick 
typhus
R. australis
Rodents, ticks
Ticks
Australia
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Oriental spotted 
fever
R. japonica
Rodents, dogs, ticks
Ticks
Japan
Maculopapular
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
African tick bite 
fever1
R. africae
Cattle, game, ticks
Ixodes tick
South Africa
Can be spotless
–
Skin, 
meninges
Rare3
Typhus group
Scrub typhus
Orientia 
tsutsugamushi
Rodents
Trombicula
mite
South-east Asia
Maculopapular
Unusual
Bronchi, 
myocardium, 
brain, skin
Rare3
Epidemic typhus
R. prowazekii
Humans
Louse
Worldwide
Morbilliform
Haemorrhagic
Often
Brain, skin, 
bronchi, 
myocardium
Up to 
40%
Endemic typhus
R. typhi
Rats
Flea
Worldwide
Slight
–
–
Rare3
1Eschar at bite site and local lymphadenopathy. 2Highest in adult males. 3Except in infants, older people and the debilitated.

[[p357]]
318    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
rash fades by the 14th day. The temperature rises rapidly and continues 
as a remittent fever (i.e. the difference between maximum and minimum 
temperature exceeds 1°C), remaining above normal with sweating until 
it falls on the 12th–18th day. In severe infection, the patient is prostrate 
with cough, pneumonia, delirium and deafness. Cardiac failure, renal fail-
ure and haemorrhage may develop. Convalescence is often slow and 
tachycardia may persist for some weeks.
Epidemic (louse-borne) typhus 
Epidemic typhus is caused by R. prowazekii and is transmitted by infected 
faeces of the human body louse, usually through scratching the skin. 
Patients with epidemic typhus infect lice, which leave when the patient 
is febrile. In conditions of overcrowding, the disease spreads rapidly. It is 
prevalent in parts of Africa, especially Ethiopia and Rwanda, and in the 
South American Andes and Afghanistan. Large epidemics have occurred 
in Europe, usually during wars. The incubation period is usually 12–14 days.
There may be several days of malaise but the onset is more often sud-
den, with rigors, fever, frontal headaches, pains in the back and limbs, 
constipation and bronchitis. The face is ushed and cyanotic, the eyes 
are congested and the patient becomes confused. The rash appears on 
the 4th–6th day. In its early stages, it disappears on pressure but soon 
becomes petechial with subcutaneous mottling. The rash appears rst on 
the anterior folds of the axillae, sides of the abdomen or backs of the 
hands, then on the trunk and forearms. The neck and face are seldom 
affected. During the second week, symptoms increase in severity. Sores 
develop on the lips. The tongue becomes dry, brown, shrunken and trem-
ulous. The spleen is palpable, the pulse feeble and the patient stuporous 
and delirious. The temperature falls rapidly at the end of the second week 
and the patient recovers gradually. In fatal cases, the patient usually dies 
in the second week from toxaemia, cardiac or renal failure, or pneumonia.
Endemic (ea-borne) typhus 
Flea-borne or ‘endemic’ typhus caused by R. typhi is endemic world-
wide. Humans are infected when the faeces or contents of a crushed 
ea, which has fed on an infected rat, are introduced into the skin. The 
incubation period is 8–14 days. The symptoms resemble those of a mild 
louse-borne typhus. The rash may be scanty and transient.
Investigation of rickettsial infection 
Routine blood investigations are not diagnostic. There is usually hepa-
titis and thrombocytopenia. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds and 
response to treatment, and may be conrmed by antibody detection or 
PCR in specialised laboratories. Differential diagnoses include malaria, 
typhoid, meningococcal sepsis and leptospirosis.
Management of rickettsial fevers 
The rickettsial fevers vary in severity but all respond to tetracycline 
500 mg 4 times daily, doxycycline 200 mg daily or chloramphenicol 
500 mg 4 times daily for 7 days. Louse-borne typhus and scrub typhus 
can be treated with a single dose of 200 mg doxycycline, repeated for 
2–3 days to prevent relapse. Chloramphenicol- and doxycycline-resist-
ant strains of O. tsutsugamushi have been reported from Thailand and 
patients here may need treatment with rifampicin.
Nursing care is important, especially in epidemic typhus. Sedation 
may be required for delirium and blood transfusion for haemorrhage. 
Relapsing fever and typhoid are common intercurrent infections in epi-
demic typhus, and pneumonia in scrub typhus. Convalescence is usually 
protracted, especially in older people.
To prevent rickettsial infection, lice, eas, ticks and mites need to be 
controlled with insecticides.
Q fever 
Q fever occurs worldwide and is caused by the rickettsia-like organism 
Coxiella burnetii, an obligate intracellular organism that survives in the 
extracellular environment. Cattle, sheep and goats are important reser-
voirs and the organism is transmitted by inhalation of aerosolised particles. 
C. burnetii exhibits phase variation, due to antigenic variation resulting from 
changes to its lipopolysaccharide (LPS). When isolated from animals or 
humans, C. burnetii expresses phase I antigen and is very infectious (a 
single bacterium is sufcient to infect a human). In culture, there is an anti-
genic shift to the phase II form, which is not infectious. Measurement of 
antigenic shift helps differentiate acute and chronic Q fever.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is 3–4 weeks. The initial symptoms are non-specic 
with fever, headache and chills; in 20% of cases, a maculopapular rash 
occurs. Other presentations include pneumonia and hepatitis. Chronic 
Q fever may present with osteomyelitis, encephalitis and endocarditis.
Investigations and management 
Diagnosis is usually serological and the stage of the infection can be 
distinguished by isotype tests and phase-specic antigens. Phase I and 
II IgM titres peak at 4–6 weeks. In chronic infections, IgG titres to phase I 
and II antigens may be raised. Suspected tissue infection (e.g. endocar-
ditis) can be diagnosed by detection of specic DNA (PCR).
Prompt treatment of acute Q fever with doxycycline reduces fever 
duration. Treatment of Q fever endocarditis is problematic, requiring 
prolonged therapy with doxycycline and rifampicin or ciprooxacin with 
hydroxychloroquine; even then, organisms are not always eradicated. 
Valve surgery is often required.
Bartonellosis 
Bartonellae are intracellular Gram-negative bacilli closely related to the 
rickettsiae, which are important causes of ‘culture-negative’ endocar-
ditis. They are found in many domestic pets, such as cats, although for 
several the host is undened (Box 13.53). The principal human patho-
gens are Bartonella quintana, B. henselae and B. bacilliformis. Bartonella
infections are associated with the following:
 Trench fever. This is a relapsing fever with severe leg pain and 
is caused by B. quintana. The disease is not fatal but is very 
debilitating.
 Bacteraemia and endocarditis in the homeless. Endocarditis due to 
B. quintana or B. henselae is associated with severe damage to the 
heart valves.
 Cat scratch disease. B. henselae causes this common benign 
lymphadenopathy in children and young adults. A vesicle or papule 
develops on the head, neck or arms after a cat scratch. The lesion 
resolves spontaneously but there may be regional lymphadenopathy 
that persists for up to 4 months before also resolving spontaneously. 
Rare complications include retinitis and encephalopathy.
 Bacillary angiomatosis. This is an HIV-associated disease caused by 
B. quintana or B. henselae (see p. 358).
 Oroya fever and verruga peruana (Carrion’s disease). This is 
endemic in areas of Peru. It is a biphasic disease caused by B. 
bacilliformis, transmitted by sandies of the genus Phlebotomus. 
Fever, haemolytic anaemia and microvascular thrombosis with 
end-organ ischaemia are features. It is frequently fatal if untreated.
13.53 Clinical diseases caused by Bartonella spp.
Reservoir
Vector
Organism
Disease
Cats
Flea
B. henselae
Cat scratch disease, bacillary 
angiomatosis, endocarditis
Undened
Lice
B. quintana
Trench fever, bacillary 
angiomatosis, endocarditis
Undened
Sandy
B. bacilliformis
Carrion’s disease: Oroya fever 
and verruga peruana
Undened
Flea
B. rochalimae
Fever, rash, anaemia, 
splenomegaly

[[p358]]
Protozoal infections     319
13
Investigations and management 
Bartonellae can be cultured in specialised laboratories but PCR is often 
used to diagnose infection. Serum antibody detection is possible but 
cross-reactions occur with Chlamydia and Coxiella spp.
Bartonella spp. are typically treated with macrolides or tetracyclines. 
Antibiotic use is guided by clinical need. Cat scratch disease usu-
ally resolves spontaneously but Bartonella endocarditis requires valve 
replacement and combination antibiotic therapy with doxycycline and 
gentamicin.
Chlamydial infections 
These are listed in Box 13.54 and are also described on pages 379 
and 512.
Trachoma 
Trachoma is a chronic keratoconjunctivitis caused by Chlamydia tra-
chomatis and is the most common cause of avoidable blindness. The 
classic trachoma environment is dry and dirty, causing children to have 
eye and nose discharges. Transmission occurs through ies, on ngers 
and within families. In endemic areas, the disease is most common in 
children.
Pathology and clinical features 
The onset is usually insidious. Infection may be asymptomatic, last for 
years with prolonged latency and may recrudesce. The conjunctiva of 
the upper lid is rst affected with vascularisation and cellular inltration. 
Early symptoms include conjunctival irritation and blepharospasm. The 
early follicles are characteristic (Fig. 13.33) but clinical differentiation from 
conjunctivitis due to other causes may be difcult. Scarring causes inver-
sion of the lids (entropion) so that the lashes rub against the cornea 
(trichiasis). The cornea becomes vascularised and opaque with detection 
only when vision begins to fail.
Investigations and management 
Intracellular inclusions may be demonstrated in conjunctival scrapings 
by staining with iodine or immunouorescence. Although chlamydiae 
may, in theory, be isolated in chick embryo or cell culture or detected by 
nucleic acid amplication tests, these methods are rarely available in the 
areas where trachoma is encountered, and in any case their sensitivity 
and specicity are poorly established. Diagnosis of trachoma is therefore 
based on clinical and epidemiological features.
A single dose of oral azithromycin (20 mg/kg) is superior to 6 weeks 
of tetracycline eye ointment twice daily for individuals in mass treatment 
programmes. Deformity and scarring of the lids, and corneal opacities, 
ulceration and scarring require surgical treatment after control of local 
infection.
Prevention 
Personal and family hygiene should be improved. Proper care of the eyes 
of newborn and young children is essential. Family contacts should be 
examined. The WHO is promoting the SAFE strategy for trachoma control 
(surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness and environmental improvement).
Protozoal infections 
Protozoa are important causes of infectious diseases. They can be cat-
egorised according to whether they cause systemic or local infection. 
Trichomoniasis is described on page 374.
Systemic protozoal infections 
Malaria 
Malaria in humans is caused by Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. 
ovale (subspecies curtisi and wallikeri), P. malariae and the zoonotic 
simian parasite P. knowlesi. It is transmitted by the bite of female 
Anopheles mosquitoes and occurs throughout the tropics and sub-
tropics at altitudes below 1500 m (Fig. 13.34). The WHO estimates that 
228 million cases of clinical malaria occurred in 2018, 93% of these in 
Africa, especially among children and pregnant women. The incidence 
rate of malaria declined globally between 2010 and 2018 due to WHO 
prevention and treatment campaigns. However, P. falciparum has now 
become resistant to artemisinins as well as chloroquine, meoquine 
and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, initially in South-east Asia.. The WHO 
is now planning for elimination of malaria in certain countries by utilising 
the ‘best evidence’ in bed nets, rapid diagnostic tests and artemisinin 
combination therapy (ACT).
Travellers are susceptible to malaria. Most cases are due to P. falci-
parum, usually from Africa, and of these 1% die because of late diagno-
sis. Migrants from endemic countries who spend long periods of time in 
non-endemic countries are particularly at risk if they visit friends and fam-
ily in their country of origin. They have lost their partial immunity and fre-
quently do not take malaria prophylaxis. A few people living near airports 
in Europe have acquired malaria from accidentally imported mosquitoes.
13.54 Chlamydial infections
Organism
Disease caused
Chlamydia trachomatis
Trachoma
Lymphogranuloma venereum (see Box 15.12)
Cervicitis, urethritis, proctitis (see Ch. 15)
Chlamydia psittaci
Psittacosis (see Box 17.37)
Chlamydophila (Chlamydia) 
pneumoniae
Atypical pneumonia (see Box 17.37)  
Acute/chronic sinusitis
Fig. 13.33 Trachoma. Trachoma is characterised by hyperaemia and numerous 
pale follicles. Courtesy of Institute of Ophthalmology, Moorelds Eye Hospital, London
Fig. 13.34 Distribution of malaria. (For up-to-date information see the Malaria 
Atlas Project (MAP): map.ox.ac.uk.)

[[p359]]
320    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Pathogenesis 
Life cycle of the malarial parasite 
The female anopheline mosquito becomes infected when it feeds on 
human blood containing gametocytes, the sexual forms of the malarial 
parasite (Figs. 13.35 and 13.36). Development in the mosquito takes 
7–20 days, and results in sporozoites accumulating in the salivary glands 
and being inoculated into the human blood stream. Sporozoites disap-
pear from human blood within half an hour and enter the liver. After some 
days, merozoites leave the liver and invade red blood cells, where further 
asexual cycles of multiplication take place, producing schizonts. Rupture 
of the schizont releases more merozoites into the blood and causes 
fever, the periodicity of which depends on the species of parasite.
P. vivax and P. ovale may persist in liver cells as dormant forms, 
hypnozoites, capable of developing into merozoites months or years 
later. Thus the rst attack of clinical malaria may occur long after 
the patient has left the endemic area, and the disease may relapse 
after treatment with drugs that only kill the erythrocytic stage of the 
parasite.
P. falciparum, P. knowlesi and P. malariae have no persistent exo-
erythrocytic phase but recrudescence of fever may result from multiplica-
tion of parasites in red cells that have not been eliminated by treatment 
and immune processes (Box 13.55).
Pathology 
Red cells infected with malaria undergo haemolysis. This is most severe 
with P. falciparum, which invades red cells of all ages; P. vivax and P. 
ovale preferentially invade younger cells, and P. malariae normoblasts, so 
that infections remain lower. Anaemia may be profound and is worsened 
by dyserythropoiesis, splenomegaly and depletion of folate stores.
In P. falciparum malaria, red cells containing trophozoites adhere to 
vascular endothelium in post-capillary venules in brain, kidney, liver, lungs 
and gut by the formation of ‘knob’ proteins. They also form ‘rosettes’ and 
rouleaux with uninfected red cells. Vessel congestion results in organ 
damage, which is exacerbated by rupture of schizonts, liberating toxic 
and antigenic substances (Fig. 13.36).
P. falciparum has inuenced human evolution, with the appearance 
of protective mutations such as sickle-cell (Hb), thalassaemia, glu-
cose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deciency (see Ch. 25) 
and HLA-B53. P. falciparum does not grow well in red cells that con-
tain haemoglobin F, C or especially S. Haemoglobin S heterozygotes 
(AS) are protected against the lethal complications of malaria. P. vivax
cannot enter red cells that lack the Duffy blood group; therefore many 
West Africans and African Americans are protected.
Clinical features 
The clinical features of malaria are non-specic and the diagnosis must 
be suspected in anyone returning from an endemic area who has fea-
tures of infection.
Fig. 13.35 Scanning electron micrograph of Plasmodium falciparum oöcysts 
lining an anopheline mosquito’s stomach.
IN FEMALE
ANOPHELINE MOSQUITO
IN HUMANS
Primary
exo-erythrocytic
cycle (liver)
Sexual
differentiation
(RBCs)
Bite
Bite
Female gametocyte being
fertilised by male gamete
Maturation of
female gamete
Exflagellating
male 
gametocyte
Zygote
Stomach
wall
Young
oöcyst
Segmenting
oöcyst
Ruptured
oöcyst
Sporozoites
invading
salivary glands
Trophozoite
Schizont
Immature
gametocytes
Male and female
gametocytes
Merozoites
Ring
form
Merozoites
Oökinete
Sexual
cycle
Erythrocytic
(asexual) cycle
(RBCs)
Fig. 13.36 Malarial parasites: life cycle. Hypnozoites (*) are present only in Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale infections. (RBC = red blood cell)

[[p360]]
Protozoal infections     321
13
P. falciparum infection 
This is the most dangerous of the malarias. The onset is often insidi-
ous, with malaise, headache and vomiting. Cough and mild diarrhoea 
are also common. The fever has no particular pattern and the classic 
Neurological
Coma
Hypoglycaemia
Seizures
Cranial nerve palsies
Opisthotonus
Respiratory
Pulmonary oedema
Secondary bacterial pneumonia
Abdomen
Jaundice
Tender liver edge with hepatitis
Pain in left upper quadrant
with splenomegaly
Fever
Cardiovascular
Shock
Cardiac failure (‘algid malaria’)
Dysrhythmias with quinine
Renal
Acute kidney injury
Severe haemolysis resulting
in haemoglobinuria (‘blackwater fever’)
Optic fundi
Blood
Parasitaemia
Anaemia
Thrombocytopenia
Coagulopathy
Disconjugate gaze due
to cranial nerve palsy
Malaria retinopathy
with Roth spots
Ring form
Ring form in RBCs
Trophozoite
Schizont
P. vivax in RBCs 
Blood film showing
parasitaemia
P. falciparum
Fig. 13.37 Features of Plasmodium falciparum infection. (RBC = red blood cell). Insets (malaria retinopathy) Courtesy of Dr Nicholas Beare, Royal Liverpool University Hospital; 
(blood lms of P. vivax and P. falciparum) Courtesy of Dr Kamolrat Silamut, Mahidol Oxford Research Unit, Bangkok, Thailand
13.55 Relationships between life cycle of parasite and clinical 
features of malaria
Cycle/feature
Plasmodium 
vivax, P. ovale
P. malariae
P. falciparum
Pre-patent 
period (minimum 
incubation)
8–25 days
15–30 days
8–25 days
Exo-erythrocytic 
cycle
Persistent as 
hypnozoites
Pre-erythrocytic 
only
Pre-erythrocytic 
only
Asexual cycle
48 hrs 
synchronous
72 hrs 
synchronous
<48 hrs 
asynchronous
Fever 
periodicity
Alternate days
Every third day
None
Delayed onset
Common
Rare
Rare
Relapses
Common up to 
2 years
Recrudescence 
many years later
Recrudescence 
up to 1 year
periodicity is rarely observed. Jaundice is common due to haemolysis 
and hepatic dysfunction. The liver and spleen enlarge and may become 
tender. Anaemia develops rapidly, as does thrombocytopenia.
A patient with falciparum malaria, apparently not seriously ill, may 
rapidly develop dangerous complications (Fig. 13.37 and Box 13.56). 
Cerebral malaria is manifested by delirium, seizures or coma, usually 
without localising signs. Children die rapidly without any specic symp-
toms other than fever. Immunity is impaired in pregnancy and the para-
site can preferentially bind to the placental protein chondroitin sulphate 
A. Abortion and intrauterine growth retardation from parasitisation of 
the maternal side of the placenta are frequent. Previous splenectomy 
increases the risk of severe malaria. Recurrent infection is rarely asso-
ciated with later development of endemic Burkitt lymphoma and hyper-
reactive (tropical) splenomegaly.
P. vivax and  P. ovale infection 
Illness usually starts with several days of continued fever before the 
development of classical bouts of fever on alternate days. Fever 
starts with a rigor. The patient feels cold and the temperature rises 
to about 40°C. After half an hour to an hour, the hot or flush phase 
begins. It lasts several hours and gives way to profuse perspiration 
and a gradual fall in temperature. The cycle is repeated 48 hours 
later. Gradually, the spleen and liver enlarge and may become tender. 
Anaemia develops slowly. Relapses are frequent in the first 2 years 
after leaving the malarious area and infection may be acquired from 
blood transfusion.

[[p361]]
322    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
13.56 Severe manifestations/complications of falciparum malaria and their immediate management
Coma (cerebral malaria)
 Maintain airway
 Nurse on side
 Exclude other treatable causes of coma (e.g. hypoglycaemia,  
bacterial meningitis)
 Avoid harmful ancillary treatments such as glucocorticoids, heparin  
and adrenaline (epinephrine)
 Intubate if necessary
Hyperpyrexia
 Tepid sponging, fanning, cooling blanket
 Antipyretic drug (paracetamol)
Convulsions
 Maintain airway
 Treat promptly with diazepam or paraldehyde injection
Hypoglycaemia
 Measure blood glucose
 Give 50% dextrose injection followed by 10% dextrose infusion  
(glucagon may be ineffective)
Severe anaemia (packed cell volume <15%)
 Transfuse fresh whole blood or packed cells if pathogen screening  
of donor blood is available
Acute pulmonary oedema
 Nurse at 45°, give oxygen, venesect 250 mL of blood, give diuretic,  
stop intravenous uids
 Intubate and add PEEP/CPAP in life-threatening hypoxaemia
 Haemolter
Acute kidney injury
 Exclude pre-renal causes
 Fluid resuscitation if appropriate
 Peritoneal dialysis (haemoltration or haemodialysis if available)
Spontaneous bleeding and coagulopathy
 Transfuse screened fresh whole blood (cryoprecipitate/fresh frozen  
plasma and platelets if available)
 Vitamin K injection
Metabolic acidosis
 Exclude or treat hypoglycaemia, hypovolaemia and Gram-negative  
sepsis
 Fluid resuscitation
 Give oxygen
Shock (‘algid malaria’)
 Suspect Gram-negative sepsis
 Take blood cultures
 Give parenteral antimicrobials
 Correct haemodynamic disturbances
Aspiration pneumonia
 Give parenteral antimicrobial drugs
 Change position
 Physiotherapy
 Give oxygen
Hyperparasitaemia
 Consider exchange transfusion (e.g. >10% of circulating erythrocytes parasitised in 
non-immune patient with severe disease)
Specic therapy
 Intravenous artesunate
 Meoquine should be avoided due to increased risk of post-malaria neurological 
syndrome
(CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; PEEP = positive end-expiratory pressure)
From WHO. Severe falciparum malaria. In: Severe and complicated malaria, 3rd edn. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2000; 94 (suppl. 1):S1–41.
P. malariae and  P. knowlesi infection 
This is usually associated with mild symptoms and bouts of fever every 
third day. Parasitaemia may persist for many years, with the occasional 
recrudescence of fever or without producing any symptoms. Chronic P. 
malariae infection causes glomerulonephritis and long-term nephrotic syn-
drome in children. P. knowlesi is usually mild but can deteriorate rapidly.
Investigations 
WHO recommends prompt malaria diagnosis, either by microscopy or 
malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT), whenever malaria is suspected. In 
a Giemsa-stained thick lm, erythrocytes are lysed, releasing all blood 
stages of the parasite. This, as well as the fact that more blood is used in 
thick lms, facilitates the diagnosis of low-level parasitaemia. A thin lm is 
essential to conrm the diagnosis, species and, in P. falciparum infections, 
to quantify the parasite load (by counting the percentage of infected eryth-
rocytes). P. falciparum parasites may be very scanty, especially in patients 
who have been partially treated. With P. falciparum, only ring forms are 
normally seen in the early stages (see Fig. 13.37); with the other species, 
all stages of the erythrocytic cycle may be found. Gametocytes appear 
after about 2 weeks, persist after treatment and are harmless, except that 
they are the source by which more mosquitoes become infected.
Immunochromatographic RDTs for malaria antigens, such as OptiMAL 
(which detects the Plasmodium LDH of P. falciparum and vivax) and 
Parasight-F (which detects the P. falciparum histidine-rich protein (HRP) 
2), are extremely sensitive and specic for falciparum malaria but less so 
for other species. They are especially useful where the microscopist is 
less experienced in examining blood lms (e.g. in non-endemic or remote 
areas). They are less sensitive for low-level parasitaemia and positivity 
may persist for a month or more in some individuals. Dual pfhrp2/3 gene 
deletion leads to false-negative HRP2-based tests and is increasingly 
reported in East Africa. The QBC Malaria Test is a uorescence micros-
copy-based malaria diagnostic test that is also used.
Nucleic acid detection (PCR) is used mainly in research and is use-
ful for determining whether a patient has a recrudescence of the same 
malaria parasite or a reinfection with a new parasite.
Management 
Mild P. falciparum malaria 
Since P. falciparum is widely resistant to chloroquine and sulfadoxine-py-
rimethamine (Fansidar) almost worldwide, an artemisinin-based treatment 
is recommended (Box 13.57). WHO policy recommends always using 
ACT, e.g. co-artemether or artesunate–amodiaquine. Unfortunately, arte-
misinin resistance has now been reported in South-east Asia, mandating 
strict adherence to local guidance on the selection of ACT, e.g. dihydro-
artemisinin-piperaquine or pyronaridine-artesunate in Thailand.
Complicated P. falciparum malaria 
Severe malaria should be considered in any non-immune patient with a 
parasite count greater than 2% or with complications, and is a medical 
emergency (see Box 13.56). Management includes early and appropriate 
antimalarial chemotherapy, active treatment of complications, correction 
of uid, electrolyte and acid–base balance, and avoidance of harmful 
ancillary treatments.

[[p362]]
Protozoal infections     323
13
The treatment of choice is intravenous artesunate. Late haemolysis is 
a treatment side-effect in some patients. Rectal administration of artesu-
nate is also being developed to allow administration in remote rural 
areas. Quinine salt is the alternative.
Exchange transfusion has not been tested in randomised controlled 
trials but may be benecial for non-immune patients with persisting high 
parasitaemias (>10% circulating erythrocytes).
Non-falciparum malaria 
P. vivax, P. ovale, P. knowlesi and P. malariae infections should be treated with 
oral chloroquine but some chloroquine resistance has been reported from 
Indonesia and all are sensitive to ACTs. ‘Radical cure’ is essential in patients with 
P. vivax or P. ovale malaria using a course of primaquine or tafenoquine, which 
destroys the hypnozoite phase in the liver. Severe haemolysis may develop in 
those who are G6PD-decient. Cyanosis due to the formation of methaemo-
globin in the red cells is more common but not dangerous (see Fig. 10.1).
Prevention 
Clinical attacks of malaria may be preventable with chemoprophylaxis 
using chloroquine, atovaquone plus proguanil (Malarone), doxycycline or 
13.57 Malaria treatment
Mild falciparum malaria
Preferred therapy
 Co-artemether (CoArtem or Riamet); contains artemether and lumefantrine  
(4 tablets orally at 0, 8, 24, 36, 48 and 60 hrs)
Alternative therapy
 Quinine (600 mg of quinine salt 3 times daily orally for 5–7 days), together with 
or followed by doxycycline (200 mg once daily orally for 7 days)
 Use clindamycin not doxycycline if the patient is a pregnant woman or 
young child
or
 Atovaquone–proguanil (Malarone, 4 tablets orally once daily for 3 days)
Pregnancy
 Co-artemether but avoid in early pregnancy
 If not using co-artemether, use quinine plus clindamycin (450 mg 3 times daily 
orally for 7 days)
Other regimens
 Artesunate (200 mg orally daily for 3 days) and meoquine (1 g orally on day 2 
and 500 mg orally on day 3)
Severe falciparum malaria
Preferred therapy
 Artesunate 2.4 mg/kg IV at 0, 12 and 24 hrs and then once daily for 7 days. 
Once the patient is able to recommence oral intake, switch to 2 mg/kg orally 
once daily, to complete a total cumulative dose of 17–18 mg/kg
Alternative therapy
 Quinine, loading dose 20 mg/kg IV over 4 hrs, up to a maximum of 1.4 g, then 
maintenance doses of 10 mg/kg quinine salt given as 4-hr infusions 3 times 
daily for the rst 48 hrs then twice a day, up to a maximum of 700 mg per 
dose or until the patient can take drugs orally. Combine with doxycycline (or 
clindamycin if there are contraindications to doxycycline)
 Note the loading dose should not be given if quinine, quinidine or meoquine 
has been administered in the previous 24 hrs
 Patients should be monitored by ECG while receiving quinine, with special 
attention to QRS duration and QT interval
Non-falciparum malaria
Preferred therapy
 Chloroquine: 600 mg chloroquine base orally, followed by 300 mg base in 6 hrs, then 
150 mg base twice daily for 2 more days plus primaquine (30 mg orally daily (for 
P. vivax) or 15 mg orally daily (for P. ovale) for 14 days) after conrming G6PD-negative
Patients with mild to moderate G6PD deciency and P. vivax or P. ovale
 Chloroquine plus primaquine 0.75 mg/kg weekly orally for 8 weeks
Chloroquine-resistant P. vivax
 Co-artemether as for P. falciparum
(ECG = electrocardiogram; G6PD = glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; IV = intravenous)
meoquine. Box 13.58 gives the recommended doses for protection of the 
non-immune. The risk of malaria in the area to be visited and the degree of 
chloroquine resistance guide the recommendations for prophylaxis. Updated 
recommendations are summarised at tfortravel.nhs.uk. Meoquine is use-
ful in areas of multiple drug resistance, such as East and Central Africa and 
Papua New Guinea. Experience shows it to be safe for at least 2 years but 
there are several contraindications to its use (see Box 13.58).
Expert advice is required for individuals unable to tolerate the rst-line 
agents listed or in whom they are contraindicated. Meoquine should 
be started 2–3 weeks before travel to give time for assessment of 
side-effects. Chloroquine should not be taken continuously as a prophy-
lactic for more than 5 years without regular ophthalmic examination, as 
it may cause irreversible retinopathy. Pregnant and lactating women may 
take proguanil or chloroquine safely.
Prevention also involves advice about the use of high-percentage 
diethyltoluamide (DEET), covering up extremities when out after dark, 
and sleeping under permethrin-impregnated mosquito nets.
Malaria control in endemic areas 
There are major initiatives to reduce and eliminate malaria in endemic 
areas, particularly 11 countries with the greatest burden (e.g. the ‘High 
Burden High Impact’ approach). Successful programmes combine vec-
tor control, including indoor residual spraying, use of long-lasting insec-
ticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) and intermittent preventative therapy (IPT; 
repeated dose of prophylactic drugs in high-risk groups, such as children 
and pregnant women, which reduces malaria and anaemia).
Research to produce a fully protective malaria vaccine is ongoing. An adju-
vanted vaccine using the R21 vaccine candidate has shown good efcacy 
in African children under 18 months and has progressed to phase III studies.
Babesiosis 
Babesiosis is a tick-borne intra-erythrocytic protozoon parasite. There are 
more than 100 species of Babesia, all of which have an animal reservoir, 
typically either rodents or cattle. These are transmitted to humans via the 
tick vector Ixodes scapularis. Most American cases of babesiosis are due 
to B. microti and most European cases to B. divergens. Patients present 
13.58 Chemoprophylaxis of malaria1
Antimalarial tablets
Adult prophylactic 
dose
Regimen
Chloroquine 
resistance high
Meoquine2
250 mg weekly
Started 2–3 weeks 
before travel and 
continued until 4 
weeks after
or Doxycycline3,4
100 mg daily
Started 1 week before 
and continued until 4 
weeks after travel
or Atovaquone plus 
proguanil (Malarone)4
1 tablet daily
From 1–2 days before 
travel until 1 week after 
return
Chloroquine 
resistance absent
Chloroquine5 and
proguanil
300 mg base weekly
100–200 mg daily
Started 1 week before 
and continued until 4 
weeks after travel
1Choice of regimen is determined by area to be visited, length of stay, level of malaria 
transmission, level of drug resistance, presence of underlying disease in the traveller and 
concomitant medication taken. 2Contraindicated in the rst trimester of pregnancy, lactation, 
cardiac conduction disorders, epilepsy, psychiatric disorders; may cause neuropsychiatric 
disorders. 3Causes photosensitisation and sunburn if high-protection sunblock is not used. 
4Avoid in pregnancy. 5British preparations of chloroquine usually contain 150 mg base, French 
preparations 100 mg base and American preparations 300 mg base.

[[p363]]
324    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
with fever and malaise 1–4 weeks after a tick bite. Illness may be compli-
cated by haemolytic anaemia. Severe illness is seen in splenectomised 
patients. The diagnosis is made by blood-lm examination. Treatment is 
with azithromycin and atovaquone or quinine and clindamycin.
African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) 
African sleeping sickness is caused by trypanosomes (Fig. 13.38) car-
ried by tsetse ies, and is unique to sub-Saharan Africa (Fig. 13.39). 
The incidence of sleeping sickness across Africa has declined 95% 
since 1999 to <1000 cases per year. It is now on the verge of erad-
ication. Trypanosoma brucei gambiense trypanosomiasis is found in 
West and Central Africa and causes 98% of human African trypano-
somiasis (HAT). T. brucei rhodesiense trypanosomiasis occurs in East 
and Central Africa. In West Africa, transmission is mainly at the river-
side, where the y rests in the shade of trees; no animal reservoir has 
been identied for T. gambiense. T. rhodesiense has a large reservoir 
in numerous wild animals and transmission takes place in the shade of 
woods bordering grasslands. Rural populations employed in agricul-
ture, shing and animal husbandry are susceptible. Local people and 
tourists visiting forests infested with tsetse ies and animal reservoirs 
may become infected.
Clinical features 
A bite by a tsetse y is painful and commonly becomes inamed; if 
trypanosomes are introduced, the site may again become painful and 
swollen about 10 days later (‘trypanosomal chancre’), associated with 
regional lymphadenopathy. Within 2–3 weeks of infection, the trypano-
somes invade the blood stream. The disease is characterised by an early 
haematolymphatic (stage 1) and a late chronic encephalopathy phase 
(stage 2).
Rhodesiense infections 
This disease is more acute and severe than in gambiense infections. 
Within days or a few weeks, the patient is usually severely ill and may 
have developed pleural effusions and signs of myocarditis or hepatitis. 
There may be a petechial rash. The patient may die before there are 
signs of involvement of the CNS. If the illness is less acute, drowsiness, 
tremors and coma develop.
Gambiense infections 
The distinction between early and late stages may not be apparent 
in gambiense infections. The disease usually runs a slow course over 
months or years, with irregular bouts of fever and enlargement of lymph 
nodes. These are characteristically rm, discrete, rubbery and pain-
less, and are particularly prominent in the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Hepatosplenomegaly may develop. After some months without treat-
ment, the CNS is invaded. Patients develop headache, altered behaviour, 
blunting of higher mental functions, insomnia by night and sleepiness by 
day, delirium and eventually tremors, pareses, wasting, coma and death.
Investigations 
Trypanosomiasis should be considered in any febrile patient from an 
endemic area. In rhodesiense infections, thick and thin malaria blood 
lms will reveal trypanosomes. The trypanosomes may be seen in the 
blood or from puncture of the primary lesion in the earliest stages of 
gambiense infections, but it is usually easier to demonstrate them by 
aspiration of a lymph node. Concentration methods include buffy coat 
microscopy and miniature anion exchange chromatography.
Due to the cyclical nature of parasitaemia, the diagnosis is often made 
by demonstration of antibodies using a simple, rapid screening card 
agglutination trypanosomiasis test (CATT) for gambiense HAT, followed 
by parasitological conrmation.
No reliable serological test is available for rhodesiense HAT. PCR diag-
nosis is available, although technical requirements limit its availability. If the 
CNS is affected, the cell count and protein content of the CSF are increased 
and the glucose is diminished. A very high level of serum IgM or the pres-
ence of IgM in the CSF is suggestive of trypanosomiasis. Recognition of 
CNS involvement is critical, as failure to treat it might be fatal.
Management 
The prognosis is good if treatment is begun early, before the brain has 
been invaded. At this stage, intravenous suramin, after a test dose of 
100–200 mg, should be given for rhodesiense infections, followed by 
ve injections of 20 mg/kg every 7 days. Fexinidazole, an oral nitroimi-
dazole derivative, acts on the parasite nitroreductase. It is the preferred 
treatment for stage 1 or stage 2 infections with a CSF white cell count 
<0.1 ×109/L gambiense infections. The adult dose is 1800 mg days 1–4, 
and 1200 mg days 5–10, taken with food. For adults weighing <35 kg the 
loading dose is 1200 mg (days 1–4) followed by 600 mg (days 5–10). For 
gambiense infections, deep intramuscular or intravenous pentamidine 
4 mg/kg for 7 days is now used mainly in children <6 years of age with 
stage 1 disease.
For the treatment of stage 2 (nervous system) infection caused by 
gambiense HAT with CSF white cell count ≥0.1 ×109/L or in whom a CSF 
exam is indicated but not performed, nifurtimox (15 mg/kg daily orally in 
three divided doses for 10 days) and eornithine (DFMO; 400 mg/kg in 
two 2-hour IV infusions for 7 days) combination therapy (NECT) is rec-
ommended. DFMO, an irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase 
was formerly given without nifurtimox (100 mg/kg IV 4 times daily for 14 
days). This regimen had more side-effects and more injections. Stage 2 
rhodesiense infection is treated with melarsoprol, an arsenical (2.2 mg/
kg IV for 10 days). Treatment-related mortality with melarsoprol is 4–12% 
due to reactive encephalopathy.
Fig. 13.38 Trypanosomiasis. Scanning electron micrograph showing trypanosomes 
swimming among erythrocytes.
Non-endemic
None
1–100
101–500
501–1000
>1000
No. of cases
Fig. 13.39 Distribution of human African trypanosomiasis. Data are from 2009. 
From Simarro PP, Diarra A, Ruiz Postigo JA, et al. The human African trypanosomiasis 
control and surveillance programme of the World Health Organization 2000–2009: 
the way forward. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2011; 5(2):e1007.

[[p364]]
Protozoal infections     325
13
Prevention 
In endemic areas, various measures are taken against tsetse ies, and 
eld teams help detect and treat early HAT.
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease) 
Chagas’ disease occurs widely in South and Central America. The cause 
is Trypanosoma cruzi, transmitted to humans from the faeces of a redu-
viid (triatomine) bug, in which the trypanosomes develop. These bugs 
live in wild forests in crevices, burrows and palm trees. The Triatoma 
infestans bug has become domesticated in the Southern Cone countries 
(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay). It lives in the mud and 
wattle walls and thatched roofs of simple rural houses and emerges at 
night to feed and defecate on the sleeping occupants. Infected faeces 
are rubbed in through the conjunctiva, mucosa of mouth or nose, or 
abrasions of the skin. Over 100 species of mammal – domestic, peri-
domestic and wild – may serve as reservoirs of infection. In some areas, 
blood transfusion accounts for about 5% of cases. Congenital transmis-
sion occasionally occurs.
Pathology 
The trypanosomes migrate via the blood stream, develop into amastig-
ote forms in the tissues and multiply intracellularly by binary ssion. In the 
acute phase, inammation (primarily cell-mediated) of parasitised, as well as 
non-parasitised, cardiac muscles and capillaries occurs, resulting in acute 
myocarditis. In the chronic phase, focal myocardial atrophy, signs of chronic 
passive congestion and thromboembolic phenomena, cardiomegaly and 
apical cardiac aneurysm are salient ndings. In the digestive form of disease, 
focal myositis and discontinuous lesions of the intramural myenteric plexus 
are seen, predominantly in the oesophagus and colon.
Clinical features 
Acute phase 
Clinical manifestations of the acute phase are seen in only 1%–2% of 
individuals infected before the age of 15 years. Young children (1–5 
years) are most commonly affected. The entrance of T. cruzi through 
an abrasion produces a dusky-red, rm swelling and enlargement of 
regional lymph nodes. A conjunctival lesion, although less common, is 
characteristic; the unilateral rm, reddish swelling of the lids may close 
the eye and constitutes ‘Romaña’s sign’. In a few patients, an acute 
generalised infection soon appears, with a transient morbilliform or urti-
carial rash, fever, lymphadenopathy and enlargement of the spleen and 
liver. In a small minority of patients, acute myocarditis and heart failure or 
neurological features, including personality changes and signs of menin-
goencephalitis, may be seen. The acute infection may be fatal to infants.
Chronic phase 
About 50%–70% of infected patients become seropositive and develop 
an indeterminate form when parasitaemia occurs only at low levels and 
is not usually detectable. They have a normal lifespan with no symptoms 
but are a natural reservoir for the disease and maintain the life cycle of 
parasites in tissues. After a latent period of several years, 10%–30% of 
chronic cases develop low-grade myocarditis and damage to conduct-
ing bres, which causes cardiomyopathy characterised by cardiac dila-
tation, arrhythmias, partial or complete heart block and sudden death. 
In nearly 10% of patients, damage to Auerbach’s plexus results in dila-
tation of various parts of the alimentary canal, especially the colon and 
oesophagus, so-called ‘mega’ disease. Dilatation of the bile ducts and 
bronchi are also recognised sequelae. Autoimmune processes may be 
responsible for much of the damage. There are geographical variations 
of the basic pattern of disease. Reactivation of Chagas’ disease can 
occur in patients with HIV if the CD4 count falls lower than 200 cells/
mm3; this can cause space-occupying lesions with a presentation similar 
to Toxoplasma gondii encephalitis in HIV, a more diffuse encephalitis, 
meningoencephalitis or myocarditis.
Investigations 
T. cruzi is easily detectable by direct microscopic examination in a blood 
lm in the acute illness. In chronic disease, antibody detection is highly 
sensitive, and a positive result with two different serological tests con-
rms the infection parasite. DNA detection by PCR in the patient’s blood 
is a highly sensitive method for documentation of infection.
Management and prevention 
Parasiticidal agents are used to treat the acute phase, congenital disease 
and early chronic phase (within 10 years of infection). Benznidazole is 
given at a dose of 5–8 mg/kg daily orally, in two divided doses for 60 
days. Nifurtimox is an alternative treatment dosed at 8–20 mg/kg orally in 
three divided doses for 60 days. All doses of either treatment are weight 
adjusted. Treatment with either agent has to be carefully supervised to 
minimise toxicity while preserving parasiticidal activity. Cure rates of 80% 
in acute disease are obtained. Both benznidazole and nifurtimox are 
toxic, with adverse reaction rates of 30%–55%. Parasiticidal treatment 
of the chronic phase is usually performed but, in the cardiac or diges-
tive ‘mega’ diseases, does not reverse tissue damage. Surgery may be 
needed.
Preventative measures include improvement of housing and destruc-
tion of reduviid bugs by spraying of houses with insecticides. Blood and 
organ donors should be screened.
Toxoplasmosis 
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite. The sexual phase of the 
parasite’s life cycle (Fig. 13.40) occurs in the small intestinal epithelium 
of the domestic cat. Oöcysts in cat faeces are spread to intermediate 
hosts (pigs, sheep and also humans) via soil contamination. Oöcysts 
may survive in moist conditions for weeks or months. After ingestion, 
the parasite transforms into rapidly dividing tachyzoites through cycles 
Cat
Rodents
Birds
Oöcysts in faeces
Contaminated food,
water or soil
Tissue
cysts
Oöcysts
Oöcysts
Tissue
cysts
Humans
Vertical
transmission
Congenital
infection
Transfusion
Transplantation
Food
animals
Fig. 13.40 Life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii.

[[p365]]
326    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
of asexual multiplication. Microscopic tissue cysts develop containing 
bradyzoites, which persist for the lifetime of the host. Cats become 
infected or reinfected by ingesting tissue cysts in prey such as rodents 
and birds.
Human infection occurs via oöcyst-contaminated soil, salads and 
vegetables, or by ingestion of raw or under-cooked meats contain-
ing tissue cysts. Sheep, pigs and rabbits are the most common 
meat sources. Outbreaks of toxoplasmosis have followed consump-
tion of unfiltered water. In high-income countries, toxoplasmosis is 
the most common protozoal infection; around 22% of adults in the 
UK are seropositive. Most primary infections are subclinical; how-
ever, toxoplasmosis is thought to account for about 15% of het-
erophile antibody-negative infectious mononucleosis. In India or 
Brazil, approximately 40%–60% of pregnant females are seroposi-
tive for T.gondii. Toxoplasmosis is an important opportunistic infec-
tion in people with HIV, with considerable morbidity and mortality. 
Generalised toxoplasmosis has followed occupational exposure of 
laboratory workers.
Clinical features 
In most immunocompetent individuals, including children and pregnant 
women, the infection goes unnoticed. In approximately 10% of patients, 
it causes a self-limiting illness, most often in adults aged 25–35 years. The 
presenting feature is usually localised or generalised painless lymphaden-
opathy. The cervical nodes are primarily involved but mediastinal, mes-
enteric or retroperitoneal groups may be affected. The spleen is seldom 
palpable. Most patients have no systemic symptoms but some complain of 
malaise, fever, fatigue, muscle pain, sore throat and headache. Complete 
resolution usually occurs within a few months, although symptoms and 
lymphadenopathy tend to uctuate unpredictably and some patients 
do not recover completely for a year or more. Encephalitis, myocarditis, 
poly myositis, pneumonitis or hepatitis occasionally occur in immunocom-
petent patients but are more frequent in immunocompromised hosts. 
Retinochoroiditis (Fig. 13.41) is usually the result of congenital infection but 
has also been reported in acquired disease.
Congenital toxoplasmosis 
Acute toxoplasmosis, mostly subclinical, affects 0.3%–1% of pregnant 
women, with approximately 60% transmission rate to the fetus, which 
rises with increasing gestation. Seropositive females infected 6 months 
before conception have no risk of fetal transmission. Congenital disease 
affects approximately 40% of infected fetuses, and is more likely and 
more severe with infection early in gestation (see Box 13.24). Many fetal 
infections are subclinical at birth but long-term sequelae include retino-
choroiditis, microcephaly and hydrocephalus.
Investigations 
In contrast to immunocompromised patients, in whom the diagnosis 
often requires direct detection of parasites, serology is often used in 
immunocompetent individuals. The Sabin–Feldman dye test (indirect u-
orescent antibody test), which detects IgG antibody, is most commonly 
used. Recent infection induces a fourfold or greater increase in titre when 
paired sera are tested. Peak titres ≥1/1000 are reached 1–2 months after 
infection, and serology then becomes an unreliable indicator of recent 
infection. The detection of signicant levels of Toxoplasma-specic IgM 
antibody may be useful in conrming acute infection. A false-positive 
result or persistence of IgM antibodies for years after infection makes 
interpretation difcult; however, negative IgM antibodies virtually rule out 
acute infection.
During pregnancy, it is critical to differentiate recent from past infection; 
the presence of high-avidity IgG antibodies excludes infection acquired in 
the preceding 3–4 months.
If necessary, the presence of Toxoplasma organisms in a lymph node 
biopsy or other tissue can be detected histochemically with T. gondii
antiserum, or by the use of PCR to detect Toxoplasma-specic DNA.
Management 
In immunocompetent subjects, uncomplicated toxoplasmosis is self-
limiting and responds poorly to antimicrobial therapy. Treatment with sul-
fadiazine, pyrimethamine and folinic acid is usually reserved for severe or 
progressive disease, and for infection in immunocompromised patients. 
Often empirical treatment is initiated in people living with HIV if space-
occupying lesions are found in the CNS (see Ch. 14).
In pregnant women with established recent infection, spiramycin (3 g 
daily in divided doses) is given until term. Once fetal infection is estab-
lished, treatment with sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine plus calcium 
folinate is recommended (spiramycin does not cross the placental bar-
rier). The cost/benet of routine Toxoplasma screening and treatment 
in pregnancy is being debated in many countries. There is insufcient 
evidence to determine the effects on mother or baby of current antipar-
asitic treatment for women who seroconvert in pregnancy.
Leishmaniasis 
Leishmaniasis is caused by unicellular, agellate, intracellular protozoa 
belonging to the genus Leishmania (order Kinetoplastidae). The 21 leish-
manial species that cause human disease are responsible for three clin-
ical syndromes:
 visceral leishmaniasis (VL, kala-azar)
 cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL)
 mucosal leishmaniasis (ML).
Epidemiology and transmission 
Although most clinical syndromes are caused by zoonotic transmis-
sion of parasites from animals (chiey canine and rodent reservoirs) to 
humans through phlebotomine sandy vectors (Fig. 13.42A), humans are 
the only known reservoir (anthroponotic person-to-person transmission) 
in major VL foci in South Asia and in injection drug-users (Fig. 13.42B 
and C). Leishmaniasis occurs in approximately 100 countries around the 
world, with an estimated annual incidence of 1 million new cases, of 
which VL contributes approximately 20 000 cases.
The life cycle of Leishmania is shown in Figure 13.43. Flagellar pro-
mastigotes (10–20 µm) are introduced by the feeding female sandy. The 
promastigotes are taken up by neutrophils, which undergo apoptosis 
and are then engulfed by macrophages, in which the parasites transform 
into amastigotes (2–4 µm; Leishman–Donovan body). These multiply, 
causing macrophage lysis and infection of other cells. Sandies pick up 
amastigotes when feeding on infected patients or animal reservoirs. In 
the sandy, the parasite transforms into a agellar promastigote, which 
multiplies by binary ssion in the gut of the vector and migrates to the 
proboscis to infect a new host.
Fig. 13.41 Retinochoroiditis due to toxoplasmosis.

[[p366]]
Protozoal infections     327
13
Sandies live in hot and humid climates in the cracks and crevices of 
mud or straw houses and lay eggs in organic matter. People living in such 
conditions are more prone to leishmaniasis. Female sandies bite during 
the night and preferentially feed on animals; humans are incidental hosts.
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) 
VL is caused by the protozoon Leishmania donovani complex (compris-
ing L. donovani, L. infantum and L. chagasi). India, Sudan, South Sudan, 
Ethiopia and Brazil account for 90% of cases of VL. Other affected 
regions include the Mediterranean, East Africa, China, Arabia, Israel and 
other South American countries (Fig. 13.44). In addition to sandy trans-
mission, VL can result from blood transfusion, and disease can present 
unexpectedly in immunosuppressed patients – for example, after renal 
transplantation and in HIV infection.
The majority of infections remain asymptomatic. In visceral disease, 
the spleen, liver, bone marrow and lymph nodes are primarily involved.
Clinical features 
In South Asia, adults and children are equally affected; elsewhere, VL 
is mainly a disease of small children and infants, except in adults with 
HIV co-infection. The incubation period ranges from weeks to months 
(occasionally, several years).
The rst sign of infection is high fever, usually accompanied by rigor 
and chills. Fever intensity decreases over time and patients may become 
afebrile for weeks to months. This is followed by a relapse of fever, 
Zoonotic VL, CL
 L. infantum
 L. major
 L. mexicana complex
 L. (V.) brasiliensis complex
Anthroponotic VL, CL
 L. donovani
 L. tropica
Anthroponotic in
injection drug-users
 HIV-VL co-infection
 L. infantum
A
B
C
Fig. 13.42 Transmission of leishmaniasis.
(CL = cutaneous leishmaniasis; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; VL = visceral 
leishmaniasis)
Sandfly
(Phlebotomus in eastern hemisphere,
Lutzomyia and Psychodopygus
in western hemisphere)
Stomach
Pharynx
Bite
Proboscis
Macrophage
Promastigote
Amastigote
Amastigote
Dermis only
 L. tropica
 L. mexicana etc.
Dermis and
mucosae
(sometimes)
 L. brasiliensis
Viscera and
dermis
(sometimes)
 L. donovani
Fig. 13.43 Life cycle of Leishmania From Knight R. Parasitic disease in man. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 1982
L. infantum
L. donovani
Fig. 13.44 World distribution of visceral leishmaniasis.
often of lesser intensity. Splenomegaly develops quickly in the rst few 
weeks and becomes massive as the disease progresses. Moderate 
hepatomegaly occurs later. Lymphadenopathy is common in Africa, the 
Mediterranean and South America but is rare in South Asia. Blackish dis-
coloration of the skin, from which the disease derived its name, kala-azar 
(the Hindi word for ‘black fever’), is a feature of advanced illness but is 
now rarely seen. Pancytopenia is common. Moderate to severe anaemia 
develops rapidly and can cause cardiac failure. Thrombocytopenia, often 
compounded by hepatic dysfunction, may result in bleeding from the 
retina, gastrointestinal tract and nose. In advanced illness, hypoalbumin-
aemia may manifest as pedal oedema, ascites and anasarca (gross gen-
eralised oedema and swelling).
As disease progresses, there is profound immunosuppression and 
secondary infections are very common. These include tuberculosis, 
pneumonia, gastroenteritis, severe amoebic or bacillary dysentery, boils, 
cellulitis, chickenpox, shingles and scabies. Without adequate treatment, 
most patients with clinical VL die.
Investigations 
Pancytopenia is the dominant feature, with granulocytopenia. Polyclonal 
hypergammaglobulinaemia, chiey IgG followed by IgM, and hypoalbu-
minaemia are seen later.

[[p367]]
328    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Demonstration of amastigotes (Leishman–Donovan bodies) in splenic 
smears is the most efcient means of diagnosis, with 98% sensitivity 
(Fig. 13.45); however, it carries a risk of serious haemorrhage in inex-
perienced hands. Safer methods, such as bone marrow or lymph node 
smears, are less sensitive but are frequently employed. Parasites may 
be demonstrated in buffy coat smears, especially in immunosuppressed 
patients. Sensitivity is improved in specialised laboratories by culturing 
the aspirate material or by using PCR for DNA detection and species 
identication.
Serodiagnosis, by ELISA or immunouorescence antibody test, is 
employed where resources allow. In endemic regions, a highly sensitive 
direct agglutination test using stained promastigotes and an equally 
efcient rapid immunochromatographic k39 strip test have become 
popular. These tests remain positive for several months to years after 
cure has been achieved, so do not predict response to treatment or 
relapse. The vast majority of people exposed to the parasite do not 
develop clinical illness but may have positive serological tests there-
after. Formal gel (aldehyde) or other similar tests based on the detec-
tion of raised globulin have no value and are not recommended for the 
diagnosis of VL.
Differential diagnosis 
This includes malaria, typhoid, tuberculosis, schistosomiasis and many 
other infectious and neoplastic conditions, some of which may coexist 
with VL. Fever, splenomegaly, pancytopenia and non-response to anti-
malarial therapy may provide clues before specic laboratory diagnosis 
is made.
Management 
Pentavalent antimonials 
Antimony (Sb) compounds were the rst drugs to be used for the treat-
ment of leishmaniasis and remain the mainstay of treatment in most parts 
of the world. The exception is South Asia, especially the Indian state of 
Bihar, where almost two-thirds of cases are refractory to Sb treatment. 
Traditionally, pentavalent antimony is available as sodium stibogluconate 
(100 mg/mL) in English-speaking countries and meglumine antimoniate 
(85 mg/mL) in French-speaking ones. The daily dose is 20 mg/kg body 
weight, intravenously or intramuscularly, for 28–30 days. Side-effects 
are common and include arthralgia, myalgia, raised hepatic transami-
nases, pancreatitis (especially in patients co-infected with HIV) and ECG 
changes (T-wave inversion and reduced amplitude). Severe cardiotox-
icity, manifest by concave ST segment elevation, prolongation of QTc
greater than 0.5 msec and ventricular dysrhythmias, is not uncommon. 
The incidence of cardiotoxicity and death is particularly high with improp-
erly manufactured Sb.
Amphotericin B 
Amphotericin B deoxycholate, given once daily or on alternate days at a 
dose of 0.75–1.00 mg/kg for 15–20 doses, is used as the rst-line drug 
in many regions where there is a signicant level of Sb unresponsive-
ness. It has a cure rate of nearly 100%. Infusion-related side-effects, 
such as high fever with rigor, thrombophlebitis, diarrhoea and vomiting, 
are extremely common. Serious side-effects, including renal or hepatic 
toxicity, hypokalaemia and thrombocytopenia, are observed frequently.
Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are less toxic. Liposomal ampho-
tericin B (Ambisome) is rst-line therapy in Europe for VL. Dosing rec-
ommendations vary according to geographical region. In South Asia, a 
total dose of 10 or 15 mg/kg, administered in a single dose or as multiple 
doses over several days, respectively, is considered adequate, whereas 
in Africa 14–18 mg/kg, and in South America and Europe 21–24 mg/kg, 
in 5–7 divided doses, is recommended for immunocompetent patients. 
High daily doses of the lipid formulations are well tolerated, and in one 
study a single dose of 10 mg/kg of AmBisome cured 96% of Indian 
patients. This regimen is used as rst-line therapy in the Kala-azar 
Elimination Programme in India, Nepal and Bangladesh.,
Other drugs 
The oral drug miltefosine, an alkyl phospholipid, has been approved in 
several countries for the treatment of VL. A daily dose of 50 mg (patient’s 
body weight <25 kg) to 100 mg (≥25 kg), or 2.5 mg/kg for children, for 28 
days, cures over 90% of patients. Side-effects include mild to moderate 
vomiting and diarrhoea, and rarely skin allergy or renal or liver toxicity. 
Since it is a teratogenic drug, it cannot be used in pregnancy; female 
patients are advised not to become pregnant for the duration of treat-
ment and 3 months thereafter because of its half-life of nearly 1 week.
Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside that has undergone trials in India 
and Africa, and is highly effective if given intramuscularly at 11 mg/kg of 
paromomycin base, daily for 3 weeks. No signicant auditory or renal 
toxicity is seen. The drug is approved in India for VL treatment.
Pentamidine isethionate was used to treat Sb-refractory patients with 
VL. However, declining efcacy and serious side-effects, such as type 1 
diabetes mellitus, hypoglycaemia and hypotension, have led to it being 
abandoned.
Multidrug therapy of VL is likely to be used increasingly to prevent 
emergence of drug resistance, and in India short-course combinations 
(a single dose of AmBisome 5 mg/kg with either 7 days of miltefosine 
or 10 days of paromomycin, or 10 days each of miltefosine and paro-
momycin) were as effective as standard therapy. In India, in treatment 
centres where the cold chain (a temperature-controlled supply chain) is 
not maintained, 10 days of paromomycin combined with miltefosine is an 
alternative treatment regimen.
Response to treatment 
A good response results in fever resolution, improved well-being, reduc-
tion in splenomegaly, weight gain and recovery of blood counts. Patients 
require 6–12 months of regular follow-up, as some may experience 
relapse irrespective of the treatment regimen.
HIV–visceral leishmaniasis co-infection 
HIV-induced immunosuppression (Ch. 14) increases the risk of contract-
ing VL 100–1000 times. Most cases of HIV–VL co-infection have been 
reported from Spain, France, Italy and Portugal, but antiretroviral therapy 
(ART) has led to a remarkable decline. HIV-associated VL is also reported 
in Africa (mainly Ethiopia), Brazil and South Asia.
Although the clinical triad of fever, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly is 
found in the majority of co-infected patients, those with low CD4 count 
may have atypical clinical presentations. VL may present with gastro-
intestinal involvement (stomach, duodenum or colon), ascites, pleural 
or pericardial effusion, or involvement of lungs, tonsil, oral mucosa or 
skin. Diagnostic principles remain the same as those in non-HIV patients. 
Parasites are numerous and easily demonstrable, even in buffy coat 
Fig. 13.45 Splenic smear showing numerous intracellular, and a few 
extracellular, amastigotes. Courtesy of Dr S. Sundar and Dr H.W. Murray.

[[p368]]
Protozoal infections     329
13
preparations. Sometimes amastigotes are found in unusual sites, such 
as bronchoalveolar lavage uid, pleural uid or biopsies of the gastro-
intestinal tract. Serological tests have low sensitivity. DNA detection by 
PCR of the blood or its buffy coat is at least 95% sensitive and accurately 
tracks recovery and relapse.
Treatment of VL with HIV co-infection is essentially the same as 
in immunocompetent patients but there are some differences in out-
come. Conventional amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg daily for 28 days) may 
be more effective in achieving initial cure than Sb (20 mg/kg daily for 
28 days). Using high-dose liposomal amphotericin B (4 mg/kg on days 
1–5, 10, 17, 24, 31 and 38), a high cure rate is possible. However, 
co-infected patients have a tendency to relapse within 1 year and 
maintenance chemotherapy with monthly liposomal amphotericin B 
is useful.
Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis 
After treatment and apparent recovery from VL in India and Sudan, some 
patients develop dermatological manifestations due to local parasitic 
infection.
Clinical features 
In India, dermatological changes occur in a small minority of patients 
6 months to at least 3 years after the initial infection. They are seen as 
macules, papules, nodules (most frequently) and plaques, which have a 
predilection for the face, especially the area around the chin. The face 
often appears erythematous (Fig. 13.46A). Hypopigmented macules can 
occur over all parts of the body and are highly variable in extent. There 
are no systemic symptoms and little spontaneous healing occurs.
In Sudan and South Sudan, approximately 50% of patients with VL 
develop post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL), experiencing skin 
manifestations concurrently with VL or within 6 months. In addition to the 
dermatological features, a measles-like maculopapular rash (Fig. 13.46B) 
may be seen all over the body. In Sudan, children are more frequently 
affected than in India. Spontaneous healing occurs in about three-quar-
ters of cases within 1 year.
Investigations and management 
The diagnosis is clinical, supported by demonstration of scanty para-
sites in lesions by slit-skin smear and culture. Immunouorescence and 
immunohistochemistry may demonstrate the parasite in skin tissues. In 
the majority of patients, serological tests (direct agglutination test or k39 
strip tests) are positive.
Treatment of PKDL is difcult. In India, Sb for 120 days, several 
courses of amphotericin B infusions, or miltefosine for 12 weeks is 
required. In Sudan, Sb for 2 months is considered adequate. In the 
absence of a physical handicap, most patients are reluctant to complete 
therapy. PKDL patients are a human reservoir, and focal outbreaks have 
been linked to patients with PKDL in areas previously free of VL. PKDL 
and cases with active VL infected sandies efciently in xenodiagnosis 
experiments done in India and Bangladesh.
Prevention and control 
Sandy control through insecticide spray is very important. Mosquito 
nets or curtains treated with insecticides will keep out the tiny sand-
ies. In endemic areas with zoonotic transmission, infected or stray dogs 
should be destroyed.
In areas with anthroponotic transmission, early diagnosis and treat-
ment of human infections, to reduce the reservoir and control epidemics 
of VL, is extremely important. Serology is useful in diagnosis of sus-
pected cases in the eld. No vaccine is currently available.
Cutaneous and mucosal leishmaniasis 
Cutaneous leishmaniasis 
CL (oriental sore) occurs in both the Old World (Asia, Africa and Europe) 
and the New World (the Americas). Transmission is described in Fig. 13.42).
In the Old World, CL is mild. It is found around the Mediterranean basin, 
throughout the Middle East and Central Asia as far as Pakistan, and in 
sub-Saharan West Africa and Sudan (Fig. 13.47). The causative organ-
isms for Old World zoonotic CL are L. major, L. tropica and L. aethiopica
(Box 13.59). Anthroponotic CL is caused by L. tropica, and is conned 
to urban or suburban areas of the Old World. Afghanistan is currently the 
biggest focus but infection is endemic in Pakistan, the western deserts of 
India, Iran, Iraq, Syria and other areas of the Middle East. In recent years 
there has been an increase in the incidence of zoonotic CL in both the Old 
and the New Worlds due to urbanisation and deforestation, which led to 
peridomestic transmission (in and around human dwellings).
New World CL is a more signicant disease, which may disgure the 
nose, ears and mouth, and is caused by the L. mexicana complex (com-
prising L. mexicana, L. amazonensis and L. venezuelensis) and by the 
Viannia subgenus L. (V.) brasiliensis complex (comprising L. (V.) guyanen-
sis, L. (V.) panamensis, L. (V.) brasiliensis and L. (V.) peruviana).
A
B
Fig. 13.46 Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis.
In India, with macules, papules, nodules and plaques.
In Sudan, with micronodular rash. (A) From Sundar 
S, Kumar K, Chakravarty J, et al. Cure of antimony-unresponsive Indian post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis with oral miltefosine. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2006; 100(7):
698–700. (B) Courtesy of Dr E.E. Zijlstra

[[p369]]
330    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
CL is commonly imported and should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of an ulcerating skin lesion, especially in travellers who have visited 
endemic areas of the Old World or forests in Central and South America.
Pathogenesis 
Inoculated parasites are taken up by dermal macrophages, in which they 
multiply and form a focus for lymphocytes, epithelioid cells and plasma 
cells. Self-healing may occur with necrosis of infected macrophages, or 
the lesion may become chronic with ulceration of the overlying epider-
mis, depending on the aetiological pathogen.
Clinical features 
The incubation period is typically 2–3 months (range 2 weeks to 5 years). 
In all types of CL a papule develops at the site of the vector bite. The 
small, red papules may be single or multiple and increase gradually in 
size, reaching 2–10 cm in diameter. A crust forms, overlying an ulcer 
with a granular base and with raised borders (Fig. 13.48). These ulcers 
develop a few weeks or months after the bite. There can be satellite 
lesions, especially in L. major and occasionally in L. tropica infections. 
Regional lymphadenopathy, pain, pruritus and secondary bacterial infec-
tions may occur.
Lesions of L. mexicana and L. peruviana closely resemble those seen 
in the Old World, but lesions on the pinna of the ear are common and are 
chronic and destructive. L. mexicana is responsible for chiclero ulcers, 
the self-healing sores of Mexico.
If immunity is effective, there is usually spontaneous healing in L. trop-
ica, L. major and L. mexicana lesions. In some patients with anergy to 
Leishmania, the skin lesions of L. aethiopica, L. mexicana and L. ama-
zonensis infections progress to the development of diffuse CL; this is 
characterised by spread of the infection from the initial ulcer, usually on 
the face, to involve the whole body in the form of non-ulcerative nodules. 
Occasionally, in L. tropica infections, sores that have apparently healed 
relapse persistently (recidivans or lupoid leishmaniasis).
Mucosal leishmaniasis 
The Viannia subgenus extends widely from the Amazon basin as far as 
Paraguay and Costa Rica, and is responsible for deep sores and ML. In 
L. (V.) brasiliensis complex infections, cutaneous lesions may be followed 
by mucosal spread of the disease simultaneously or even years later. 
Young men with chronic lesions are particularly at risk, and 2%–40% of 
infected persons develop ‘espundia’, metastatic lesions in the mucosa 
of the nose or mouth. This is characterised by thickening and erythema 
of the nasal mucosa, typically starting at the junction of the nose and 
upper lip. Later, ulceration develops. The lips, soft palate, fauces and 
larynx may also be invaded and destroyed, leading to considerable suf-
fering and deformity. There is no spontaneous healing, and death may 
result from severe respiratory tract infections due to massive destruction 
of the pharynx.
Investigations in CL and ML 
CL is often diagnosed by the clinical features. Parasitological conr-
mation is important, however, because clinical manifestations may be 
mimicked by other infections. Amastigotes can be demonstrated on a 
slit-skin smear with Giemsa staining; alternatively, they can be cultured 
from the sores early during the infection. Parasites are difcult to isolate 
from sores caused by L. brasiliensis, responsible for the vast majority 
of cases in Brazil. Touch preparations from biopsies and histopathology 
usually have a low sensitivity. Culture of ne needle aspiration material 
has been reported to be the most sensitive method.
ML is more difcult to diagnose parasitologically. The leishmanin skin 
test measures delayed-type hypersensitivity to killed Leishmania organ-
isms. A positive test is dened as induration of more than 5 mm, 48 hours 
after intradermal injection. The test is positive, except in diffuse CL and 
during active VL. PCR is used increasingly for diagnosis and speciation, 
which is useful in selecting therapy.
Management of CL and ML 
Small lesions may self-heal or are treated by freezing with liquid nitrogen 
or curettage. There is no ideal antimicrobial therapy. Treatment should 
be individualised on the basis of the causative organism, severity of the 
lesions, availability of drugs, anticipated toxicity, and local resistance 
patterns.
In CL, topical application of paromomycin 15% plus methylbenzetho-
nium chloride 12% is benecial. Intralesional antimony (Sb 0.2–0.8 mL/
lesion) up to 2 g seems to be rapidly effective in suitable cases; it is well 
tolerated and economic, and is safe in patients with cardiac, liver or renal 
diseases.
In ML, and in CL when the lesions are multiple or in a disguring site, 
it is better to treat with parenteral Sb (20 mg/kg daily, usually given for 
20 days for CL and 28 days for ML), or with conventional or liposo-
mal amphotericin B (see treatment of VL above). Sb is also indicated 
to prevent the development of mucosal disease, if there is any chance 
that a lesion acquired in South America is due to an L. brasiliensis
strain. Refractory CL or ML should be treated with an amphotericin B 
preparation.
Other regimens may be effective. Two to four doses of pentamidine 
(2–4 mg/kg), administered on alternate days, are effective in New World 
CL caused by L. guyanensis. In ML, 8 injections of pentamidine (4 mg/
kg on alternate days) cure the majority of patients. Various azole com-
pounds, uconazole, ketoconazole and itraconazole, have similar and 
modest efcacy rates in the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Prevention of CL and ML 
Personal protection against sandy bites is important. No effective vac-
cine is yet available.
Gastrointestinal protozoal infections 
Amoebiasis 
Amoebiasis is caused by Entamoeba histolytica, which is spread 
between humans by its cysts. It is one of the leading parasitic causes 
of morbidity and mortality in the tropics and is occasionally acquired in 
non-tropical countries. Two non-pathogenic Entamoeba species (E. dis-
par and E. moshkovskii) are morphologically identical to E. histolytica, 
and are distinguishable only by molecular techniques, isoenzyme stud-
ies or monoclonal antibody typing. However, only E. histolytica causes 
amoebic dysentery or liver abscess. The life cycle of the amoeba is 
shown in Figure 13.49A
L. mexicana
L. brasiliensis
L. infantum
L. tropica
L. major
L. aethiopica
Fig. 13.47 World distribution of cutaneous leishmaniasis.
13.59 Types of Old World cutaneous leishmaniasis
Leishmania spp.
Host
Clinical features
L. tropica
Dogs
Slow evolution, less severe
L. major
Gerbils, desert rodents
Rapid necrosis, wet sores
L. aethiopica
Hyraxes
Solitary facial lesions with 
satellites

[[p370]]
Protozoal infections     331
13
Pathology 
Cysts of E. histolytica are ingested in water or uncooked foods contami-
nated by human faeces. Infection may also be acquired through anal/oral 
sexual practices. Trophozoites emerge from the cysts in the small bowel 
and enter the large bowel. The parasite invades the mucous membrane 
of the large bowel, producing lesions that are maximal in the caecum but 
extend to the anal canal. These are ask-shaped ulcers, varying greatly 
in size and surrounded by healthy mucosa. A rare complication is amoe-
boma, a localised granuloma that may present as a palpable abdominal 
mass (usually in the right iliac fossa), a rectal mass (rarely) or a lling 
defect on colonic radiography. This has to be distinguished from other 
causes of colonic mass (e.g. cancer). Amoebic ulcers may cause severe 
haemorrhage but rarely perforate the bowel wall.
Amoebic trophozoites can emerge from the vegetative cyst from the 
bowel and be carried to the liver in a portal venule. They can multiply rapidly 
and destroy the liver parenchyma, causing an abscess (see also p. 891). 
The liquid contents at rst have a characteristic pinkish colour, which may 
later change to chocolate-brown (said to resemble anchovy sauce).
Cutaneous amoebiasis, though rare, causes progressive genital, peri-
anal or peri-abdominal surgical wound ulceration.
Clinical features 
Intestinal amoebiasis – amoebic dysentery 
Most amoebic infections are asymptomatic. The incubation period 
of amoebiasis ranges from 2 weeks to many years, followed by a 
chronic course with abdominal pains and two or more unformed 
stools a day. Offensive diarrhoea, alternating with constipation, and 
blood or mucus in the stool are common. There may be abdominal 
pain, especially in the right lower quadrant (which may mimic acute 
appendicitis). A dysenteric presentation with passage of blood, sim-
ulating bacillary dysentery or ulcerative colitis, occurs particularly 
in older people, in the puerperium and with super-added pyogenic 
infection of the ulcers.
Amoebic liver abscess 
The abscess is usually found in the right hepatic lobe. There may not 
be associated diarrhoea. Early symptoms may be only local discomfort 
and malaise; later, a swinging temperature and sweating may develop, 
usually without marked systemic symptoms or signs. An enlarged, 
tender liver, cough and pain in the right shoulder are characteristic but 
symptoms may remain vague and signs minimal. A large abscess may 
A
B
Fig. 13.48 Cutaneous leishmaniasis.
(B) Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld
B
Trophozoite
in faeces
(do not encyst)
Cyst maturation
in distal colon 
and faeces
Ingested
mature cyst
Encystment
in colon
Excystment in
small bowel
Lumen trophozoite
Colonic
mucosa
Ulcer
Amoeboma
Amoebic
abscess
Ingested
erythrocytes
Tissue
trophozoite
A
Fig. 13.49 Amoebiasis. 
Entamoeba histolytica.  
(A) From Knight 
R. Parasitic disease in man. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 1982. (B) Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld

[[p371]]
332    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
penetrate the diaphragm, rupturing into the lung, and may be coughed 
up through a hepatobronchial stula. Rupture into the pleural or perito-
neal cavity, or rupture of a left lobe abscess in the pericardial sac, is less 
common but more serious.
Investigations 
Microscopic examination of the stool and exudate can reveal motile 
trophozoites containing red blood cells. Trophozoite motility decreases 
rapidly as the stool preparation cools. Several stools may need to be 
examined in chronic amoebiasis before cysts are found. Sigmoidoscopy 
may reveal typical ask-shaped ulcers, which should be scraped and 
examined immediately for E. histolytica. In endemic areas, one-third of 
the population are symptomless passers of amoebic cysts.
An amoebic abscess of the liver is suspected on clinical grounds; there 
is often a neutrophil leucocytosis and a raised right hemidiaphragm on 
chest X-ray. Conrmation is by ultrasonic scanning. Aspirated pus from 
an amoebic abscess has the characteristic chocolate-brown appear-
ance but rarely contains free amoebae (Fig. 13.49B).
Serum antibodies are detectable by immunouorescence in over 95% of 
patients with hepatic amoebiasis and intestinal amoeboma, but in only about 
60% of dysenteric amoebiasis. DNA detection by PCR or by loop-mediated 
isothermal amplication (LAMP) assay have been shown to be useful in diag-
nosis of E. histolytica infections but are not generally available.
Management 
Intestinal and early hepatic amoebiasis responds quickly to oral metroni-
dazole (800 mg 3 times daily for 5–10 days) or other long-acting nitroimi-
dazoles like tinidazole or ornidazole (both in doses of 2 g daily for 3 days). 
Nitazoxanide (500 mg twice daily for 3 days) is an alternative drug. Either 
diloxanide furoate or paromomycin, in doses of 500 mg orally 3 times daily 
for 10 days after treatment, should be given to eliminate luminal cysts.
If a liver abscess is large or threatens to burst, or if the response to 
chemotherapy is not prompt, aspiration is required and is repeated if 
necessary. Rupture of an abscess into the pleural cavity, pericardial sac 
or peritoneal cavity necessitates immediate aspiration or surgical drain-
age. Small serous effusions resolve without drainage.
Prevention 
Personal precautions against contracting amoebiasis include not eating 
fresh, uncooked vegetables or drinking unclean water.
Giardiasis 
Infection with Giardia lamblia (also known as G. intestinalis) is found 
worldwide and is common in the tropics. It particularly affects children, 
tourists and immunosuppressed individuals, and is the parasite most 
commonly imported into the UK. Cysts remain viable in water for up to 3 
months and infection usually occurs by ingesting contaminated water. Its 
agellar trophozoite form attaches to the duodenal and jejunal mucosa, 
causing inammation.
Clinical features and investigations 
After an incubation period of 1–3 weeks, there is diarrhoea, abdominal 
pain, weakness, anorexia, nausea and vomiting. On examination, there 
may be abdominal distension and tenderness. Chronic diarrhoea and 
malabsorption may occur, with bulky stools that oat.
Stools obtained at 2–3-day intervals should be examined for cysts. 
Duodenal or jejunal aspiration by endoscopy gives a higher diagnostic 
yield. A number of stool antigen detection tests are available. Jejunal 
biopsy specimens may show Giardia on the epithelial surface. PCR/mul-
tiplex PCR are increasingly being used in the diagnosis of giardiasis, but 
may not be freely accessible in low-income countries.
Management 
Treatment is with a single dose of tinidazole 2 g, metronidazole 400 mg 
3 times daily for 10 days, or nitazoxanide 500 mg orally twice daily for 
3 days.
Cryptosporidiosis 
Cryptosporidium spp. are coccidian protozoal parasites of humans and 
domestic animals. Infection is acquired by the faecal–oral route through 
contaminated water supplies. The incubation period is approximately 7–10 
days and is followed by watery diarrhoea and abdominal cramps. The illness 
is usually self-limiting but in immunocompromised patients, especially those 
with HIV, the illness can be devastating, with persistent severe diarrhoea 
and substantial weight loss. Diagnosis is by detection of oöcysts on faecal 
microscopy or PCR of stool. Treatment is not usually required; nitazoxanide 
can be used in immunocompromised hosts but efcacy is uncertain.
Cyclosporiasis 
Cyclospora cayetanensis is a globally distributed coccidian protozoal 
parasite of humans. Infection is acquired by ingestion of contaminated 
water and recent food-borne outbreaks have been associated with rasp-
berries and coriander (cilantro). The incubation period of approximately 
2–11 days is followed by diarrhoea with abdominal cramps, which may 
remit and relapse. Although usually self-limiting, the illness may last as 
long as 6 weeks, with signicant weight loss and malabsorption, and 
is more severe in immunocompromised individuals. Diagnosis is as for 
crytosporidiosis. Treatment may be necessary in a few cases, using 
co-trimoxazole 960 mg twice daily for 7 days.
Infections caused by helminths 
Helminths (from the Greek helmins, meaning worm) include three groups 
of parasitic worm (Box 13.60), large multicellular organisms with complex 
tissues and organs.
Intestinal human nematodes 
Adult nematodes living in the human gut can cause disease. There are 
two types:
 the hookworms, which have a soil stage in which they develop into 
larvae that then penetrate the host
 a group of nematodes that survive in the soil merely as eggs, which 
have to be ingested for their life cycle to continue.
The geographical distribution of hookworms is limited by the lar-
val requirement for warmth and humidity. Soil-transmitted nematode 
13.60 Classes of helminth that parasitise humans
Nematodes or roundworms
 Intestinal human nematodes: Ancylostoma duodenale, Necator americanus, 
Strongyloides stercoralis, Ascaris lumbricoides, Enterobius vermicularis, 
Trichuris trichiura
 Tissue-dwelling human nematodes: Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Loa 
loa, Onchocerca volvulus, Dracunculus medinensis, Mansonella perstans, 
Dirolaria immitis
 Zoonotic nematodes: Trichinella spiralis
Trematodes or ukes
 Blood ukes: Schistosoma haematobium, S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. mekongi, 
S. intercalatum
 Lung ukes: Paragonimus spp
 Hepatobiliary ukes: Clonorchis sinensis, Fasciola hepatica, Opisthorchis felineus
 Intestinal ukes: Fasciolopsis buski
Cestodes or tapeworms
 Intestinal tapeworms: Taenia saginata, T. solium, Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Hymenolepis nana
 Tissue-dwelling cysts or worms: Taenia solium, Echinococcus granulosus

[[p372]]
Infections caused by helminths     333
13
infections can be prevented by avoidance of faecal soil contamination 
(adequate sewerage disposal) or skin contact (wearing shoes), and by 
strict personal hygiene.
Ancylostomiasis (hookworm) 
Ancylostomiasis is caused by Ancylostoma duodenale or Necator amer-
icanus. The complex life cycle is shown in Figure 13.50. The adult hook-
worm is 1 cm long and lives in the duodenum and upper jejunum. Eggs 
are passed in the faeces. In warm, moist, shady soil, the larvae develop 
into rhabditiform and then the infective lariform stages; they then pene-
trate human skin and are carried to the lungs. After entering the alveoli, 
they ascend the bronchi, are swallowed and mature in the small intestine, 
reaching maturity 4–7 weeks after infection. The worms attach to the 
mucosa of the small intestine by their buccal capsule (Fig. 13.51) and 
withdraw blood. The mean daily blood loss from one A. duodenale is 
0.15 mL and that from N. americanus 0.03 mL.
Hookworm infection is a leading cause of anaemia in the tropics and 
subtropics. A. duodenale is endemic in the Far East and Mediterranean 
coastal regions, and is also present in Africa, while N. americanus is 
endemic in West, East and Central Africa, and Central and South 
America, as well as in the Far East.
Clinical features 
An allergic dermatitis, usually on the feet (ground itch), may be expe-
rienced at the time of infection. The passage of the larvae through the 
lungs in a heavy infection causes a paroxysmal cough with blood-stained 
sputum, associated with patchy pulmonary consolidation and eosino-
philia. When the worms reach the small intestine, vomiting and epigastric 
pain resembling peptic ulcer disease may occur. Sometimes, frequent 
loose stools are passed. The degree of iron and protein deciency 
depends on the worm burden, patient nutrition and iron stores. Anaemia 
with high-output cardiac failure may result. The mental and physical 
development of children may be delayed in severe infection.
Investigations 
There is eosinophilia. The characteristic ovum can be recognised in the 
stool. If hookworms are present in numbers sufcient to cause anaemia, 
faecal occult blood testing will be positive.
Management 
A single dose of albendazole (400 mg) is the treatment of choice. 
Alternatively, mebendazole 100 mg twice daily for 3 days may be used. 
Anaemia and heart failure associated with hookworm infection respond 
well to oral iron, even when severe; blood transfusion is rarely required.
Strongyloidiasis 
Strongyloides stercoralis is a small nematode (2 mm × 0.4 mm) that para-
sitises the mucosa of the upper part of the small intestine, often in large 
numbers, causing persistent eosinophilia. The eggs hatch in the bowel 
but only larvae are passed in the faeces. In moist soil, they moult and 
become the infective lariform larvae. After penetrating human skin, they 
undergo a development cycle similar to that of hookworms, except that 
the female worms burrow into the intestinal mucosa and submucosa. 
Some larvae in the intestine may develop into lariform larvae, which may 
then penetrate the mucosa or the perianal skin and lead to autoinfection 
and persistent infection. Patients with Strongyloides infection persisting 
for more than 35 years have been described. Strongyloidiasis occurs in 
the tropics and subtropics, and is especially prevalent in the Far East.
Clinical features 
These are shown in Box 13.61. The classic triad of symptoms consists 
of abdominal pain, diarrhoea and urticaria. Cutaneous manifestations, 
either urticaria or larva currens (a highly characteristic pruritic, elevated, 
erythematous lesion, rapidly advancing along the course of larval migra-
tion), are characteristic and occur in 66% of patients.
Warm,
moist
shady soil
Pharynx
Bronchi
Lungs
Eosinophilia
Duodenum
Adult
worm
Blood
loss
Faecal
eggs
Blood
stream
Larvae
Ova
Fig. 13.50 Ancylostomiasis. Life cycle of Ancylostoma
Fig. 13.51 Ancylostoma duodenale. Electron micrograph showing the ventral 
teeth. From Gibbons LM. SEM guide to the morphology of nematode parasites of 
vertebrates. Farnham Royal, Slough: Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau International; 
1986
13.61 Clinical features of strongyloidiasis
Penetration of skin by infective larvae
 Itchy rash
Presence of worms in gut
 Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, steatorrhoea, weight loss
Allergic phenomena
 Urticarial plaques and papules, wheezing, arthralgia
Autoinfection
 Transient itchy, linear, urticarial weals across abdomen and buttocks (larva 
currens)
Systemic (super-)infection
 Diarrhoea, pneumonia, meningoencephalitis, death

[[p373]]
334    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Systemic strongyloidiasis (the Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome), 
with dissemination of larvae throughout the body, occurs with immune 
suppression (HIV or HTLV-1 infection, steroid or immunosuppressant 
treatment). Patients present with severe, generalised abdominal pain, 
abdominal distension and shock. Massive larval invasion of the lungs 
causes cough, wheeze and dyspnoea; cerebral involvement has mani-
festations ranging from subtle neurological signs to coma. Gram-negative 
sepsis frequently results.
Investigations 
There is eosinophilia. Serology (ELISA) is helpful but denitive diag-
nosis requires microscopic examination of faeces for motile rhabditi-
form larvae; excretion is intermittent and so repeated examinations 
are necessary. Larvae may be found in jejunal aspirates or can also 
be cultured from faeces. PCR can be used for greater specicity and 
sensitivity.
Management 
A course of two doses of ivermectin (200 µg/kg), administered on suc-
cessive days, is effective. Alternatively, albendazole is given orally (15 mg/
kg twice daily for 3 days). A second course may be required. For the 
Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, ivermectin is given at 200 µg/
kg for 5–7 days.
Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm) 
This pale yellow nematode is 20–35 cm long and the largest of the intes-
tinal nematodes. Humans are infected by eating food contaminated with 
mature ova. Ascaris larvae hatch in the duodenum, migrate through the 
lungs, ascend the bronchial tree, are swallowed and mature in the small 
intestine. This tissue migration can provoke both local and general hyper-
sensitivity reactions, with pneumonitis, eosinophilic granulomas, wheez-
ing and urticaria.
Clinical features 
Intestinal ascariasis causes symptoms ranging from vague abdominal 
pain to malnutrition. The large size of the adult worm and its tendency to 
aggregate and migrate result in obstructive complications. Tropical and 
subtropical areas are endemic for ascariasis, and here it causes up to 
35% of all intestinal obstructions, most commonly in the terminal ileum. 
Obstruction can be complicated further by intussusception, volvulus, 
haemorrhagic infarction and perforation. Other complications include 
blockage of the bile or pancreatic duct and obstruction of the appendix 
by adult worms. Ascariasis in non-endemic areas has been associated 
with pig husbandry and may be caused by Ascaris suum, which is indis-
tinguishable from A. lumbricoides
Investigations 
The diagnosis is made microscopically by nding ova in the faeces. Adult 
worms are frequently expelled rectally or orally. Occasionally, the worms 
are demonstrated radiographically by a barium examination. There is 
eosinophilia.
Management 
A single dose of albendazole (400 mg), pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg; 
maximum 1 g), or ivermectin (150–200 µg/kg), or alternatively mebenda-
zole (100 mg twice daily for 3 days) treats intestinal ascariasis. Patients 
should be warned that they might expel numerous whole, large worms. 
Obstruction due to ascariasis should be treated with nasogastric suction, 
piperazine and intravenous uids. Complete intestinal obstruction and its 
complications require urgent surgical intervention.
Prevention 
Community chemotherapy programmes reduce Ascaris infection. The 
whole community can be treated every 3 months for several years. 
Alternatively treatment targets schoolchildren to lower the prevalence of 
ascariasis in the community.
Enterobius vermicularis (threadworm, pinworm) 
This helminth is common worldwide and affects mainly children. After the 
ova are swallowed, development takes place in the small intestine but 
the adult worms are found chiey in the colon.
Clinical features 
The female lays ova around the anus, causing intense itching, especially 
at night. The ova are carried to the mouth on the ngers and so reinfec-
tion or human-to-human infection occurs (Fig. 13.52). In females, the 
genitalia may be involved. The adult worms may be seen moving on the 
buttocks or in the stool.
Investigations 
Ova are detected in stool samples or by applying the adhesive surface 
of cellophane tape to the perianal skin in the morning. This is then exam-
ined on a glass slide under the microscope. A perianal swab, moistened 
with saline, also allows diagnosis.
Management 
A single dose of mebendazole (100 mg), albendazole (400 mg), pyrantel 
pamoate (11 mg/kg) or piperazine (4 g) treats infection and is repeated 
after 2 weeks to control auto-reinfection. If infection recurs in a fam-
ily, each member should be treated. All nightclothes and bed linen are 
laundered during treatment. Fingernails must be kept short and hands 
washed carefully before meals. Subsequent therapy is reserved for family 
members with recurrent infection.
Trichuris trichiura (whipworm) 
Whipworm infections are common worldwide with poor hygiene. 
Infection follows ingestion of earth or food contaminated with ova, which 
have become infective after lying for 3 weeks or more in moist soil. The 
adult worm is 3–5 cm long and has a coiled anterior end resembling a 
whip. Whipworms inhabit the caecum, lower ileum, appendix, colon 
and anal canal. There are usually no symptoms, but intense infections in 
children may cause persistent diarrhoea or rectal prolapse, and growth 
retardation. The diagnosis is readily made by identifying ova in faeces. 
Treatment is with mebendazole in doses of 100 mg twice daily or alben-
dazole 400 mg daily for 3 days for patients with light infections, and for 
5–7 days for those with heavy infections.
Adult
worm in
colon
Itch
Ova
Fig. 13.52 Threadworm. Life cycle of Enterobius vermicularis.

[[p374]]
Infections caused by helminths     335
13
Tissue-dwelling human nematodes 
Filarial worms are tissue-dwelling nematodes. The larval stages are inoc-
ulated by biting mosquitoes or ies, each specic to a particular larial 
species. The larvae develop into adult worms (2–50 cm long), which, 
after mating, produce millions of microlariae (170–320 µm long) that 
migrate in blood or skin. The life cycle is completed when the vector 
takes up microlariae by biting humans. In the insect, ingested micro-
lariae develop into infective larvae for inoculation in humans, normally 
the only host.
Disease is due to the host’s immune response to the worms (both 
adult and microlariae), particularly dying worms, and its pattern and 
severity vary with the site and stage of each species (Box 13.62). The 
worms are long-lived: microlariae survive 2–3 years and adult worms 
10–15 years. The infections are chronic and worst in individuals con-
stantly reinfected.
Lymphatic lariasis 
The larial worms Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi infect approxi-
mately 120 million people globally whose features range from subclinical 
infection to hydrocele and elephantiasis.
W. bancrofti is usually transmitted by night-biting culicine or anophe-
line mosquitoes (Fig. 13.53). The adult worms, 4–10 cm in length, live in 
the lymphatics, and the females produce microlariae that circulate in 
large numbers in the peripheral blood, usually at night. The infection is 
widespread in tropical Africa, on the North African coast, in coastal areas 
of Asia, Indonesia and northern Australia, the South Pacic islands, the 
West Indies and also in North and South America.
B. malayi usually causes less severe disease than W. bancrofti and is 
transmitted by Mansonia or Anopheles mosquitoes in Indonesia, Borneo, 
Malaysia, Vietnam, South China, South India and Sri Lanka.
Pathology 
Toxins released by adult worms cause lymphangiectasia; this dilatation of 
the lymphatic vessels leads to lymphatic dysfunction and the chronic clin-
ical manifestations of lymphatic lariasis, lymphoedema and hydrocele. 
Death of the adult worm results in acute larial lymphangitis. The lariae 
are symbiotically infected with rickettsia-like bacteria (Wolbachia spp.), 
and lipopolysaccharide released from Wolbachia triggers inammation. 
Lymphatic obstruction persists after death of the adult worm. Secondary 
bacterial infections cause tissue destruction.
Clinical features 
Acute larial lymphangitis presents with fever, pain, tenderness and ery-
thema along the course of inamed lymphatic vessels. Inammation of 
the spermatic cord, epididymis and testis is common. Episodes last a few 
days but may recur several times a year. Temporary oedema becomes 
more persistent and regional lymph nodes enlarge. Progressive enlarge-
ment, coarsening, corrugation, ssuring and bacterial infection of the 
skin and subcutaneous tissue develop gradually, causing irreversible 
‘elephantiasis’. The scrotum may reach an enormous size. Chyluria and 
chylous effusions are milky and opalescent; on standing, fat globules rise 
to the top.
Acute lymphatic manifestations of lariasis must be differentiated 
from thrombophlebitis and infection. Oedema and lymphatic obstruc-
tive changes must be distinguished from congestive cardiac failure, 
malignancy, trauma and idiopathic abnormalities of the lymphatic sys-
tem. Silicates absorbed from volcanic soil can also cause elephantiasis 
(podoconiosis).
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is a complication, and is the result 
of the host response to microlariae. It is seen mainly in India, due to 
microlariae trapped in the pulmonary capillaries that are destroyed by 
allergic inammation. Patients present with paroxysmal cough, wheeze 
and fever. If untreated, this may progress to debilitating chronic interstitial 
lung disease.
Investigations 
Early in lariasis lymphangitis is a clinical diagnosis, supported by eosino-
philia and sometimes by positive larial serology. Filarial infections cause 
the highest eosinophil counts of all helminthic infections.
Microlariae can be found in the peripheral blood at night; motile in 
a wet blood lm or detected by microltration in lysed blood. They are 
usually present in hydrocele uid, which may occasionally yield an adult 
laria. By the time elephantiasis develops, microlariae become difcult 
to nd. Calcied lariae may sometimes be demonstrable by radiogra-
phy. Movement of adult worms can be seen on scrotal ultrasound. PCR-
based tests for detection of W. bancrofti and B. malayi DNA from blood 
have been developed.
Indirect uorescence and ELISA detect antibodies in over 95% of 
active cases and 70% of established elephantiasis. The test becomes 
negative 1–2 years after cure. Serological tests cannot distinguish the dif-
ferent larial infections. Highly sensitive and specic, commercially avail-
able, immunochromatographic card tests detect circulating W. bancrofti
antigen using nger-prick blood samples taken at any time of the day.
In tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, serology is strongly positive and IgE 
levels are massively elevated but circulating microlariae are not found. 
The chest X-ray shows miliary changes or mottled opacities. Pulmonary 
function tests show a restrictive picture.
13.62 Pathogenicity of larial infections depending on site and 
stage of worms
Worm species
Adult worm
Microlariae
Wuchereria bancrofti
and Brugia malayi
Lymphatic vessels+++
Blood
Pulmonary capillaries++
Loa loa
Subcutaneous+
Blood+
Onchocerca volvulus
Subcutaneous+
Skin+++
Eye+++
Mansonella perstans
Retroperitoneal
Blood
Mansonella 
streptocerca
Skin+
Skin++
(+++ severe; ++ moderate; + mild;  rarely pathogenic)
Microfilariae in
blood and trapped
in pulmonary
capillaries
Infective larva
Mosquito
Microfilariae
Adult worm 
in lymphatics
Epididymo-orchitis
and hydrocele
Lymphangitis
and 
lymphoedema
Fig. 13.53 Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi. Life cycle of organisms and 
pathogenesis of lymphatic lariasis.

[[p375]]
336    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Management 
Treatment is aimed at halting and reversing disease progression. 
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC, 2 mg/kg orally 3 times daily for 21 days, 
or 6 mg/kg as a single dose) kills microlariae and adult worms. Most 
adverse effects seen with DEC treatment are due to the host response 
to dying microlariae, which is directly proportional to the microlar-
ial load. The main symptoms are fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, 
arthralgia and prostration, usually within 24–36 hours of the rst dose of 
DEC. Antihistamines or glucocorticoids treat these allergic phenomena. 
Combining albendazole (400 mg) with ivermectin (200 µg/kg) in a single 
dose, with or without DEC (300 mg), is also highly effective in clearing 
the parasites. Treatment of Wolbachia with doxycycline (200 mg/day) for 
4–8 weeks provides additional benet by eliminating the bacteria; this 
leads to interruption of parasite embryogenesis. For tropical pulmonary 
eosinophilia, DEC for 14 days is the treatment of choice.
Co-infections 
Patients co-infected with lymphatic liariasis and onchocerciasis with 
eye involvement should be treated with doxycycline before ivermectin. 
Co-infection with lymphatic lariasis and loaiasis depends on the Loa loa
microlarial load. If high ivermectin, doxycycline or albendazole should 
be given rst before DEC to reduce microlarial load as DEC can result in 
severe encephalitis/shock.
Chronic lymphatic pathology 
Active management of chronic lymphatic pathology can alleviate symp-
toms. Patients should be taught meticulous skin care for lymphoedema 
to prevent secondary bacterial and fungal infections. Tight bandaging, 
massage and bed rest with elevation of the affected limb help to control 
the lymphoedema. Prompt diagnosis and antibiotic therapy of bacte-
rial cellulitis prevent further lymphatic damage and worsening of existing 
elephantiasis. Plastic surgery to remove excess tissue may offer relief 
in established elephantiasis but without establishment of new lymphatic 
drainage recurrence is likely. Hydroceles and chyluria can be repaired 
surgically.
Prevention 
Treatment of the whole population (mass drug administration, MDA) in 
endemic areas with annual single-dose DEC (6 mg/kg), either alone or in 
combination with albendazole and ivermectin (triple drugs), can reduce 
larial transmission. MDA should be combined with mosquito control 
programmes.
Loiasis 
Loiasis is caused by infection with the laria Loa loa. The disease is 
endemic in forested and swampy parts of Western and Central Africa. 
The adult worms, 3–7 cm × 4 mm, chiey parasitise the subcutaneous 
tissue of humans, releasing larval microlariae into the peripheral blood 
in the daytime. The vector is Chrysops, a forest-dwelling, day-biting y.
The host response to Loa loa is usually absent or mild. From time to 
time a short-lived, inammatory, oedematous swelling (a Calabar swell-
ing) is produced around an adult worm. Heavy infections, especially 
when treated, may cause encephalitis.
Clinical features 
The infection is often symptomless. The incubation period ranges from 
3 months to over a year. The rst sign is usually a Calabar swelling: an 
irritating, tense, localised swelling that may be painful, especially if beside 
a joint. The swelling is generally on a limb; it measures a few centimetres 
in diameter but may be diffuse and extensive. It usually disappears after 
a few days but may persist for 2–3 weeks. Several swellings may appear 
at irregular intervals, often in adjacent sites. Sometimes, there is urticaria 
and pruritus elsewhere. Occasionally, a worm may be seen wriggling 
under the skin, especially that of an eyelid, and may cross the eye under 
the conjunctiva, taking many minutes to do so.
Investigations 
Diagnosis is by demonstrating microlariae in blood taken during the day, 
but they may not always be found in patients with Calabar swellings. 
Antilarial antibodies are positive in 95% of patients and there is massive 
eosinophilia. Occasionally, a calcied worm may be seen on X-ray.
Management 
DEC (see above) is curative, in a dose of 9–12 mg/kg daily, continued 
for 21 days. Treatment may precipitate a severe (‘Mazzotti’) reaction in 
patients with a heavy microlaraemia, characterised by fever, joint and 
muscle pain, and encephalitis; microlaraemic patients should be given 
glucocorticoid cover.
Prevention 
Building houses away from trees and having dwellings wire-screened 
reduce infections. Protective clothing and insect repellents are also use-
ful. DEC in a dose of 5 mg/kg daily for 3 days each month is partially 
protective.
Onchocerciasis (river blindness) 
Onchocerciasis results from infection by the larial Onchocerca volvulus. 
The infection is conveyed by ies of the genus Simulium, which breed in 
rapidly owing, well-aerated water. Adult ies inict painful bites during 
the day, both inside and outside houses. While feeding, they pick up the 
microlariae, which mature into the infective larva and are transmitted 
to a new host in subsequent bites. Humans are the only known hosts 
(Fig. 13.54).
Onchocerciasis is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, Yemen and a few 
foci in Central and South America. It is estimated that 21 million people 
are infected and 1 million have vison loss. Due to onchocerciasis, huge 
tracts of fertile land lie virtually untilled and individuals and communities 
are impoverished.
Pathology 
After inoculation of larvae by a bite, the worms mature in 2–4 months and 
live for up to 17 years in subcutaneous and connective tissues. At sites 
of trauma, over bony prominences and around joints, brosis may form 
nodules around adult worms, which otherwise cause no direct damage. 
Innumerable microlariae, discharged by the female O. volvulus, move 
actively in these nodules and in the adjacent tissues. The microlariae 
Adult worm in
subcutaneous
nodule
Microfilariae
in dermis:
dermatitis
Microfilariae
in eyes:
‘river blindness’
Infective
larva
Simulium
fly
Microfilariae
Fig. 13.54 Onchocerca volvulus. Life cycle of organism and pathogenesis of 
onchocerciasis.

[[p376]]
Infections caused by helminths     337
13
are widely distributed in the skin and may invade the eye. Live microlar-
iae elicit little tissue reaction but dead ones may cause severe allergic 
inammation, leading to hyaline necrosis and loss of collagen and elastin. 
Death of microlariae in the eye causes inammation and may lead to 
blindness.
Clinical features 
The infection may remain symptomless for months or years. The rst 
symptom is usually itching, localised to one quadrant of the body and 
later becoming generalised and involving the eyes. Transient oedema of 
part or all of a limb is an early sign, followed by papular urticaria, spread-
ing gradually from the site of infection. In dark skins the most common 
signs are papules excoriated by scratching, spotty hyperpigmentation 
from resolving inammation, and chronic changes of a rough, thickened 
and wrinkled skin. Both infected and uninfected supercial lymph nodes 
enlarge and may hang down in folds of loose skin in the groin. Hydrocele, 
femoral hernias and scrotal elephantiasis can occur. Firm subcutaneous 
nodules ≥1 cm in diameter (onchocercomas) occur in chronic infection.
Eye disease is most common in highly endemic areas and is associ-
ated with chronic heavy infections and nodules on the head. Early man-
ifestations include itching, lacrimation and conjunctival injection. These 
cause conjunctivitis; sclerosing keratitis with pannus formation; uveitis, 
which may lead to glaucoma and cataract; and, less commonly, cho-
roiditis and optic neuritis. Classically, ‘snowake’ deposits are seen in the 
edges of the cornea.
Investigations 
The nding of nodules or characteristic lesions of the skin or eyes in a 
patient from an endemic area, associated with eosinophilia, is sugges-
tive. Skin snips or shavings, taken with a corneoscleral punch or scalpel 
blade from calf, buttock and shoulder, are placed in saline under a cover 
slip on a microscope slide and examined after 4 hours. Microlariae are 
seen wriggling free in all but the lightest infections. Slit-lamp examination 
may reveal microlariae moving in the anterior chamber of the eye or 
trapped in the cornea. An excised nodule may reveal a coiled, thread-like 
adult worm.
Filarial antibodies are positive in up to 95% of patients. Rapid strip tests 
to detect antibody or antigen are under clinical evaluation. When there is 
a strong suspicion of onchocerciasis but tests are negative, a provoca-
tive Mazzotti test, in which administration of 0.5–1.0 mg/kg of DEC exac-
erbates pruritus or dermatitis, strongly suggests onchocerciasis. PCR, 
though highly sensitive and specic, is not available commercially.
Management 
Ivermectin is recommended, in a single dose of 100–200 µg/kg, repeated 
several times at 3-monthly intervals to prevent relapses. It kills microlar-
iae and has minimal toxicity. In the rare event of a severe reaction causing 
oedema or postural hypotension, prednisolone 20–30 mg may be given 
daily for 2 or 3 days. Ivermectin has little macrolaricidal effect so that, 
1 year after ivermectin treatment, skin microlarial densities regain at 
least 20% of pre-treatment levels; repeated treatments are required for 
the lifespan of the adult worm. Eradication of Wolbachia with doxycycline 
(100 mg daily for 6 weeks) prevents worm reproduction.
Prevention 
Mass treatment with ivermectin reduces community morbidity and slows the 
progression of eye disease but it does not clear worm infection. Simulium
can be destroyed in its larval stage by the application of insecticide to 
streams. Long trousers, skirts and sleeves discourage the y from biting.
Dracunculiasis (Guinea worm) 
Infestation with the Guinea worm Dracunculus medinensis manifests 
when the female worm, over a metre long, emerges from the skin. 
Humans are infected by ingesting a small crustacean, Cyclops, which 
inhabits wells and ponds, and contains the infective larval stage of 
the worm. Global programmes have almost eradicated this disease. 
However, recent ndings of dracunculiasis in animals pose a challenge 
to eradication efforts. This is especially the case for dogs in Chad, as 48 
of 54 cases in 2019 worldwide were in Chad.
Management and prevention 
Traditionally, the protruding worm is extracted by winding it out gently over 
several days on a matchstick. The worm must never be broken. Antibiotics 
for secondary infection and prophylaxis of tetanus are also required.
The global eradication campaign aims to provide clean drinking water 
and eradicate water eas from drinking water by simple ltration of water 
through a plastic mesh lter and chemical treatment of water supplies.
Other lariases 
Mansonella perstans 
This larial worm is transmitted by the midges Culicoides austeni and C. 
grahami. It is common throughout equatorial Africa, as far south as Zambia, 
and also in Trinidad and parts of northern and eastern South America.
M. perstans has never been proven to cause disease but it may be 
responsible for a persistent eosinophilia and occasional allergic mani-
festations. M. perstans is resistant to ivermectin and DEC, however, 
anti-Wolbachia treatment (doxycycline 200 mg daily for 6 weeks) can 
cure this infection.
Dirolaria immitis 
This dog heartworm infects humans, causing skin and lung lesions. It is 
not uncommon in the USA, Japan and Australia.
Zoonotic nematodes 
Trichinosis (trichinellosis) 
Trichinella spiralis is a nematode that parasitises rats and pigs, and is 
transmitted to humans by ingestion of partially cooked infected pork, 
particularly sausage or ham, or occasionally by bear meat. Symptoms 
result from invasion of intestinal submucosa by ingested larvae, which 
develop into adult worms, and the secondary invasion of striated mus-
cle by fresh larvae produced by these adult worms. Outbreaks have 
occurred in countries where pork is eaten.
Clinical features 
The clinical features of trichinosis are determined by the larval numbers. 
A light infection with a few worms may be asymptomatic; a heavy infec-
tion causes nausea and diarrhoea 24–48 hours after the infected meal. 
A few days later, the symptoms associated with larval invasion predom-
inate: there is fever and oedema of the face, eyelids and conjunctivae; 
invasion of the diaphragm may cause pain, cough and dyspnoea; and 
involvement of the muscles of the limbs, chest and mouth causes stiff-
ness, pain and tenderness in affected muscles. Larval migration may 
cause acute myocarditis and encephalitis. Eosinophilia, which can be 
very high, is observed after 10 days. An intense infection may prove fatal 
but those who survive recover completely.
Investigations 
Frequently, people who have eaten infected pork from a common source 
develop symptoms at about the same time. Biopsy from the deltoid or 
gastrocnemius muscle after the third week of symptoms may reveal 
encysted larvae. Serological tests are also helpful.
Management 
Treatment is with albendazole (400 mg twice daily for 8–14 days) or 
mebendazole (200–400 mg three times daily for 3 days, followed by 400–
500 mg three times daily for 10 days). Treatment commenced early in 
infection kills newly formed adult worms in the submucosa and reduces 
the number of larvae reaching the muscles. Glucocorticoids are neces-
sary to control the serious effects of acute inammation.

[[p377]]
338    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Anisakiasis (herring worm) 
This infection is caused by the larvae of a sh nematode (Anisakis sim-
plex or Pseudoterranova decipiens) and is associated with consumption 
of under-cooked sh or squid. The parasite cannot complete its life cycle 
in humans but larval ingestion is associated with pharyngeal tingling, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea and vomiting. Diagnosis is made by identi-
cation of the larva by patients or endoscopists, and albendazole (400 mg 
twice a day for 5 days) treats larvae that are not manually removed.
Cutaneous larva migrans 
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is the most common linear lesion seen in 
travellers (Fig. 13.55). Intensely pruritic, linear, serpiginous lesions result 
from the larval migration of the dog hookworm (Ancylostoma caninum). 
The track moves across the skin at a rate of 2–3 cm/day. This contrasts 
with the fast-moving transient rash of Strongyloides. Although the lar-
vae of dog hookworms frequently infect humans, they do not usually 
develop into the adult form. The most common site for CLM is the foot 
but elbows, breasts and buttocks may be affected. Most patients with 
CLM have recently visited a beach where the affected part was exposed. 
The diagnosis is clinical. Treatment may be local with 12-hourly appli-
cation of 15% thiabendazole cream, or systemic with a single dose of 
albendazole (400 mg) or ivermectin (150–200 µg/kg).
Angiostrongylus cantonensis 
The rat lungworm infects humans in Asia and the Pacic basin, via 
ingestion of infected snails or contaminated water. It causes eosinophilic 
meningitis. The role of combination therapy with glucocorticoids and 
albendazole remains controversial.
Gnathostomiasis 
Gnathostomiasis occurs predominantly in South-east Asia and is due to 
Gnathostoma spinigerum. It also occurs in other parts of Asia, Central 
and South America, and Africa. Humans are infected by the larvae from 
intermediate hosts (raw or under-cooked freshwater sh, shrimps and 
frogs) and are not denitive hosts, so the life cycle is incomplete. Pruritic, 
painful, migratory nodules appear 3–4 weeks after ingestion due to larval 
migration. Complications include cough, visual disturbance, eosinophilic 
meningitis or encephalitis. Serology conrms diagnosis and the preferred 
treatment is albendazole (400 mg twice daily) for 21 days, but its role 
in visual or neurological disease is uncertain as it may increase larval 
migration.
Trematodes (ukes) 
These leaf-shaped worms are parasitic to humans and animals. Their 
complex life cycles may involve one or more intermediate hosts, often 
freshwater molluscs.
Schistosomiasis 
Schistosomiasis is a major cause of morbidity in the tropics. The species 
commonly causing disease in humans are: Schistosoma haematobium, 
S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. mekongi and S. intercalatum. S. haema-
tobium is sometimes called bilharzia or bilharziasis. Schistosome eggs 
have been found in Egyptian mummies.
The life cycle is shown in Figure 13.56A. The ovum is passed in the 
urine or faeces of infected individuals and gains access to fresh water, 
where the ciliated miracidium is liberated; it enters its intermediate host, 
a species of freshwater snail, and multiplies. Large numbers of fork-tailed 
cercariae are then liberated into the water, where they may survive for 
2–3 days. Cercariae can penetrate the skin or the mucous membrane of 
the mouth of humans. They transform into schistosomulae and moult as 
they pass through the lungs; then they are carried by the blood stream 
to the liver, and so to the portal vein, where they mature. The male worm 
is up to 20 mm in length and the slenderer cylindrical female, usually 
enfolded longitudinally by the male, is longer (Fig. 13.56B). Within 4–6 
weeks of infection, they migrate to the venules draining the pelvic vis-
cera, where the females deposit ova.
Pathology 
The passage of eggs through mucosa and the granulomatous reaction 
to eggs deposited in tissues causes disease. The eggs of S. haemato-
bium pass mainly through the bladder wall but may also involve the rec-
tum, seminal vesicles, vagina, cervix and uterine tubes. S. mansoni and 
S. japonicum eggs pass mainly through the wall of the lower bowel or 
are carried to the liver. The most serious, although rare, site of ectopic 
egg deposition is the CNS. Granulomas are composed of macrophages, 
eosinophils, and epithelioid and giant cells around an ovum. Later, there 
is brosis and eggs calcify, which is often visible radiologically. Eggs of S. 
haematobium may leave the vesical plexus and be carried directly to the 
lung. Those of S. mansoni and S. japonicum may also reach the lungs after 
the development of portal hypertension and consequent portasystemic 
collateral circulation. Egg deposition in the pulmonary vasculature, and the 
resultant host response, can lead to pulmonary hypertension.
Clinical features 
Recent travellers, especially those overlanding through Africa, may pres-
ent with allergic manifestations and eosinophilia; residents of schisto-
somiasis-endemic areas are more likely to present with chronic urinary 
tract pathology or portal hypertension.
During early infection, there may be itching lasting 1–2 days at the site 
of cercarial penetration (‘swimmer’s itch’). After a symptom-free period of 
3–5 weeks, acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) may present with 
allergic manifestations: urticaria, fever, muscle aches, abdominal pain, head-
aches, cough and sweating. On examination, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
lymphadenopathy and pneumonia may be present. These allergic phenom-
ena may be severe in infections with S. mansoni and S. japonicum, but are 
rare with S. haematobium. The features subside after 1–2 weeks.
Chronic schistosomiasis is due to egg deposition and occurs months 
to years after infection. The symptoms and signs depend on the intensity 
of infection and the species of infecting schistosome (Box 13.63).
Schistosoma haematobium
Humans are the only natural hosts of S. haematobium, which is highly 
endemic in Egypt and East Africa, and occurs throughout Africa and the 
Fig. 13.55 Cutaneous larva migrans. Courtesy of Dr Ravi Gowda, Royal 
Hallamshire Hospital, Shefeld.

[[p378]]
Infections caused by helminths     339
13
Middle East (Fig. 13.57). Infection can be acquired after a brief exposure, 
such as swimming in freshwater lakes in Africa.
Painless terminal haematuria is usually the rst and most com-
mon symptom. Frequency of micturition follows, due to bladder neck 
obstruction. Later, frequent urinary tract infections, bladder or ureteric 
stones, hydronephrosis and ultimately renal failure with a contracted cal-
cied bladder may occur. Pain is often felt in the iliac fossa or in the loin, 
and radiates to the groin. In several endemic areas, there is a strong 
epidemiological association of S. haematobium infection with squamous 
cell carcinoma of the bladder. Disease of the seminal vesicles may lead to 
haematospermia. Females may develop schistosomal papillomas of the 
vulva, and schistosomal lesions of the cervix may be mistaken for cancer. 
Intestinal symptoms may follow involvement of the bowel wall. Ectopic 
worms cause skin or spinal cord lesions.
The severity of S. haematobium infection varies greatly; light infec-
tions are often asymptomatic. However, as adult worms can live for 20 
years or more and lesions may progress, these patients should always 
be treated.
Schistosoma mansoni
S. mansoni is endemic throughout Africa, the Middle East, Venezuela, 
Brazil and the Caribbean (see Fig. 13.57).
Characteristic symptoms begin from 2 months after infection. They 
may be minimal (e.g. malaise) or consist of abdominal pain and frequent 
stools that contain blood-stained mucus. With severe advanced disease, 
Lungs
Portal
vein
Blood
stream
Adult worm
in vesical and
rectal veins
River Nile etc.
Miracidium
Snail
Cercariae
Ovum
A
B
Fig. 13.56 Schistosoma
13.63 Pathogenesis of schistosomiasis
Time
Schistosoma 
haematobium
S. mansoni and S. 
japonicum
Cercarial penetration
Days
Papular dermatitis at 
site of penetration
As for S. haematobium
Larval migration and maturation
Weeks
Pneumonitis, myositis, 
hepatitis, fever, ‘serum 
sickness’, eosinophilia, 
seroconversion
As for S. haematobium
Early egg deposition
Months
Cystitis, haematuria
Colitis, granulomatous 
hepatitis, acute portal 
hypertension
Ectopic granulomatous 
lesions: skin, CNS etc.
Immune complex 
glomerulonephritis
As for S. haematobium
Late egg deposition
Years
Fibrosis and 
calcication of ureters, 
bladder: bacterial 
infection, calculi, 
hydronephrosis, 
carcinoma
Colonic polyposis and 
strictures, periportal 
brosis, portal 
hypertension
Pulmonary granulomas 
and pulmonary 
hypertension
As for S. haematobium
S. mansoni
S. mansoni/S. haematobium
S. haematobium
S. japonicum
S. mekongi
S. intercalatum
Fig. 13.57 Geographical distribution of schistosomiasis. From Gryseels et al., 
Lancet 2006; 368:1106–1118.

[[p379]]
340    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
increased discomfort from rectal polyps may be experienced. The early 
hepatomegaly is reversible but portal hypertension may cause massive 
splenomegaly, fatal haematemesis from oesophageal varices, or pro-
gressive ascites. Liver function is initially preserved because the pathol-
ogy is brotic rather than cirrhotic. S. mansoni and other schistosome 
infections predispose to the carriage of Salmonella, in part because 
Salmonella may attach to the schistosomes and in part because shared 
antigens on schistosomes may induce immunological tolerance to 
Salmonella
Schistosoma japonicum, S. mekongi and  S. intercalatum
In addition to humans, the adult worm of S. japonicum infects the dog, 
rat, eld mouse, water buffalo, ox, cat, pig, horse and sheep. Although 
other Schistosoma spp. can infect species other than humans, the 
non-human reservoir seems to be particularly important only in trans-
mission for S. japonicum. S. japonicum is prevalent in the Yellow River 
and Yangtze–Jiang basins in China, where the infection is a major public 
health problem. It also has a focal distribution in the Philippines, Indonesia 
and Thailand (see Fig. 13.57). The related S. mekongi occurs in Laos, 
Thailand and Myanmar, and S. intercalatum in West and Central Africa.
The pathology of S. japonicum is similar to that of S. mansoni, but as 
this worm produces more eggs, the lesions tend to be more extensive 
and widespread. The clinical features resemble those of severe infection 
with S. mansoni, with added neurological features. The small and large 
bowel may be affected, and hepatic brosis with splenic enlargement is 
usual. Deposition of eggs or worms in the CNS, especially in the brain 
or spinal cord, causes symptoms in about 5% of infections, notably epi-
lepsy, blindness, hemiplegia or paraplegia.
Investigations 
There is marked eosinophilia. Serological tests (ELISA) are useful as 
screening tests but remain positive after treatment.
In S. haematobium infection, dipstick urine testing shows blood and 
albumin. The eggs can be found by microscopic examination of the 
centrifuged deposit of terminal stream urine (Fig. 13.58). Ultrasound 
assesses the urinary tract; bladder wall thickening, hydronephrosis 
and bladder calcication can be detected. Cystoscopy reveals ‘sandy’ 
patches, bleeding mucosa and later distortion.
In a heavy infection with S. mansoni or S. japonicum, the characteris-
tic egg with its lateral spine can usually be found in the stool. When the 
infection is light or of long duration, a rectal biopsy can be examined. 
Sigmoidoscopy may show inammation or bleeding. Biopsies should 
be examined for ova. PCR, though highly sensitive and specic, is not 
widely available,
Management 
Therapy aims to kill the adult schistosomes and stop egg-laying. 
Praziquantel (20 mg/kg orally twice daily for 1 day) is the drug of choice 
for all forms of schistosomiasis except S. japonicum and S. mekongi, 
for which 20 mg/kg for 3 doses is recommended. The drug produces 
parasitological cure in 80% of treated individuals and over 90% reduction 
in egg counts in the remainder. Side-effects are uncommon but include 
nausea and abdominal pain. Praziquantel therapy in early infection 
reverses hepatomegaly, bladder wall thickening and granulomas.
Surgery may be required to deal with residual lesions such as ureteric 
stricture, small brotic urinary bladders, or granulomatous masses in the 
brain or spinal cord. Removal of rectal papillomas by diathermy or by 
other means may provide symptomatic relief.
Prevention 
No single means of controlling schistosomiasis has been established to 
date. The life cycle is terminated if fresh water containing the snail host 
is not contaminated by ova-containing urine or faeces. The provision 
of latrines and of a safe water supply, however, remains challenging in 
rural areas throughout the tropics. Furthermore, S. japonicum has mul-
tiple hosts besides humans, therefore latrines would have little impact. 
Population mass treatment annually helps prevent S. haematobium and 
S. mansoni infection but so far has had little success with S. japoni-
cum. Targeting the intermediate host, the snail, is problematic and has 
not, on its own, proved successful. For personal protection, contact with 
infected water must be avoided.
Liver ukes 
Liver ukes infect at least 20 million people and remain public health 
priorities in endemic areas. Clinical symptoms are abdominal pain, 
hepatomegaly and relapsing cholangitis. Clonorchis sinensis and 
Opisthorchis felineus are major aetiological agents of bile duct cancer. 
The three major liver ukes have similar life cycles and pathologies, as 
outlined in Box 13.64
Other ukes of medical importance include lung and intestinal ukes 
(see Box 13.60).
Cestodes (tapeworms) 
Cestodes are ribbon-shaped worms that inhabit the intestinal tract. They 
have no alimentary system and absorb nutrients through the tegumental 
surface. The anterior end, or scolex, has suckers for attaching to the 
host. From the scolex, a series of progressively developing segments 
arise, the proglottides, which may continue to show active movements 
when shed. Cross-fertilisation takes place between segments. Ova, 
present in large numbers in mature proglottides, remain viable for weeks, 
and during this period they may be consumed by the intermediate host. 
Larvae liberated from the ingested ova pass into the tissues of the inter-
mediate host, forming larval cysticerci.
Tapeworms cause two distinct patterns of disease: either intestinal 
infection or systemic cysticercosis (see Fig. 13.59). Taenia saginata (beef 
tapeworm), Taenia asiatica and Diphyllobothrium latum (sh tapeworm) 
cause only intestinal infection in humans, following ingestion of inter-
mediate hosts. Taenia solium causes intestinal infection if a cysti cerci-
containing intermediate host is ingested, and cysticercosis (systemic 
infection from larval migration) if ova are ingested. Echinococcus gran-
ulosus (dog tapeworm) does not cause human intestinal infection, but 
causes hydatid disease (which is analogous to cysticercosis) following 
ingestion of ova and subsequent larval migration.
Intestinal tapeworm 
Humans acquire tapeworm by eating under-cooked beef infected with 
the larval stage of T. saginata, under-cooked pork containing the larval 
stage of T. solium or T. asiatica, or under-cooked freshwater sh con-
taining larvae of D. latum. Usually, only one adult tapeworm is present in 
the gut but up to 10 have been reported. The ova of all the three Taenia
are indistinguishable microscopically. However, examination of scolex 
Fig. 13.58 Ova of Schistosoma haematobium in urine. Note the terminal spike.

[[p380]]
Infections caused by helminths     341
13
and proglottides can differentiate them: T. solium has a rostellum and 
two rows of hooklets on the scolex, and discharges multiple proglot-
tides (3–5) attached together with lower degrees of uterine branching 
(approximately 10); T. saginata has only four suckers in its scolex, and 
discharges single proglottids with greater uterine branching (up to 30); 
T. asiatica has a rostellum without hooks on its scolex and is difcult 
to differentiate from T. saginata, except that there are fewer uterine 
branches (16–21).
Taenia solium 
T. solium, the pork tapeworm, is common in central Europe, South Africa, 
South America and parts of Asia. It is smaller than T. saginata. The adult 
worm is found only in humans following the ingestion of pork containing 
cysticerci. Intestinal infection is treated with praziquantel (5–10 mg/kg) or 
niclosamide (2 g), both as a single dose, or alternatively with nitazoxanide 
(500 mg twice daily for 3 days). These are followed by a mild laxative (after 
1–2 hours) to prevent retrograde intestinal autoinfection. Cooking pork well 
prevents intestinal infection. Great care must be taken while attending a 
patient harbouring an adult worm to avoid ingestion of ova or segments.
Taenia saginata 
Infection with T. saginata occurs in all parts of the world. The adult worm 
may be several metres long and produces minimal intestinal upset in 
human beings, but identication of segments in the faeces or on under-
clothing distresses patients. Ova may be found in the stool. Praziquantel is 
the drug of choice; niclosamide or nitazoxanide are alternatives. Prevention 
depends on efcient meat inspection and thorough cooking of beef.
Taenia asiatica 
T. asiatica is a newly recognised species of Taenia, restricted to Asia. It 
is acquired by eating uncooked meat or viscera of pigs. Clinical features 
and treatment are similar to those of T. saginata
Cysticercosis 
Human cysticercosis is acquired by ingesting T. solium tapeworm ova, 
from either contaminated ngers or food (Fig. 13.59). The larvae are liber-
ated from eggs in the stomach, penetrate the intestinal mucosa and are 
carried to many parts of the body, developing into cysticerci, 0.5–1 cm 
cysts that contain the head of a young worm. They do not grow further or 
migrate. Common locations are subcutaneous tissue, skeletal muscles 
and brain (Fig. 13.60).
Clinical features 
Supercial cysts can be palpated under the skin or mucosa as pea-like 
ovoid bodies, but cause few or no symptoms and eventually die and 
calcify.
Heavy brain infections, especially in children, may cause features of 
encephalitis. More commonly, however, cerebral signs do not occur until 
the larvae die, 5–20 years later. Epilepsy, including new-onset focal sei-
zures, personality changes, staggering gait and signs of hydrocephalus, 
are the most common features.
13.64 Diseases caused by ukes in the bile duct
Clonorchiasis
Opisthorchiasis
Fascioliasis
Parasite
Clonorchis 
sinensis
Opisthorchis 
felineus
Fasciola hepatica
Other 
mammalian 
hosts
Dogs, cats, pigs
Dogs, cats, 
foxes, pigs
Sheep, cattle
Mode of 
spread
Ova in faeces, 
water
As for C. 
sinensis
Ova in faeces on 
to wet pasture
1st 
intermediate 
host
Snails
Snails
Snails
2nd 
intermediate 
host
Freshwater sh
Freshwater sh
Encysts on 
vegetation
Geographical 
distribution
Far East, 
especially South 
China
Far East, 
especially 
North-east 
Thailand
Cosmopolitan, 
including UK
Pathology
Escherichia 
coli cholangitis, 
abscesses, 
biliary carcinoma
As for C. 
sinensis
Toxaemia, 
cholangitis, 
eosinophilia
Symptoms
Often symptom-
free, recurrent 
jaundice
As for C. 
sinensis
Unexplained 
fever, tender 
liver, may be 
ectopic, e.g. 
subcutaneous 
uke
Diagnosis
Ova in stool 
or duodenal 
aspirate
As for C. 
sinensis
As for C. sinensis, 
also serology
Prevention
Cook sh
Cook sh
Avoid 
contaminated 
watercress
Treatment
Praziquantel 
25 mg/kg 3 
times daily for 
2 days
As for C. 
sinensis but for 
1 day only
Triclabendazole 
10 mg/kg single 
dose; repeat 
treatment may be 
required*
*In the UK, available from the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London.
Adult
worms
in gut
Pig
Eggs passed in
human faeces
Human pork tapeworm
infection results from
eating undercooked
pork containing cysticerci 
Eggs ingested by pig
become cysticerci
in muscles
If cysticerci
are swallowed
they develop to
adult tapeworms
in the human
intestine
Ingestion
of meat
Faecal–oral
route
Human cysticercosis
results from ingestion of
the tapeworm eggs as
a result of faecal
contamination of food 
If eggs are swallowed
by humans they develop
to cysticerci in various
sites, e.g. brain, muscle
Cysticerci
Fig. 13.59 Cysticercosis. Life cycle of Taenia solium.

[[p381]]
342    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Investigations 
Calcied cysts in muscles can be recognised radiologically. In the 
brain, however, less calcication takes place and larvae are only 
occasionally visible by plain X-ray; CT or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) will usually show them. Epileptic ts starting in adult life suggest 
the possibility of cysticercosis if the patient has lived in or travelled 
to an endemic area. The subcutaneous tissue should be palpated 
and any nodule excised for histology. Radiological examination of the 
skeletal muscles may be helpful. Antibody detection is available for 
serodiagnosis.
Management and prevention 
Albendazole (15 mg/kg daily for a minimum of 8 days) is recommended 
for parenchymal neurocysticercosis. Praziquantel (50 mg/kg in 3 divided 
doses daily for 10 days) is another option. Prednisolone (10 mg 3 times 
daily) is also given for 14 days, starting 1 day before anti-cysticercosis 
therapy. Antiepileptic drugs are often prescribed until the reaction in the 
brain has subsided. Operative intervention is indicated for hydrocepha-
lus. Studies from India and Peru suggest that most small, solitary cere-
bral cysts will resolve without treatment.
Echinococcus granulosus (Taenia echinococcus)  
and hydatid disease 
Dogs are the denitive hosts of the tiny tapeworm E. granulosus. The 
larval stage, a hydatid cyst, normally occurs in sheep, cattle, camels 
and other animals exposed to contaminated pastures or water. By han-
dling a dog or drinking contaminated water, humans may ingest eggs 
(Fig. 13.61). The embryo is liberated from the ovum in the small intestine 
and invades the blood stream, spreading to the liver. The resultant cyst 
grows very slowly, sometimes intermittently. It is composed of an envel-
oping brous pericyst, laminated hyaline membrane (ectocyst) and inner 
germinal layers (endocyst) that give rise to daughter cysts, or a germi-
nating cystic brood capsule in which larvae (protoscolices) develop. Over 
time, some cysts calcify and become non-viable. The disease is com-
mon in the Middle East, North and East Africa, Australia and Argentina. 
Foci of infection persist in the UK in rural Wales and Scotland. E. multi-
locularis, which has a cycle between foxes and voles, causes a similar 
but more severe infection, ‘alveolar hydatid disease’, which invades the 
liver like cancer.
Clinical features 
A hydatid cyst is typically acquired in childhood and, after growing for 
years, may cause site-specic pressure symptoms. In nearly 75% of 
patients the right lobe of the liver is invaded and contains a single cyst. In 
others, a cyst may be found in lung, bone, brain or elsewhere.
Investigations 
The diagnosis depends on the clinical, radiological and ultrasound 
ndings in a patient that has close contact with dogs in an endemic 
area. Complement xation and ELISA are positive in 70%–90% of 
patients.
Management and prevention 
Hydatid cysts should be excised wherever possible. Great care is taken 
to avoid spillage and cavities are sterilised with 0.5% silver nitrate or 
2.7% sodium chloride. Albendazole (400 mg twice daily for 3 months) 
should also be used and is often combined with PAIR (percutaneous 
puncture, aspiration, injection of scolicidal agent and re-aspiration). 
Praziquantel (20 mg/kg twice daily for 14 days) also kills protoscolices 
perioperatively.
Prevention is difcult when there is a close association with dogs. 
Personal hygiene, satisfactory disposal of carcasses, meat inspection 
and deworming of dogs reduces disease prevalence.
Other tapeworms 
Other cestodes’ adult or larval stages may infect humans. In spargan-
osis an immature worm develops, usually subcutaneously, as a result of 
eating or applying to the skin the secondary or tertiary intermediate host, 
such as frogs or snakes.
Ectoparasites 
Ectoparasites only interact with the outermost surfaces of the host; see 
also page 1093.
Jiggers (tungiasis) 
This is widespread in tropical America and Africa, and is caused by 
the sand ea Tunga penetrans. The pregnant ea burrows into the 
skin around toes and produces large numbers of eggs. The burrows 
are intensely irritating and the whole inammatory nodule should 
be removed with a sterile needle. Secondary infection of lesions is 
common.
Myiasis 
Myiasis is due to skin infestation with larvae of the South American 
boty, Dermatobia hominis, or the African tumbu y, Cordylobia 
anthropophaga. The larvae develop in a subcutaneous space with a 
central sinus. This orice is the air source for the larvae, and periodi-
cally the larval respiratory spiracles protrude through the sinus. Patients 
with myiasis feel movement within the larval burrow and can experience 
intermittent sharp, lancinating pains. Myiasis is diagnosed clinically and 
should be suspected with any furuncular lesion accompanied by pain 
and a crawling sensation in the skin. The larva may be suffocated by 
blocking the respiratory orice with petroleum jelly and gently removing 
it with tweezers. Secondary infection of myiasis is rare and rapid healing 
follows removal of intact larvae.
Fungal infections 
Fungal infections, or mycoses, are classied as supercial, subcuta-
neous or systemic (deep), depending on the degree of tissue invasion. 
Fig. 13.60 Neurocysticercosis. T2-weighted axial image of the brain showing 
multiple lesions of neurocysticercosis (arrows show the largest lesions).

[[p382]]
Fungal infections     343
13
Human
Hydatid cysts in liver, lung etc.
Sheep etc.
Hydatid cysts in
liver, lung etc.
Ova
Faeces
Dog etc.
Worms in gut
A
B
C
Fig. 13.61 Hydatid disease. 
Echinococcus granulosus.  
Filamentous fungi (moulds)
Characterised by the production of
elongated, cylindrical, often septate
cells (hyphae) and conidia (spores)
Examples:
 Aspergillus spp. (A. fumigatus
 shown here)
 Fusarium spp.
 Dermatophyte fungi (Tricophyton spp.,
Microsporum spp. etc.)
 Mucorales
Dimorphic fungi
Yeasts
Exist in filamentous (top) or yeast
(bottom) form, depending on
environmental conditions
Examples:
 Histoplasma capsulatum,
  Coccidioides immitis, Paracoccidioides
  brasiliensis (shown here), Blastomyces
  dermatidis
 Sporothrix schenkii
 Talaromyces marneffei
 Malassezia spp.
Characterised by the production of
oval or round cells, which reproduce
by binary fission (budding)
Examples:
 Candida spp.*
 Cryptococcus spp. (C. neoformans
 shown here)
Fig. 13.62 Classication of medically important fungi. Fungal classication is based on simple morphological characteristics. Pneumocystis jirovecii is morphologically 
distinct from other fungi and does not t into this classication. *Although Candida albicans exists in a number of forms, including lamentous (hyphae and pseudohyphae), 
it is generally encountered in its yeast form so is classied in this category. Insets (dimorphic fungi) Courtesy of Beatriz Gomez and Angela Restrepo, CIB, Medellín, Colombia
They are caused by lamentous fungi (moulds), by yeasts or by fungi that 
vary between these two forms, depending on environmental conditions 
(dimorphic fungi; Fig. 13.62).
Supercial mycoses 
Supercial cutaneous fungal infections caused by dermatophyte fungi 
are described in Chapter 27
Candidiasis (thrush) 
Supercial candidiasis is caused by Candida spp., mainly C. albicans. 
Manifestations include oropharyngeal and vaginal candidiasis (‘thrush’), 
intertrigo and chronic paronychia. Supercial candidiasis often follows 
antibiotic therapy. Intertrigo is characterised by inammation in skin folds 
with surrounding ‘satellite lesions’. Chronic paronychia is associated with 
frequent wetting of the hands. Supercial candidiasis is treated mainly with 

[[p383]]
344    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
topical azoles (p. 121), oral azoles being reserved for refractory or recurrent 
disease. Severe oropharyngeal and oesophageal candidiasis is seen with 
T-cell immunodeciency, including HIV infection, and anti-IL-17 therapy. 
Recurrent vaginal or penile candidiasis may be a manifestation of diabetes 
mellitus. Rarely, mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) or sig-
nal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) cause a syndrome 
of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, resulting in chronic Candida infec-
tions of skin, mucosa and nails, with hyperkeratotic nails and erythema-
tous periungual skin. Patients have cell-mediated immune defects against 
Candida and may have polyendocrinopathy and autoimmune features.
Subcutaneous mycoses 
Chromoblastomycosis 
Chromoblastomycosis is a predominantly tropical or subtropical disease 
caused by environmental dematiaceous (dark-pigmented) fungi, most 
commonly Fonsecaea pedrosoi. Other causes include F. compacta, 
Cladophialophora carrionii and Phialophora verrucosa. The disease is 
a cutaneous/subcutaneous mycosis acquired by traumatic inoculation, 
particularly the foot, ankle and lower leg. Several months after inocu-
lation, lesions develop. Medical attention is often sought several years 
later. The initial lesion is a papule. Further papules develop and coalesce 
to form irregular plaques. Nodular lesions may produce a characteristic 
‘cauliower’ appearance.
Diagnosis is by histopathological examination of infected material, 
revealing dematiaceous, rounded, thick-walled ‘sclerotic bodies’ with 
septa at right-angles to each other. The aetiological agent is conrmed 
by culture. Therapeutic approaches include antifungal agents, cryo-
surgery and surgical excision, alone or in combination, but the optimal 
therapy is unknown. Itraconazole and terbinane are the most effective 
antifungal agents. However, posaconazole has also been used with a 
good outcome.
Mycetoma (eumycetoma and actinomycetoma) 
Mycetoma is a chronic suppurative infection of the deep soft tissues 
and bones, notably the limbs but also the abdominal or chest wall or 
head. It is caused by either lamentous fungi, Eumyces (eumycetoma 
– 40%) or aerobic Actinomycetes (actinomycetoma – 60%). Many fungi 
cause eumycetomas, the most common being Madurella mycetomatis, 
M. grisea, Leptosphaeria senegalensis and Scedosporium apiosper-
mum; causes of actinomycetoma include Nocardia, Streptomyces and 
Actinomadura spp. Both groups produce characteristically coloured 
‘grains’ (microcolonies), the colour depending on the organism (black 
grains – eumycetoma, red and yellow grains – actinomycetoma, white 
grains – either). The disease occurs mostly in the tropics and subtropics.
Clinical features 
The disease is acquired by inoculation (e.g. from a thorn), usually of the foot 
(Madura foot). A painless swelling at the inoculation site becomes chronic 
and progressive, spreads steadily within the soft tissues, and eventually pen-
etrates bone. Sub-epidermal nodules mature and rupture, revealing sinuses 
that may discharge grains. Sinuses heal with scarring, while fresh sinuses 
appear elsewhere. Deeper tissue invasion and bone involvement are less 
rapid and extensive in eumycetoma than actinomycetoma. There is little pain 
and usually no fever or lymphadenopathy, but there is progressive disability.
Investigations 
Diagnosis of mycetoma involves identication of grains in pus, and/or 
histopathological examination of tissue. Culture is necessary for spe-
cies identication and susceptibility testing. Serological tests are not 
available.
Management 
Eumycetoma is usually treated with a combination of surgery and 
antifungal therapy. Antifungal susceptibility testing, if available, is 
recommended, although clinical outcome does not necessarily cor-
respond to in vitro test results. Itraconazole and ketoconazole (both 
200–400 mg/day) are used most commonly. Success has also been 
reported with terbinane monotherapy, and for some cases with lipo-
somal amphotericin B. Refractory cases have responded to voricona-
zole or posaconazole. Therapy is continued for 6–12 months or longer. 
In extreme cases, amputation may be required. Actinomycetoma is 
treated with prolonged antibiotic combinations, most commonly strep-
tomycin and dapsone. Dapsone is replaced by co-trimoxazole with 
intolerance or refractory disease. Success has also been reported with 
co-trimoxazole plus amikacin, with rifampicin added in difcult cases 
and to prevent recurrence.
Phaeohyphomycosis 
Phaeohyphomycoses are a heterogeneous group of fungal diseases 
caused by a large number (>70) of dematiaceous fungi. In phaeohyph-
omycosis, the tissue form of the fungus is predominantly mycelial (la-
mentous), as opposed to eumycetoma (grain) or chromoblastomycosis 
(sclerotic body). Disease may be supercial, subcutaneous or deep. 
The most serious manifestation is cerebral phaeohyphomycosis, which 
presents with a ring-enhancing, space-occupying cerebral lesion. 
Optimal therapy for this condition is not established but usually includes 
neurosurgical intervention and antifungal (usually triazole) therapy. 
Causative agents are Cladophialophora bantiana, Fonsecaea spp. and 
Rhinocladiella mackenziei, which occurs mainly in the Middle East and 
is usually fatal.
Sporotrichosis 
Sporotrichosis is caused by Sporothrix schenckii, a dimorphic fun-
gal saprophyte of plants in tropical and subtropical regions. Disease is 
caused by dermal inoculation of the fungus, usually from a thorn (occa-
sionally from a cat scratch). A subcutaneous nodule develops at the 
site of infection and subsequently ulcerates, with a purulent discharge. 
The disease may then spread along the cutaneous lymphatic channels, 
resulting in multiple cutaneous nodules that ulcerate and discharge (lym-
phocutaneous sporotrichosis). Rarer forms include cutaneous disease 
presenting with arthritis. Later, draining sinuses may form. Pulmonary 
sporotrichosis occurs as a result of inhalation of the conidia (spores) 
and causes chronic cavitary bronodular disease with haemoptysis and 
constitutional symptoms. Disseminated disease may occur, especially in 
immuncompromised hosts
Investigations 
Typical yeast forms detected on histology conrm diagnosis but are 
rarely seen; the fungus can also be cultured from biopsy specimens. 
ELISA detection of antibodies can be helpful.
Management 
Cutaneous and lymphocutaneous disease is treated with itraconazole 
(200–400 mg daily, prescribed as the oral solution, which has better 
bioavailability than the capsule formulation) for 3–6 months. Alternative 
agents include a saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI, given 
orally), initiated with 5 drops and increased to 40–50 drops 3 times 
daily, or terbinane (500 mg twice daily). Localised hyperthermia may 
be used in pregnancy (to avoid azole use). Osteoarticular disease 
requires a longer course of therapy (at least 12 months). Severe or 
life-threatening disease is treated with amphotericin B (lipid formula-
tion preferred).
Systemic mycoses 
Aspergillosis 
Aspergillosis is an opportunistic systemic mycosis, which affects the 
respiratory tract predominantly. It is described on page 525.

[[p384]]
Fungal infections     345
13
Candidiasis 
Systemic candidiasis is an opportunistic mycosis caused by Candida
spp. The most common cause is C. albicans. Other agents include C. 
dubliniensis, C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. parapsilosis and C. tropicalis. 
Candida species identication often predicts susceptibility to ucona-
zole: C. krusei is universally resistant, many C. glabrata isolates have 
reduced susceptibility or are resistant, and other species are mostly sus-
ceptible. Candidiasis is usually an endogenous disease that originates 
from oropharyngeal, genitourinary or skin colonisation, although nosoco-
mial spread occurs. C. auris is an emerging species, which has a particu-
lar propensity for nosocomial transmission.
Syndromes of systemic candidiasis 
Acute disseminated candidiasis 
This usually presents as candidaemia (isolation of Candida spp. from the 
blood). The main predisposing factor is the presence of a central venous 
catheter. Other major factors include recent abdominal surgery, total par-
enteral nutrition (TPN), recent antimicrobial therapy and localised Candida
colonisation. Up to 40% of cases will have ophthalmic involvement, with 
characteristic retinal ‘cotton wool’ exudates. As this is a sight-threaten-
ing condition, all candidaemic patients should have a full ophthalmoscopy 
review. Skin lesions (non-tender pink/red nodules) may be seen. Although 
predominantly a disease of intensive care and surgical patients, acute dis-
seminated candidiasis and/or Candida endophthalmitis is seen occasion-
ally in injection drug-users, due to candidal contamination of citric acid or 
lemon juice used to dissolve heroin.
Chronic disseminated candidiasis (hepatosplenic candidiasis) 
Persistent fever in a neutropenic patient, despite antibacterial therapy 
and neutrophil recovery, associated with the development of abdomi-
nal pain, raised alkaline phosphatase and multiple lesions in abdominal 
organs (e.g. liver, spleen and/or kidneys) on radiological imaging, sug-
gests a diagnosis of hepatosplenic candidiasis. This represents a form of 
immune reconstitution syndrome in patients recovering from neutropenia 
and usually lasts for several months, despite appropriate therapy.
Other manifestations 
Renal tract candidiasis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, peritonitis, menin-
gitis and endocarditis may occur and are usually sequelae of acute dis-
seminated disease. Diagnosis and treatment of these conditions require 
specialist mycological advice.
Management 
Blood cultures positive for Candida spp. must never be ignored. Acute 
disseminated candidiasis is treated with antifungal therapy, removal of 
any in-dwelling central venous catheter (whether known to be the source 
of infection or not) and removal of any documented source. Candidaemia 
should be treated initially with an echinocandin (p. 122), with subsequent 
adjustment (usually to intravenous or oral uconazole) guided by clini-
cal response, species identication and susceptibility testing. Treatment 
should continue for a minimum of 14 days. Alternative therapies include 
voriconazole and amphotericin B formulations.
Chronic disseminated candidiasis requires prolonged treatment over 
several months with uconazole or other agents, depending on species 
and clinical response. The duration of the condition may be reduced by 
adjuvant therapy with systemic glucocorticoids.
Cryptococcosis 
Cryptococcosis is a systemic mycosis caused by two environmental yeast 
species, Cr. neoformans and Cr. gattii. Cr. neoformans is distributed world-
wide and is primarily an opportunistic pathogen, most commonly associ-
ated with HIV infection or other immunocompromised hosts. Cr. gattii is 
a primary pathogen with a widespread distribution, including Australasia, 
Africa, Canada (Vancouver Island) and the north-western USA.
Cryptococcosis is acquired by inhalation of yeasts. These may dis-
seminate to any organ, most commonly the CNS and skin. The mani-
festations of Cr. neoformans are most severe in immunocompromised 
individuals. Conversely, Cr. gattii causes severe disease in immunocom-
petent hosts. Disseminated cryptococcosis (sepsis with cryptococci 
present in the blood stream or at multiple sites) is largely restricted to 
immunocompromised patients. CNS manifestations of cryptococcosis 
include meningitis and cryptococcoma (Fig. 13.63), the latter more likely 
with Cr. gattii infection. Manifestations of pulmonary cryptococcosis 
range from severe pneumonia (in more immunocompromised patients) 
to asymptomatic disease with single or multiple pulmonary nodules, 
sometimes exhibiting cavitation (in patients with lesser immunosuppres-
sion). Cryptococcal nodules may mimic other causes of lung pathology, 
such as tuberculosis or malignancy, and diagnosis requires histopathol-
ogy and/or culture.
Treatment of severe cryptococcosis is the same as for cryptococcal 
meningitis, initially with liposomal amphotericin B. Mild pulmonary dis-
ease is usually treated with uconazole, although for asymptomatic nod-
ules resection of the lesions is likely to be sufcient.
Fusariosis 
Fusarium spp. cause disseminated disease in patients with prolonged 
neutropenia. The disease presents with antibiotic-resistant fever and evi-
dence of dissemination (e.g. skin nodules, endophthalmitis, septic arthri-
tis, pulmonary disease; Fig. 13.64). Unlike Aspergillus spp., Fusarium
spp. are often recovered from blood cultures. Treatment is challenging 
because of resistance to antifungal agents; voriconazole, posaconazole 
or lipid-formulated amphotericin B is usually prescribed.
Mucormycosis 
Mucormycosis is a severe but uncommon opportunistic systemic myco-
sis caused by a number of ‘mucoraceous’ moulds, most commonly 
Lichtheimia spp., Rhizomucor spp., Mucor spp. and Rhizopus spp. 
Disease patterns include rhinocerebral/craniofacial, pulmonary, cutane-
ous and systemic disease. All are characterised by the rapid development 
A
B
Fig. 13.63 Cryptococcal disease. A 23-year-old HIV-positive male developed 
of the lesion stained with Grocott’s silver stain showed encapsulated yeasts. 
Cryptococcus neoformans was cultured.

[[p385]]
346    INFECTIOUS DISEASE
of severe tissue necrosis, which is usually fatal if left untreated. The most 
common predisposing factors are profound immunosuppression from 
neutropenia and/or haematopoietic stem cell transplantation, uncon-
trolled diabetes mellitus, iron chelation therapy with desferrioxamine and 
severe burns. During the COVID-19 pandemic mucormycosis emerged 
as a specic complication of COVID-19, reported mainly from India.
Denitive diagnosis is by culture but histopathological conrmation is 
required, as the fungi may be environmental contaminants. Treatment 
requires a combination of antifungal therapy and surgical débride-
ment, with correction of predisposing factor(s) if possible. High-dose 
lipid-formulated amphotericin B is most commonly used. Posaconazole 
is active against many mucoraceous moulds in vitro and may be used as 
a second-line agent or as oral ‘step-down’ therapy.
Talaromyces marneffei infection 
T. marneffei is a thermally dimorphic pathogen (lamentous in environ-
mental conditions and yeast at body temperature), which causes disease 
in South-east Asia, mainly in association with HIV infection (although 
immunocompetent patients may also be infected). Acquisition is usu-
ally by inhalation of environmental spores, with primary lung infection 
followed by haematogenous dissemination. A generalised papular rash, 
which progresses to widespread necrosis and ulceration, is a charac-
teristic feature. Skin lesions may resemble molluscum contagiosum. 
Diagnosis is by histopathology and/or culture of respiratory secretions, 
blood or any infected clinical material (e.g. skin lesions, bone marrow, 
biopsies). Treatment involves an amphotericin B formulation followed by 
itraconazole (in severe infection), or itraconazole alone.
Histoplasmosis 
Histoplasmosis is a primary systemic mycosis caused by the dimor-
phic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. H. capsulatum var. capsulatum
is endemic to east-central USA (especially the Mississippi and Ohio 
river valleys), parts of Canada, Latin America, the Caribbean, East and 
A
B
Fig. 13.64 Fusarium infection. A patient presented with fever and skin nodules 
after developing neutropenia secondary to haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
and chemotherapy for relapsed leukaemia. Fusarium solani was cultured from skin 
Fusarium in blood culture medium.
South-east Asia, and Africa. It occurs sporadically in Australia and India, 
and is very rare in Europe. H. capsulatum var. duboisii is found in West 
Africa and Madagascar.
The primary reservoir of H. capsulatum is soil enriched by bird and bat 
droppings, in which the fungus remains viable for many years. Infection is 
by inhalation of infected dust. Natural infections are found in bats, which 
represent a secondary reservoir of infection. Histoplasmosis is a specic 
hazard for explorers of caves and people who clear out bird (including 
chicken) roosts.
Pathology 
The organism is inhaled in the form of conidia or hyphal fragments and 
transforms to the yeast phase during infection. Conidia or yeasts are 
phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages and neutrophils, and this may 
be followed by haematogenous dissemination to any organ. Subsequent 
development of a T-lymphocyte response brings the infection under con-
trol, resulting in a latent state in most exposed individuals.
Clinical features 
Disease severity depends on the quantity of spores inhaled and the 
immune status of the host. In most cases, infection is asymptomatic. 
Pulmonary symptoms are the most common presentation, with fever, 
non-productive cough and an inuenza-like illness. Erythema nodosum, 
myalgia and joint pain frequently occur, and chest radiography may 
reveal a pneumonitis with hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Patients with pre-existing lung disease, such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) or emphysema, may develop chronic pulmo-
nary histoplasmosis (CPH). The predominant features of this condition, 
which mimics tuberculosis, are fever, cough, dyspnoea, weight loss and 
night sweats. Radiological ndings include brosis, nodules, cavitation 
and hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Disease caused by H. capsulatum var. duboisii presents more com-
monly with papulonodular and ulcerating lesions of the skin and under-
lying subcutaneous tissue and bone (sometimes referred to as ‘African 
histoplasmosis’). Multiple lesions of the ribs are common and the bones of 
the limbs may be affected. Lung involvement is relatively rare. Radiological 
examination may show rounded foci of bone destruction, sometimes 
associated with abscess formation. Other disease patterns include a 
visceral form with liver and splenic invasion, and disseminated disease.
Acute disseminated histoplasmosis is seen with immunocompromise, 
including HIV infection. Features include fever, pancytopenia, hepat-
osplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and often a papular skin eruption. 
Chronic disseminated disease presents with fever, anorexia and weight 
loss. Cutaneous and mucosal lesions, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplen-
omegaly and meningitis may develop. Emergomyces africanus is a 
dimorphic fungus described in South Africa, which causes a dissemi-
nated histoplasmosis-like illness, mainly associated with HIV infection. 
Histopathologically, yeast forms appear similar to histoplasmosis and 
can be distinguished only by PCR.
Investigations 
Histoplasmosis should be suspected in endemic areas with every undi-
agnosed infection in which there are pulmonary signs, enlarged lymph 
nodes, hepatosplenomegaly or characteristic cutaneous/bony lesions. 
Radiological examination in long-standing cases may show calcied 
lesions in the lungs, spleen or other organs. In the more acute phases 
of the disease, single or multiple soft pulmonary shadows with enlarged 
tracheobronchial nodes are seen on chest X-ray.
Laboratory diagnosis is by direct detection (histopathology or antigen 
detection), culture and serology; although antigen detection is the most 
effective method, it is not widely available. Serology utilises comple-
ment xation testing or immunodiffusion; interpretation is complex and 
requires a specialist. Histoplasma antigen may be detectable in blood 
or urine. Culture is denitive but slow (up to 12 weeks). Histopathology 
may show characteristic intracellular yeasts. Diagnosis of subcutane-
ous or bony infection is mainly by histopathological examination and/
or culture.

[[p386]]
13
Further information    347
Management 
Mild pulmonary disease does not require treatment. However, if pro-
longed, it may be treated with itraconazole. More severe pulmonary dis-
ease is treated with an amphotericin B formulation for 2 weeks, followed 
by itraconazole for 12 weeks, with methylprednisolone added for the 
rst 2 weeks of therapy if there is hypoxia or ARDS. CPH is treated with 
itraconazole oral solution for 12–24 months, and disseminated histoplas-
mosis with an amphotericin B formulation followed by itraconazole. Lipid 
formulations of amphotericin B are preferred but their use is subject to 
availability. In subcutaneous and bone infection, patterns of remission 
and relapse are more common than cure. A solitary bony lesion may 
require local surgical treatment only.
Coccidioidomycosis 
This is a primary systemic mycosis caused by the dimorphic fungi 
Coccidioides immitis and C. posadasii, found in the south-western 
USA and Central and South America. The disease is acquired by inha-
lation of conidia (arthrospores). In 60% of cases it is asymptomatic 
but in the remainder it affects the lungs, lymph nodes and skin. Rarely 
(in approximately 0.5%), it may spread haematogenously to bones, 
adrenal glands, meninges and other organs, particularly in those with 
immunocompromise.
Pulmonary coccidioidomycosis has two forms: primary and progres-
sive. If symptomatic, primary coccidioidomycosis presents with cough, 
fever, chest pain, dyspnoea and (commonly) arthritis and a rash (ery-
thema multiforme). Progressive disease presents with systemic upset 
(e.g. fever, weight loss, anorexia) and features of lobar pneumonia, and 
may resemble tuberculosis.
Coccidioides meningitis (which may be associated with CSF eosino-
phils) is the most severe disease manifestation; it is fatal if untreated and 
requires life-long suppressive therapy with antifungal azoles.
Investigations and management 
Diagnosis is by direct histopathological detection in specimens, culture 
of infected tissue or uids, or antibody detection. IgM may be detected 
after 1–3 weeks of disease by precipitin tests. IgG appears later and is 
detected with the complement xation test. Change in IgG titre may be 
used to monitor clinical progress.
Treatment depends on specic disease manifestations and ranges 
from regular clinical reassessment without antifungal therapy (in mild 
pulmonary, asymptomatic cavitary or single nodular disease) to high-
dose treatment with an antifungal azole (typically uconazole), which 
may be continued indenitely (e.g. in meningitis). Amphotericin B is 
used in diffuse pneumonia, disseminated disease and, intrathecally, 
in meningitis. Posaconazole has been used successfully in refractory 
disease.
Paracoccidioidomycosis 
This is a primary systemic mycosis caused by inhalation of the dimor-
phic fungus Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, which is restricted to South 
America. The disease affects the lungs, mucous membranes (painful 
destructive ulceration in 50% of cases), skin, lymph nodes and adre-
nal glands (hypoadrenalism). Diagnosis is by microscopy and culture of 
lesions, and antibody detection. Oral itraconazole solution (200 mg/day) 
has demonstrated 98% efcacy and is currently the treatment of choice 
(mean duration 6 months). Ketoconazole, uconazole, voriconazole 
and 2–3-year courses of sulphonamides are alternatives. Amphotericin 
B is used in severe or refractory disease, followed by an azole or 
sulphonamide.
Blastomycosis 
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus endemic to restricted 
parts of North America, mainly around the Mississippi and Ohio riv-
ers. Very occasionally, it is reported from Africa. The disease usually 
presents as a chronic pneumonia similar to pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Bones, skin and the genitourinary tract may also be affected. Diagnosis 
is by culture of the organism or identication of the characteristic 
yeast form in a clinical specimen. Antibody detection is rarely helpful. 
Treatment is with amphotericin B (severe disease) or itraconazole.
Further information
Websites 
britishinfection.org British Infection Association; source of general information on 
communicable diseases.
cdc.gov US Centers for Disease Control; source of general information about 
infectious diseases.
tfortravel.nhs.uk Scottish site with valuable information for travellers.
gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england Public Health England; 
information on infectious diseases in the UK.
idsociety.org Infectious Diseases Society of America; source of general 
information relating to infectious diseases and of authoritative practice 
guidelines.
who.int; see especially www.who.int/csr/don/en World Health Organization; 
invaluable links on travel medicine with updates on outbreaks of infections, 
changing resistance patterns and vaccination requirements.

[[p387]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p388]]
Multiple Choice Questions 
 13.1.  A 35-year-old conservationist returns from an extended 
stay in Central Africa. They have had recurrent fevers and 
lymphadenopathy. They failed to respond to a self-administered 
course of malaria treatment and have been increasingly bothered 
with headaches. They have also started to note some memory 
problems. A card agglutination trypanosomiasis test is positive 
for Trypanosoma brucei gambiense and a lymph node aspirate 
identies trypanosomes. A lumbar puncture is performed and 
reveals white blood cells of 0.7 ×109/L and an elevated protein 
and reduced glucose are noted. Recommended treatment for 
this condition is with:
A. Eornithine
B. Melarsoprol
C. Suramin
D. Nirfurtimox and eornithine combination therapy
E. Nirfurtimox
Answer: D.
Nirfurtimox and eornithine combination therapy (NECT) is now the 
preferred therapy for Trypanosoma brucei gambiense stage 2 infection 
causing nervous system disease. It should be used when the CSF exam 
shows ≥0.1 ×109/L white blood cells or where a lumbar puncture is indi-
cated but cannot be performed. Melarsporol was used in the past but 
treatment was associated with signicant mortality while NECT reduces 
the number of injections and side-effects associated with eornithine 
monotherapy which was used before the introduction of NECT. The other 
agents listed are used for other forms of trypanosomiasis.
 13.2.  A 35-year-old geologist returns from a 4-week period working in 
Siberia. Two weeks into his illness he developed fever and myalgia 
since when he has had low grade symptoms until he developed 
severe headache and neck stiffness 2 days ago after returning from 
Siberia. This illness originated approximately after a 3-day eld trip 
when he camped in a wooded area with other colleagues. He has 
had no skin rash. He is admitted to hospital. Initial lumbar puncture 
reveals a raised white cell count, primarily lymphocytes and 
elevated protein. He is placed on ceftriaxone but after 3 days has 
noted no improvement. Initial investigations include negative Lyme 
disease serology and negative Lyme disease PCR. An HIV test is 
also negative. A dengue serology was sent from the accident and 
emergency room and is reportedly positive. Which of the following 
is most likely to establish the diagnosis?
A. Dengue PCR
B. Follow-up HIV serology
C. Rocky Mountain spotted fever serology and PCR
D. Follow-up lumbar puncture for Lyme disease serology in CSF
E. Tick-borne encephalitis virus serology and PCR
Answer: E.
Tick-borne encephalitis is the most likely cause of this syndrome. After 
a tick bite the initial illness occurs after a mean of 7 days while emer-
gence of meningitis or encephalitis can take up to a further 28 days. The 
causative agent is a avivirus and cross-reactivity with other avivirus 
infections, including dengue, is common. Lyme disease is also a con-
sideration but there has been no response to initial therapy. While this 
remains in the differential, serological testing on CSF is not a standard 
test. HIV should always be considered but the initial test was negative, 
although its interpretation relies on knowing when the individual last had 
unprotected sexual intercourse. Dengue and Rocky Mountain Spotted 
Fever infections are not located in the region visited.
 13.3.  A 74-year-old man with obesity and hypertension presents to the 
accident and emergency department with fever, loss of smell and 
respiratory distress in early December 2020. He is up to date on 
all vaccinations as of November 2020. A D-dimer test is elevated. 
A CT pulmonary angiogram is performed which shows multiple 
pulmonary clots. A PCR performed on an upper respiratory 
sample is positive for a virus. Which virus is most likely to explain 
this combination of symptoms?
A. Adenovirus
B. Cytomegalovirus
C. Inuenza A virus
D. Respiratory syncytial virus
E. SARS-CoV-2
Answer: E.
The symptoms are most likely caused by SARS-CoV-2. The development 
of pulmonary emboli has been particularly reported with COVID-19 though it 
can occur during many other infections. Although in some seasons the inu-
enza A virus may evolve such that there is reduced vaccine efcacy this only 
occurs in occasional u seasons. Other respiratory virus infections would be 
less likely in this scenario and cytomegalovirus only would be likely if there 
was a history of very signicant T-cell immunosuppression
 13.4.  A 55-year-old woman is admitted with respiratory distress and 
an oxygen saturation of 88%. She was previously t and well, 
but she works in a care home and recently many of the residents 
have been sick with COVID-19. An antiviral therapeutic that may 
have some activity against the causative SARS-CoV-2 is:
A. Oseltamivir
B. Remdesivir
C. Tenofovir
D. Palivizumab
E. Tocilizumab
Answer: B.
Remdesivir has antiviral activity against several viruses in vitro and some clin-
ical trials show activity against SARS-CoV-2, although at the time of writing it 
is not recommended for clinical use by the World Health Organization (WHO). 
Oseltamivir is used against inuenza A, tenofovir against HIV and hepatitis B 
virus and palivizumab is a monoclonal antibody used against respiratory syncy-
tial virus. Tocilizumab is an anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody that has shown anti-
inammatory activity in COVID-19, but it is not an antiviral. Tenofovir use in 
HIV may be associated with lower rates of hospitalisation with COVID-19 but 
there is no evidence this reects antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2.
 13.5.  A 76-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus is admitted with 
pyelonephritis and acute kidney injury. She has had multiple 
previous infections. Despite initial antimicrobial therapy she remains 
febrile and blood cultures now reveal Klebsiella pneumoniae
resistant to multiple antimicrobials. The laboratory informs you that 
the strain is a KPC-2 carbapenemase-producing microorganism 
with a high meropenem minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). 
She has previously been treated for a multidrug-resistant infection 
with colistin but developed renal impairment and encephalopathy. 
Subject to supportive sensitivities, which agent would you initially 
consider switching this patient onto?
A. Colistin
B. Ceftazidime-avibactam

[[p389]]
C. Fosfomycin
D. Meropenem
E. Tigecycline
Answer: B.
Ceftazidime-avibactam is a beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor com-
bination that can be used against many multidrug-resistant bacteria, 
sometimes in combinations. Although avibactam is not active against 
some carabapenemases, e.g. New Delhi metallo beta-lactamase, it is 
active against many, including the K. pneumoniae-producing beta-
lact amase (KPC-2) enzyme produced here. Although colistin may be 
required, her previous problems suggest other options should be con-
sidered rst. Fosfomycin is primarily reserved for uncomplicated urinary 
tract infections and tigecycline or meropenem, when resistance is not 
associated with high minimum inhibitory concentrations, are reserved for 
combination therapy, often with colistin or aminoglycosides.

[[p390]]
HIV infection and AIDS
14
G Maartens
Clinical examination in HIV disease 350
Epidemiology 352
Global and regional epidemics 352
Modes of transmission 352
Virology and immunology 352
Diagnosis and investigations 354
Diagnosing HIV infection 354
Viral load and CD4 counts 354
Clinical manifestations of HIV 355
Presenting problems in HIV infection 355
Lymphadenopathy 356
Weight loss 356
Fever 356
Mucocutaneous disease 357
Gastrointestinal disease 359
Hepatobiliary disease 360
Respiratory disease 360
Nervous system and eye disease 362
Rheumatological disease 364
Haematological abnormalities 364
Renal disease 364
Cardiac disease 365
HIV-related cancers 365
Prevention of opportunistic infections 365
Preventing exposure 365
Chemoprophylaxis 365
Immunisation 366
Antiretroviral therapy 366
ART complications 367
ART in special situations 367
Prevention of HIV 368

[[p391]]
350    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
Clinical examination in HIV disease
Inset (oral hairy leucoplakia) Courtesy of Audiovisual Department, St Mary's Hospital, London.
Observation
Oropharynx
Mucous membranes
Neck
Lymph node enlargement
  Tuberculosis
  Lymphoma
  Kaposi’s sarcoma
  Persistent generalised
  lymphadenopathy
Parotidomegaly
Eyes
Retina
Toxoplasmosis
  HIV retinopathy
  Progressive outer retinal
  necrosis
 Weight loss
 Tachypnoea
 Fevers and sweats 
Skin
Abdomen
Hepatosplenomegaly
Chest
Lungs
  Pleural effusion
   Tuberculosis
   Kaposi’s sarcoma
   Parapneumonic
Central nervous system
Higher mental function
  HIV dementia
  Progressive multifocal
  leucoencephalopathy
Focal signs
Toxoplasmosis
  Primary CNS lymphoma
Neck stiffness
  Cryptococcal meningitis
  Tuberculous meningitis
  Pneumococcal meningitis
Anogenital region
Rashes
Legs
Peripheral nerve examination
  Spastic paraparesis
  Peripheral neuropathy
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Molluscum contagiosum
Gingivitis/periodontitis
Cervical lymphadenopathy
Oropharyngeal candidiasis
Teeth
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Cytomegalovirus retinitis
Anal cancer
Papular pruritic eruption
Herpes zoster
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Herpes simplex
Aphthous ulcers
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Condylomas
Herpes simplex
Ulcers
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1

[[p392]]
Clinical examination in HIV disease    351
14
HIV clinical staging classications
World Health Organization (WHO) clinical stage (used in low- and middle-
income countries)
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) clinical categories (used in high-income 
countries)
Stage 1
Category A
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy
Primary HIV infection
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy
Stage 2
Category B
Unexplained moderate weight loss (< 10% of body weight)
Recurrent upper respiratory tract infections
Herpes zoster
Angular cheilitis
Recurrent oral ulceration
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Fungal nail infections
Bacillary angiomatosis
Candidiasis, oropharyngeal (thrush)
Candidiasis, vulvovaginal; persistent, frequent or poorly responsive to therapy
Cervical dysplasia (moderate or severe)/cervical carcinoma in situ
Constitutional symptoms, such as fever (38.5°C) or diarrhoea lasting > 1 month
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Herpes zoster, involving two distinct episodes or more than one dermatome
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Listeriosis
Pelvic inammatory disease, particularly if complicated by tubo-ovarian abscess
Peripheral neuropathy
Stage 3
Unexplained severe weight loss (> 10% of body weight)
Unexplained chronic diarrhoea for > 1 month
Unexplained persistent fever (> 37.5°C for > 1 month)
Persistent oral candidiasis
Oral hairy leucoplakia
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Severe bacterial infections
Acute necrotising ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis or periodontitis
Unexplained anaemia (< 80 g/L), neutropenia (< 0.5 ×109/L) and/or chronic 
thrombocytopenia (< 50 × 109/L)
Stage 4
Category C
Candidiasis of oesophagus, trachea, bronchi or lungs
Cervical carcinoma – invasive
Cryptococcosis – extrapulmonary
Cryptosporidiosis, chronic (> 1 month)
Cytomegalovirus disease (outside liver, spleen and nodes)
Herpes simplex chronic (> 1 month) ulcers or visceral
HIV encephalopathy
HIV wasting syndrome
Cystoisosporiasis (formerly known as isosporiasis), chronic (> 1 month)
Kaposi's sarcoma
Lymphoma (cerebral or B-cell non-Hodgkin)
Mycobacterial infection, non-tuberculous, extrapulmonary or disseminated
Mycosis – disseminated endemic (e.g. coccidioidomycosis, talaromycosis (formerly penicilliosis), histoplasmosis)
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Pneumonia, recurrent bacterial
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Toxoplasmosis – cerebral
Tuberculosis – extrapulmonary (CDC includes pulmonary)
Sepsis, recurrent (including non-typhoidal Salmonella) (CDC only includes Salmonella)
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy*
Symptomatic HIV-associated cardiomyopathy*
Leishmaniasis, atypical disseminated*
*These conditions are in WHO stage 4 but not in CDC category C.

[[p393]]
352    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
Epidemiology
The acquired immunodeciency syndrome (AIDS) was rst recognised 
in 1981, although the earliest documented case of HIV infection has 
been traced to a blood sample from the Democratic Republic of Congo 
in 1959. AIDS is caused by the human immunodeciency virus (HIV), 
which progressively impairs cellular immunity. HIV is a zoonotic infec-
tion with simian immunodeciency viruses (SIV) from African primates, 
probably rst infecting local hunters. SIVs do not cause disease in their 
natural primate hosts. HIV-1 was transmitted from chimpanzees and 
HIV-2 from sooty mangabey monkeys. HIV-1 is the cause of the global 
HIV pandemic, while HIV-2, which causes a similar illness to HIV-1 but 
progresses more slowly and is less transmissible, is restricted mainly to 
western Africa. It has been estimated that both HIV-1 and HIV-2 rst 
infected humans about 100 years ago. HIV-2 will not be discussed fur-
ther in this chapter.
There are three groups of HIV-1, representing three separate trans-
mission events from chimpanzees: M (‘major’, worldwide distribution), 
O (‘outlier’) and N (‘non-major and non-outlier’). Groups O and N are 
restricted to West Africa. Group M consists of nine subtypes: A–D, F–H, J 
and K, but recombinants of subtypes occur frequently. Globally, subtype 
C (which predominates in sub-Saharan Africa and India) accounts for 
half of infections and appears to be more readily transmitted. Subtype B 
predominates in Western Europe, the Americas and Australia. In Europe, 
the prevalence of non-B subtypes is increasing because of migration. 
Subtypes A and D are associated with slower and faster disease pro-
gression, respectively.
Global and regional epidemics
In 2019 it was estimated that there were 38 million people living with 
HIV (PLWH), 1.7 million new infections and 690000 AIDS-related deaths. 
The global epidemiology of HIV has been changed by expanding access 
to combination antiretroviral therapy (ART), which reached 25.4 million 
people in 2019: the annual number of AIDS-related deaths has more 
than halved since the peak in 2004, the number of new infections has 
decreased by 40% since the peak in 1999, and the number of PLWH 
has increased. Regions have marked differences in HIV prevalence, inci-
dence and dominant modes of transmission (Box 14.1). HIV has had a 
devastating impact in sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in southern Africa, 
where average life expectancy of the general population fell to below 40 
years before the introduction of ART.
Modes of transmission
HIV is transmitted by sexual contact, by exposure to blood (e.g. injec-
tion drug use, occupational exposure in health-care workers) and blood 
products, or to infants of HIV-infected mothers, who may be infected 
in utero (this is uncommon), perinatally or via breastfeeding. The risk of 
contracting HIV after exposure to infected body uid is dependent on the 
integrity of the exposed site, the type and volume of uid, and the level 
of viraemia in the source person. The approximate transmission risk after 
exposure is given in Box 14.2. Factors that increase the risk of transmis-
sion are listed in Box 14.3
A high proportion of patients with haemophilia in high-income coun-
tries were infected through contaminated blood products before HIV 
antibody screening was adopted in 1985. Routine screening of blood 
and blood products for HIV infection has virtually eliminated this mode 
of transmission. However, because of the lack of adequate screening 
facilities in resource-poor countries, it has been estimated that 5%–10% 
of blood transfusions globally are with HIV-infected blood.
Virology and immunology
HIV is an enveloped ribonucleic acid (RNA) retrovirus from the lentivirus 
family. After mucosal exposure, HIV is transported via dendritic cells to 
the lymph nodes, where infection becomes established. This is followed 
by viraemia and dissemination to lymphoid organs, which are the main 
sites of viral replication.
Each mature virion has a lipid membrane lined by a matrix pro-
tein that is studded with glycoprotein (gp) 120 and gp41 spikes. 
The inner cone-shaped protein core (p24) houses two copies of the 
single-stranded RNA genome and viral enzymes. The HIV genome 
14.1  Regional HIV prevalence in 2019, incidence trend and dominant mode of transmission
Region
People living with HIV (millions)
HIV incidence trend (2010–2019)
Dominant transmission
Sub-Saharan Africa
25.6
Decreasing
Heterosexual
Asia and Pacic
5.8
Decreasing
MSM, heterosexual
Latin America and Caribbean
2.4
Increasing
MSM, heterosexual
Western and Central Europe, and 
North America
2.2
Stable
MSM, IDU
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
1.7
Increasing
IDU, MSM
Middle East and North Africa
0.24
Increasing
IDU, MSM
(IDU = injection drug-users; MSM = men who have sex with men)
14.2  Risk of HIV transmission after single exposure to an HIV-
infected source*
HIV exposure
Approximate risk
Sexual
Vaginal intercourse: female to male
Vaginal intercourse: male to female
Anal intercourse: insertive
Anal intercourse: receptive
Oral intercourse: insertive
Oral intercourse: receptive
0.05%
0.1%
0.1%
1.4%
< 0.01%
< 0.01%
Blood exposure
Blood transfusion
Intravenous drug-users sharing needles
Percutaneous needlestick injury
Mucous membrane splash
90%
0.67%
0.3%
0.09%
Mother to child
Vaginal delivery
Breastfeeding (per month)
15%
0.5%
*These are approximate estimates and assume that the source person is not being treated with 
ART.

[[p394]]
Virology and immunology    353
14
14.3 Factors increasing the risk of transmission of HIV
Common to all transmission categories
 High viral load
Sexual transmission
 STIs, especially genital ulcers
 Cervical ectopy
 Rectal or vaginal lacerations
 Menstruation
 Uncircumcised male partner
 Receptive anal intercourse
 Sexual activity with recreational drug 
use (‘chemsex’)
Injection drug use transmission
 Sharing equipment
 Linked commercial sex
 Intravenous use
 Concomitant cocaine use
 Incarceration
Occupational transmission
 Deep injury
 Visible blood on device
 Needle was in a blood vessel
Vertical transmission
 Prolonged rupture of membranes
 Older gestational age
(STIs = sexually transmitted infections)
consists of three characteristic retroviral genes – gag (encodes a poly-
protein that is processed into structural proteins, including p24), pol
(codes for the enzymes reverse transcriptase, integrase and protease) 
and env (codes for envelope proteins gp120 and gp41) – as well as six 
regulatory genes.
HIV infects cells bearing the CD4 receptor; these are T-helper lym-
phocytes, monocyte–macrophages, dendritic cells, and microglial cells 
in the central nervous system (CNS). Entry into the cell commences 
with binding of gp120 to the CD4 receptor (Fig. 14.1), which results 
in a conformational change in gp120 that permits binding to one of 
two chemokine co-receptors (CXCR4 or CCR5). The chemokine co- 
receptor CCR5 is utilised during initial infection, but subsequently the 
virus may adapt to use CXCR4. Individuals who are homozygous for the 
CCR5 delta 32 mutation do not express CCR5 on CD4 cells and are 
immune to HIV infection. Chemokine co-receptor binding is followed by 
membrane fusion and cellular entry involving gp41. After penetrating the 
cell and uncoating, a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) copy is transcribed 
from the RNA genome by the reverse transcriptase enzyme, which is 
carried by the infecting virion. Reverse transcription is an error-prone 
process and multiple mutations arise with ongoing replication, which 
results in considerable viral genetic heterogeneity. Viral DNA is trans-
ported into the nucleus and integrated within the host cell genome by 
the integrase enzyme. Integrated virus is known as proviral DNA and 
persists for the life of the cell. Cells infected with proviral HIV DNA pro-
duce new virions only if they undergo cellular activation, resulting in the 
transcription of viral messenger RNA (mRNA) copies, which are then 
translated into viral peptide chains. The precursor polyproteins are then 
cleaved by the viral protease enzyme to form new viral structural pro-
teins and enzymes that migrate to the cell surface and are assembled 
using the host cellular apparatus to produce infectious viral particles; 
these bud from the cell surface, incorporating the host cell membrane 
into the viral envelope. The mature virion then infects other CD4 cells 
and the process is repeated. CD4 lymphocytes that are replicating HIV 
have a short survival time of about 1 day. In asymptomatic PLWH it has 
Proviral DNA
Cell nucleus
Integration
Double-stranded
DNA
Fusion
Fusion
inhibitors
Binding
to co-receptor
CCR5 or CXCR4
Attachment
to CD4 receptor
Maturation
Viral
release
Reverse
transcriptase
inhibitors
Chemokine
receptor
antagonist
Chemokine co-receptor
(CCR5 or CXCR4)
Genomic
RNA
Reverse
transcription
of viral RNA
genome
Reverse
transcription
Integrase
inhibitors
Transcription
Translation
Viral
proteins
Viral mRNA
Protease
inhibitors
Cleavage
of polypeptides
and assembly
Fig. 14.1 Life cycle of HIV. Red arrows indicate sites of action of antiretroviral drugs.

[[p395]]
354    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
been estimated that more than 1010 virions are produced and 109 CD4 
lymphocytes destroyed each day. The CD4 lymphocytes are destroyed 
primarily by the host immune response rather than by cytopathic effects 
of HIV.
A small population of T-helper lymphocytes enter a post-integration 
latent phase. Latently infected cells are important as sanctuary sites from 
antiretroviral drugs, which act only on replicating virus. Current ART is 
unable to eradicate HIV infection due to the persistence of proviral DNA 
in long-lived latent CD4 cells.
The host immune response to HIV infection is both humoral, with the 
development of antibodies to a wide range of antigens, and cellular, with a 
dramatic expansion of HIV-specic CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes, resulting 
in a CD8 lymphocytosis and reversal of the usual CD4:CD8 ratio. CD8 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill activated CD4 cells that are replicating HIV, 
but not latently infected CD4 cells. HIV evades destruction despite this 
vigorous immune response, in part because the highly conserved regions 
of gp120 and gp41 that are necessary for viral attachment and entry are 
covered by highly variable glycoprotein loops that change over time as a 
result of mutations selected for by the immune response. The initial peak of 
viraemia in primary infection settles to a plateau phase of persistent chronic 
viraemia. With time, there is gradual attrition of the T-helper lymphocyte 
population and, as these cells are pivotal in orchestrating the immune 
response, the patient becomes susceptible to opportunistic diseases. 
The predominant opportunist infections in PLWH are the consequences 
of impaired cell-mediated immunity (e.g. mycobacteria, herpesviruses). 
However, there is also a B-lymphocyte defect with impaired antibody 
production to new antigens and dysregulated antibody production, with 
a polyclonal increase in gamma globulins, resulting in an increased risk of 
infection with encapsulated bacteria, notably Streptococcus pneumoniae
The immune activation in response to HIV infection does not com-
pletely resolve on effective ART. This residual inammatory state has 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of several non-communicable dis-
eases that occur at a higher rate in PLWH on ART than in the general 
population; e.g. ischaemic heart disease, thrombotic strokes, chronic 
kidney disease and non-AIDS cancers.
Diagnosis and investigations
Diagnosing HIV infection
Globally, the trend is towards universal HIV testing, rather than test-
ing only those patients at high risk or those with manifestations of HIV 
infection. However, in the UK, testing is still targeted to high-risk groups 
(Box14.4). HIV is diagnosed by detecting host antibodies either with 
rapid point-of-care tests or in the laboratory, where enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay (ELISA) tests are usually done. Most tests detect anti-
bodies to both HIV-1 and HIV-2. Screening tests often include an assay 
for p24 antigen in addition to antibodies, in order to detect patients with 
primary infection before the antibody response occurs. Two positive 
antibody tests from two different immunoassays are sufcient to conrm 
infection. Nucleic acid amplication tests (usually polymerase chain reac-
tion, PCR) to detect HIV RNA are used to diagnose infections in infants 
of HIV-positive mothers, who carry maternal antibodies to HIV for up to 
15 months irrespective of whether they are HIV-infected, and to diagnose 
primary infection before antibodies have developed. PCR is more sensi-
tive than p24 antigen detection for diagnosing primary infection.
The purpose of HIV testing is not simply to identify infected individuals, 
but also to educate people about prevention and transmission of the 
virus. Pre- and post-test discussions in the client’s home language are 
essential (Box 14.5). There are major advantages to using rapid point-of-
care HIV tests as pre- and post-test discussions can be held at the same 
visit and ART can be initiated if the HIV infection is conrmed.
A number of baseline investigations should be done at the initial med-
ical evaluation (Box 14.6). The extent of these investigations will depend 
on the resources available.
14.4 Patients who should be offered and recommended HIV 
testing in the UK
Patients accessing specialist sexual health services (including genitourinary 
medicine)
 All patients who attend for testing or treatment
Patients accessing primary care (including emergency care) and secondary 
care
 All patients attending their rst appointment at:
Drug dependency programmes
Pregnancy termination services
Services treating hepatitis B or C, lymphoma or tuberculosis
 All patients who:
Have symptoms that may indicate HIV or for which HIV is part of the 
differential diagnosis
Are from a country or group with high rate of HIV infection
Are male, or trans women, who have sex with men
Report sexual contact with someone from a country with a high rate  
of HIV infection
Disclose high-risk sexual practices, e.g. ‘chemsex’
Are diagnosed with, or request testing for, a sexually transmitted infection
Report a history of injecting drug use
Are the sexual partners of people known to be HIV-positive or at high risk 
of HIV
 In areas of high1 and extremely high2 prevalence:
All patients not previously diagnosed with HIV who register with a general 
practice or undergo blood testing for any reason
 In areas of extremely high prevalence2
All emergency care and secondary care patients not previously diagnosed 
with HIV
At each general practice consultation consider offering opportunistic HIV 
testing
Prison inmates
 All new inmates not previously diagnosed with HIV
Adapted from National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. HIV testing: increasing uptake 
among people who may have undiagnosed HIV. NICE guideline NG60 (Dec. 2016).
Viral load and CD4 counts
CD4 counts
CD4 lymphocyte counts are usually determined by ow cytometry but 
cheaper methods have been developed for low-income countries. The 
CD4 count is the most clinically useful laboratory indicator of the degree 
of immune suppression; it is used, together with clinical staging, in deci-
sions to start prophylaxis against opportunistic infections, and is of great 
value in the differential diagnosis of clinical problems.
The CD4 count varies by up to 20% from day to day and is transiently 
reduced by intercurrent infections. The normal CD4 count is over 500 
cells/mm3. The rate of decline in CD4 count is highly variable. People 
with CD4 counts between 200 and 500 cells/mm3 have a low risk of 
developing major opportunistic infections. Morbidity due to inamma-
tory dermatoses, herpes zoster, oral candidiasis, tuberculosis, bacterial 
pneumonia and HIV-related immune disorders (e.g. immune thrombocy-
topenia) becomes increasingly common as CD4 counts decline. Once 
the count is below 200 cells/mm3, there is severe immune suppression 
and a high risk of AIDS-dening conditions. It is important to note that 
patients can be asymptomatic despite very low CD4 counts and that 
major opportunistic diseases occasionally present with high CD4 counts.
Viral load
The level of viraemia is measured by quantitative PCR of HIV RNA, 
known as the viral load. Determining the viral load is crucial for monitoring 
responses to ART (p. 366). People with high viral loads (e.g. > 100 000 
1Prevalence of diagnosed HIV is 2–5 per 1000 people aged 15–59. 
2Prevalence of diagnosed HIV is ≥ 5 per 1000 people aged 15–59.

[[p396]]
Presenting problems in HIV infection    355
14
14.5 HIV pre- and post-test discussions*
Pre-test discussion
 Discuss meaning of positive and negative test results
 Realise importance of maintaining condentiality
 Identify person to whom positive result could be disclosed
 Explore knowledge and explain natural history of HIV
 Discuss transmission and risk reduction
 Assess coping strategy
 Explain test procedure
 Obtain informed consent
Post-test discussion
Test result negative
 Discuss transmission and need for behaviour modication
 Advise second test 3 months after last exposure
Test result positive
 Explain meaning of result
 Organise medical follow-up
 Assess coping strategy
 Stress importance of disclosure
 Explain value of antiretroviral therapy
 Provide written information and useful Internet resources
 Discuss condentiality issues
 Organise emotional and practical support (names/phone numbers)
 Facilitate notication of sexual partners
14.6 Baseline investigations
 CD4 count
 Viral load
 Hepatitis B surface antigen
 Hepatitis C antibody
 Liver function tests
 Full blood count
 Urinalysis, serum creatinine
 Syphilis serology
 Cervical smear in women
  Serum cryptococcal antigen (if CD4 
< 100)
 Tuberculin skin test or interferon 
gamma release assay
 Sexually transmitted infection screen
copies/mL) experience more rapid declines in CD4 count, while those 
with low viral loads (< 1000 copies/mL) usually have slow or even no 
decline in CD4 counts. Viral loads are variable; only changes in viral load 
of more than 0.5 log10 copies/mL are considered clinically signicant.
Clinical manifestations of HIV
Clinical staging of patients should be done at the initial medical exam-
ination, as it provides prognostic information and is a key criterion for 
initiating prophylaxis against opportunistic infections. Two clinical staging 
systems are used internationally (p. 351). In both, patients are staged 
according to the most severe manifestation and do not improve their 
classication. For example, a patient who is asymptomatic following a 
major opportunistic disease (AIDS) remains at stage 4 or category C 
of the WHO and CDC systems respectively, and never reverts to ear-
lier stages. Finally, patients do not always progress steadily through all 
stages and may present with AIDS, having been asymptomatic.
Primary HIV infection
Primary infection is symptomatic in more than 50% of cases but the 
diagnosis is often missed. The incubation period is usually 2–4 weeks 
after exposure. The duration of symptoms is variable but is seldom 
longer than 2 weeks. The clinical manifestations (Box 14.7) resem-
ble those of infectious mononucleosis/glandular fever (p. 285), but 
the presence of maculopapular rash or mucosal ulceration strongly 
suggests primary HIV infection rather than the other viral causes of 
infectious mononucleosis, in which rashes generally occur only if ami-
nopenicillins are given. Atypical lymphocytosis occurs less frequently 
than in Epstein–Barr (EBV) infection. Transient lymphopenia, including 
CD4 lymphocytes, is found in most cases (Fig. 14.2), which may result 
in opportunistic infections, notably oropharyngeal candidiasis. Major 
opportunistic infections like Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (usu-
ally referred to as Pneumocystis pneumonia, PCP) may rarely occur. 
Thrombocytopenia and moderate elevation of liver enzymes are com-
monly present. The differential diagnosis of primary HIV includes acute 
EBV, primary cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, rubella, primary toxo-
plasmosis and secondary syphilis.
Early diagnosis is made by detecting HIV RNA by PCR or p24 anti-
genaemia. The appearance of specic anti-HIV antibodies in serum 
(seroconversion) occurs 2–12 weeks after the development of symp-
toms. The window period, during which antibody tests may be false 
negative, is prolonged when post-exposure prophylaxis has been used.
Asymptomatic infection
A prolonged period of clinical latency follows primary infection, during 
which infected individuals are asymptomatic. Persistent generalised 
lymphadenopathy with nodes typically <  2 cm diameter is a common 
nding. Eventually, the lymph nodes regress, with destruction of node 
architecture as disease advances.
Viraemia peaks during primary infection and then drops as the immune 
response develops, to reach a plateau about 3 months later. The level of 
viraemia post seroconversion is a predictor of the rate of decline in CD4 
counts, which is highly variable and explained in part by genetic factors 
affecting the immune response. The median time from infection to the 
development of AIDS in adults is about 9 years (see Fig. 14.2). A small 
proportion of untreated PLWH are long-term non-progressors, with CD4 
counts remaining in the reference range for 10 years or more. Some 
long-term non-progressors have undetectable viral loads and are known 
as ‘elite controllers’.
Minor HIV-associated disorders
A wide range of disorders indicating some impairment of cellular immu-
nity occur in most patients before they develop AIDS (CDC category B 
or WHO stages 2 and 3). Careful examination of the mouth is important 
when patients are being followed up, as oral candidiasis and oral hairy 
leucoplakia are common conditions that require initiation of prophylaxis 
against opportunistic infections, irrespective of the CD4 count.
Acquired immunodeciency syndrome
AIDS is dened by the development of specied opportunistic infections, 
cancers and severe manifestations of HIV itself (CDC category C or WHO 
stage 4).
Presenting problems in HIV infection
HIV itself is associated with a wide variety of clinical manifestations, and 
opportunistic diseases add many more. All body systems can be affected 
by HIV. The CD4 count is useful in differential diagnosis (Box14.8). For 
example, in a patient with a pulmonary inltrate and a CD4 count of 350 
cells/mm3, pulmonary tuberculosis is a likely diagnosis and PCP is very 
unlikely, but if the patient's CD4 count is 50 cells/mm3, both PCP and 
tuberculosis are likely.
14.7 Clinical features of primary infection
 Fever
 Maculopapular rash
 Pharyngitis
 Lymphadenopathy
 Myalgia/arthralgia
 Diarrhoea
 Headache
 Oral and genital ulceration
 Meningo-encephalitis
 Bell's palsy
*Current UK guidance is that lengthy pre-test discussion is not required; the basic requirement 
is that individuals should be made aware that they will be tested for HIV and told how they will 
receive their result.

[[p397]]
356    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
Globally, tuberculosis is the most common cause of morbidity and 
mortality in PLWH. Tuberculosis should be considered in the differen-
tial diagnosis of most presenting problems in patients from communities 
where tuberculosis is common.
Lymphadenopathy
Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy due to HIV is described above 
under asymptomatic infection. Lymphadenopathy may also be due to 
malignancy (Kaposi's sarcoma or lymphoma) or infections, especially 
tuberculosis, which is an extremely common cause in low- and mid-
dle-income countries. Tuberculous lymph nodes are often matted and 
may become uctuant due to extensive caseous necrosis; inexperienced 
clinicians often perform incision and drainage inappropriately when aspi-
ration is all that is required. Symmetrical generalised lymphadenopathy 
may occur in disseminated tuberculosis. Lymphoma typically presents 
with large, rm, asymmetric nodes. Rapid enlargement of a node, asym-
metric enlargement or lymphadenopathy associated with constitutional 
symptoms (even if the nodes are symmetrical) warrants further investiga-
tion. Lymph node needle aspiration should be performed. One portion of 
the sample should be sent for Mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR, which 
has about a 70% yield in tuberculosis (or AAFB microscopy if PCR is 
unavailable). The other portion should be xed on a slide and sent for 
cytology. If caseous liquid is aspirated, this should be sent for mycobac-
terial culture or PCR. If needle aspiration is unhelpful, or if lymphoma or 
Kaposi's sarcoma is suspected, excision biopsy should be performed.
Weight loss
Weight loss is a common nding in advanced HIV infection. The HIV 
wasting syndrome is an AIDS-dening condition and is dened as weight 
loss of more than 10% of body weight, plus either unexplained chronic 
diarrhoea (lasting over 1 month) or chronic weakness and unexplained 
prolonged fever (lasting over 1 month). This is a diagnosis of exclusion. 
If the weight loss is rapid (more than 1 kg a month), then major oppor-
tunistic infections or cancers become more likely. Painful oral conditions 
and nausea from drugs contribute by limiting intake. Depression is com-
mon and can cause signicant weight loss. Measurement of C-reactive 
protein is helpful in the work-up of weight loss, as this is markedly raised 
with most opportunistic diseases but not with HIV itself. Erythrocyte sed-
imentation rate (ESR) is elevated by HIV infection and is therefore not 
useful as a screen for opportunistic diseases. The presence of fever or 
diarrhoea is helpful in the differential diagnosis of weight loss (Fig. 14.3).
Fever
Fever is a common presenting feature. Common causes of prolonged 
fever with weight loss are listed in Fig. 14.3. Non-typhoid Salmonella
bacteraemia, which commonly presents with fever in low-income 
countries, is accompanied by diarrhoea in only about 50% of patients. 
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) in HIV infection is dened as temper-
ature over 38°C with no cause found after 4 weeks in outpatients or 3 
days in inpatients, and initial investigations such as chest X-rays, uri-
nalysis and blood cultures have failed to identify the cause. HIV itself 
can present with prolonged fever but this is a diagnosis of exclusion, 
as a treatable cause will be found in most patients. Abdominal imag-
ing, preferably by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), should be requested. Abdominal nodes (especially if they 
are hypodense in the centre) or splenic microabscesses strongly sug-
gest tuberculosis. Mycobacterial blood cultures, which can also detect 
fungi, should be performed. Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy 
are helpful if the full blood count shows cytopenias. Liver biopsy may 
be helpful if the liver enzymes are elevated but is invasive and seldom 
necessary. Mycobacterial and fungal stains and cultures should be done 
on all biopsies. Chest X-rays should be repeated after about a week, 
1200
Clinical
latency
Constitutional
symptoms
Opportunistic
diseases
Death
Primary
infection
Acute HIV syndrome
Wide dissemination of virus
Seeding of lymphoid organs
107
106
HIV RNA copies per mL plasma
105
104
103
102
CD4+ T–lymphocyte count (cells/mm3)
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9 10
4
11
3
6
Weeks
CD4
Viral load
Years
9 12
Fig. 14.2 Virological and immunological progression of untreated HIV infection.
14.8 CD4 count and risk of common HIV-associated diseases
< 500 cells/mm3
 Tuberculosis
 Bacterial pneumonia
 Herpes zoster
 Oropharyngeal candidiasis
 Non-typhoid salmonellosis
 Kaposi's sarcoma
 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
 HIV-associated idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura
< 200 cells/mm3
 Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
 Chronic herpes simplex ulcers
 Oesophageal candidiasis
 Cystoisospora belli (syn. Isospora 
belli) diarrhoea
 HIV wasting syndrome
 HIV-associated dementia
 Peripheral neuropathy
 Endemic mycoses
< 100 cells/mm
 Cerebral toxoplasmosis
 Cryptococcal meningitis
 Cryptosporidiosis and 
microsporidiosis
 Primary CNS lymphoma
 Cytomegalovirus
 Disseminated Mycobacterium avium
complex (MAC)
 Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy

[[p398]]
Presenting problems in HIV infection    357
14
as micronodular or interstitial inltrates may have become apparent (see 
p. 362 for differential diagnosis).
Tuberculosis is by far the most common cause of PUO in low- and 
middle-income countries, and in these settings a trial of empirical ther-
apy is warranted after cultures have been sent. In high-income coun-
tries, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) infection is an 
important cause of PUO, often also presenting with diarrhoea and sple-
nomegaly. Disseminated endemic mycoses (e.g. histoplasmosis, coccid-
ioidomycosis, talaromycosis) present with PUO, often with papular skin 
eruptions or mucosal ulcerations (Fig. 14.4). Skin biopsy for histology 
and fungal culture is often diagnostic.
Mucocutaneous disease
The skin and mouth must be carefully examined, as mucocutaneous 
manifestations are extremely common in advanced HIV infection and 
many prognostically important conditions can be diagnosed by simple 
inspection. The differential diagnosis of dermatological conditions is sim-
plied by categorising disorders according to the lesion type (Box 14.9). 
Some common dermatological diseases, notably psoriasis, are exacer-
bated by HIV. The risk of many drug rashes is increased in PLWH. Skin 
biopsy should be taken, and sent for histology and culture for mycobac-
teria and fungi, in patients with papular rashes or if there are constitu-
tional symptoms coinciding with the development of the rash.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is common in HIV. The severity increases as the 
CD4 count falls. It presents as scaly red patches, typically in the nasola-
bial folds and in hairy areas. It is associated with an increased presence 
of Malassezia spp. (dimorphic yeastlike fungi) but the pathogenesis is 
unknown. It responds well to a combined topical antifungal and gluco-
corticoid. Selenium sulphide shampoo is helpful for scalp involvement.
Herpes simplex infections
Recurrences of herpes simplex infection are common and primarily affect 
the nasolabial and anogenital areas (Fig. 14.5). As immune suppres-
sion worsens, the ulcers take longer to heal and become more exten-
sive. Ulcers that persist for more than 4 weeks are AIDS-dening. The 
diagnosis is based on clinical appearance and PCR of vesicle uid or 
from ulcer swabs, although PCR may need to be reserved to resolve 
atypical presentations if it is not readily available. Response to a course 
of antiviral drug such as aciclovir is good but relapses are common. 
Frequent relapses that persist despite ART should be treated with aci-
clovir 400 mg twice daily long term (Box 14.10).
Herpes zoster
Typically presents with a pathognomonic vesicular rash on an erythe-
matous base in a dermatomal distribution (p. 282). The median CD4 
count at the rst episode of zoster is 350 cells/mm3. In patients with 
Loss of weight
Fever
Diarrhoea
Yes
No
Yes
No
Tuberculosis
MAC
Disseminated mycoses
NHL
CMV
HIV wasting
Depression
HIV wasting
Painful oral/oesophageal disorder
Lipoatrophy (d4T and AZT)
Symptomatic hyperlactataemia
GI side-effects of ART
Small bowel
(large-volume,
watery)
Large bowel
(small-volume, blood/mucus,
tenesmus)
Cryptosporidiosis
Microsporidiosis
Cystoisosporiasis
HIV enteropathy
PI-induced
MAC
CMV
Salmonella
Shigella
Campylobacter
Clostridioides difficile
Fig. 14.3 Presentation and differential diagnosis of weight loss. (ART = antiretroviral therapy; AZT = zidovudine; CMV = cytomegalovirus; d4T = stavudine; KS =
Kaposi’s sarcoma; MAC = Mycobacterium avium complex; NHL = non-Hodgkin lymphoma; PI = protease inhibitor)
Fig. 14.4 Disseminated histoplasmosis presenting with diffuse papular rash 
and fever. Skin biopsy was diagnostic. Courtesy of Professor Graeme Meintjes.

[[p399]]
358    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
advanced HIV disease, the rash may be multidermatomal and recurrent 
episodes may occur. Disseminated zoster is rare. In PLWH, zoster is 
generally more extensive, has a longer duration and the risk of devel-
oping post-herpetic neuralgia is increased. High doses of aciclovir or its 
congeners should be given for all cases with active disease, irrespective 
of the time since the onset of the rash. Post-herpetic neuralgia is dif-
cult to manage. Analgesic adjuvants, e.g. amitriptyline and pregabalin, 
should be commenced in all patients with prolonged pain. Topical cap-
saicin has modest efcacy.
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) is a spindle-cell tumour of lympho-endothelial ori-
gin. All forms of KS are due to sexually transmitted human herpesvirus 
8, also known as KS-associated herpesvirus. KS occurs in four patterns:
 classic KS: rare, indolent and restricted largely to older men of 
Mediterranean or Jewish origin
 endemic KS: occurs in sub-Saharan Africa, is more aggressive, 
presents at earlier ages than classic KS, and affects men more than 
women
 KS in patients on immunosuppressant drugs: usually transplant 
recipients, who experience disseminated disease
 AIDS-associated KS
In Africa, the male-to-female ratio of AIDS-associated KS is much 
lower than is seen with endemic KS, but men are still more affected than 
women, despite the fact that the seroprevalence of human herpesvirus 8 
is the same in both sexes.
AIDS-associated KS is always a multicentric disease. Early mucocuta-
neous lesions are macular and may be difcult to diagnose. Subsequently, 
lesions become papular or nodular, and may ulcerate. KS lesions typi-
cally have a red–purple colour (Fig. 14.6) but may become hyperpig-
mented, especially in dark-skinned patients. As the disease progresses, 
the skin lesions become more numerous and larger. Lymphoedema is 
common, as lymphatic vessels are inltrated. KS also commonly spreads 
to lymph nodes and viscerally, especially to the lungs and gastrointestinal 
tract. Visceral disease occasionally occurs in the absence of mucocuta-
neous involvement. B symptoms of fever, night sweats and weight loss 
may occur.
KS may respond to ART. Chemotherapy should be reserved for those 
patients who fail to respond to ART, or be given together with ART if there 
are poor prognostic features such as visceral involvement, oedema, 
ulcerated lesions and B symptoms.
Bacillary angiomatosis
Bacillary angiomatosis is a bacterial infection caused by Bartonella 
henselae or B. quintana. Skin lesions range from solitary supercial 
red–purple lesions resembling KS or pyogenic granuloma, to multiple 
subcutaneous nodules or plaques. Lesions are painful and may bleed 
or ulcerate. The infection may become disseminated with fevers, lym-
phadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Diagnosis is made by biopsy of 
a lesion and Warthin–Starry silver staining, which reveals aggregates of 
bacilli. Treatment with doxycycline or azithromycin is effective.
Papular pruritic eruption
Papular pruritic eruption (‘itchy red bump disease’) is an intensely itchy, 
symmetrical rash affecting the trunk and extremities. It is thought to be 
due to an allergic reaction to insect bites. In sub-Saharan Africa, it is 
the most common skin manifestation of advanced HIV disease. Post-
inammatory hyperpigmentation is common. Topical glucocorticoids, 
emollients and antihistamines are useful but response is variable. 
Measures to reduce insect bites are logical but difcult to implement in 
low-income settings.
Drug rashes
Cutaneous hypersensitivity to drugs occurs about 100 times more fre-
quently in HIV infection. The most common type is an erythematous macu-
lopapular rash, which may be scaly. The drugs most commonly associated 
with rashes are sulphonamides and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NNRTIs – see below). Severe, life-threatening features of drug 
rashes include blistering (when this affects more than 30% of surface area 
it is known as toxic epidermal necrolysis), involvement of mucous mem-
branes (Stevens–Johnson syndrome), or systemic involvement with fever 
or organ dysfunction (especially hepatitis, which is often delayed for a 
week or two after the rash develops). Because sulphonamides are impor-
tant in the treatment and prophylaxis of opportunistic infections, rechal-
lenge or desensitisation is often attempted in patients who have previously 
experienced rashes, provided the reaction was not life-threatening. Details 
of rashes caused by ART are given below.
14.9 Differential diagnosis of skin conditions by lesion type
Scaly rashes
 Seborrhoeic dermatitis
 Psoriasis* (exacerbated by HIV)
 Tinea corporis*
 Dry skin/ichthyosis
 Norwegian scabies*
 Drug rashes*
Pruritic papules
 Pruritic papular eruption (‘itchy red 
bump disease’)
 Eosinophilic folliculitis
 Scabies*
Papules and nodules (non-pruritic)
 Molluscum contagiosum*
 Secondary syphilis
 Kaposi's sarcoma
 Bacillary angiomatosis
 Cryptococcosis
 Warts*
 Disseminated endemic mycoses 
(histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, 
talaromycosis and emergomycosis)
Blisters
 Herpes simplex
 Herpes zoster
 Fixed drug eruptions
 Drug rashes (especially toxic 
epidermal necrolysis)
Mucocutaneous ulcers
 Ecthyma
 Herpes simplex
 Aphthous ulcers (minor and major)
 Histoplasmosis
 Drug rashes (Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome)
Hyperpigmentation
 Post-inammatory (especially 
pruritic papular eruption)
 Zidovudine
 Emtricitabine (palms and soles)
*See Chapter 27 for more information.
Fig. 14.5 Severe mucocutaneous herpes simplex. Chronic anogenital or perioral 
ulcers are very common in advanced HIV infection.

[[p400]]
Presenting problems in HIV infection    359
14
Oral conditions
Oropharyngeal candidiasis is common in advanced HIV infection. It is nearly 
always caused by Candida albicans, but azole-resistant Candida species 
may be selected for if there have been repeated courses of azole drugs. 
Pseudomembranous candidiasis is the most common manifestation, with 
white patches on the buccal mucosa (p. 350) that can be scraped off to 
reveal a red raw surface. Erythematous candidiasis is more difcult to diag-
nose and presents with a reddened mucosa and a smooth shiny tongue. 
Angular cheilitis due to Candida is a common manifestation. Topical anti-
fungals are usually effective. Antifungal lozenges are more effective than 
antifungal solutions. Systemic azole therapy, usually uconazole, should be 
given if topical therapy fails or if there are oesophageal symptoms.
Oral hairy leucoplakia (p. 350) appears as corrugated white plaques 
running vertically on the side of the tongue and is virtually pathogno-
monic of HIV disease. It is usually asymptomatic and is due to EBV.
Herpetiform oral ulcers occur in primary infection. Herpes simplex 
typically affects the nasolabial area but may cause oral ulcers. In early 
disease, minor aphthous ulcers are common. In advanced disease, giant 
aphthous ulcers occur. These destroy tissue, are painful and need to 
be differentiated from herpes simplex and CMV ulcers by biopsy. They 
respond to systemic glucocorticoids and ART. Some disseminated 
endemic mycoses, notably histoplasmosis (p. 346), may cause oral 
ulcers, usually associated with constitutional symptoms. Finally, super-
cial oral ulcers may occur as part of the Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 
usually caused by sulphonamides or NNRTIs.
KS often involves the mouth, especially the hard palate (see above and 
Fig. 14.6). Nodular oral lesions are associated with a worse prognosis.
Gingivitis is common in advanced HIV infection. Acute necrotising 
ulcerative gingivitis and periostitis (p. 350) can result in loss of teeth.
Nail disorders
Fungal infections of the nails (onychomycosis) are common and often 
involve multiple nails. Blue–black discoloration of nails may be due to HIV 
or to the antiretroviral drug zidovudine.
Gastrointestinal disease
Oesophageal diseases
Oesophageal candidiasis (Fig. 14.7) is the most common cause of pain 
on swallowing (odynophagia), dysphagia and regurgitation in advanced 
HIV infection. Concomitant oral candidiasis is present in most patients. 
Systemic azole therapy, e.g. uconazole 200 mg daily for 14 days, is usu-
ally effective but relapses are common (see Box 14.10). Patients whose 
oesophageal symptoms fail to respond to azoles should be investigated 
with oesophagoscopy; major aphthous ulceration and CMV ulcers are 
the most likely causes and need to be differentiated by biopsy.
Diarrhoea
Chronic diarrhoea is a common presenting problem in patients with 
advanced HIV, especially in areas where there is no access to safe water. 
It is a component of the HIV wasting syndrome. The differential diagnosis 
14.10 Treatment of common opportunistic infections in adults with AIDS
Opportunistic infection
Treatment
Alternative treatment
Secondary prophylaxis 1
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
Co-trimoxazole 20/100 mg/kg/day IV/PO 
(in 4 divided doses) for 21 days; 
maximum per dose 320/1600 mg
Early adjunctive prednisone 40 mg 
twice daily, if hypoxic
Clindamycin 900 mg 3 times daily 
IV (switch to 600 mg 3 times daily 
PO once improving) plus primaquine 
30 mg PO daily for 21 days
Co-trimoxazole 160/800 mg daily PO
Cerebral toxoplasmosis
Sulfadiazine 15 mg/kg 4 times daily 
PO plus pyrimethamine 200 mg stat 
PO, then 75 mg daily plus folinic acid 
15–25 mg daily for 6 weeks
Co-trimoxazole 320/1600 mg 
twice daily IV/PO for 4 weeks, then 
160/800 mg twice daily for 3 months
Co-trimoxazole 160/800 mg daily PO
Cryptococcosis
Liposomal amphotericin B 4 mg/kg/
day IV plus ucytosine 25 mg/kg  
4 times daily PO for 7 days, followed 
by uconazole 400 mg daily PO for 
8 weeks
Amphotericin B 1 mg/kg/day IV plus 
uconazole2 800 mg daily IV/PO for 14 
days, followed by uconazole 400 mg 
daily PO for 8 weeks
Fluconazole 200 mg daily PO (for 
minimum of 1 year)
Oesophageal candidiasis
Fluconazole 200 mg daily IV/PO for 
14 days
Itraconazole 200 mg daily PO for  
14–21 days
Not usually recommended
Disseminated Mycobacterium 
avium complex
Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily PO 
plus ethambutol 15 mg/kg daily PO
Azithromycin 500 mg daily PO plus 
ethambutol 15 mg/kg daily PO
Continue treatment for minimum of 
1 year
Herpes simplex ulcers
Aciclovir 400 mg 3 times daily PO for 
5–10 days
Valaciclovir 500 mg or famciclovir 
125 mg twice daily PO for 5–10 days
Aciclovir 400 mg twice daily PO if 
recurrences are frequent/severe
Cystoisospora belli diarrhoea
Co-trimoxazole 160/800 mg 4 times 
daily PO for 10 days
Ciprooxacin 500 mg twice daily PO 
for 10 days
Co-trimoxazole 160/800 mg daily PO
1Secondary prophylaxis may be discontinued once CD4 counts have increased to > 200 cells/mm3 on antiretroviral therapy for at least 3 months. 2Only if ucytosine is unavailable. 
(IV = intravenous; PO = orally)
Fig. 14.6 Oral Kaposi's sarcoma. A full examination is important to detect disease 
that may affect the palate, gums, fauces or tongue.

[[p401]]
360    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
of diarrhoea depends on whether the presentation is with large or small 
bowel symptoms (see Fig. 14.3).
Large bowel diarrhoea
Acute 
diarrhoea 
caused 
by 
the 
bacterial 
enteric 
pathogens 
Campylobacter, Shigella and Salmonella occurs more frequently than in 
HIV-negative people and the illness is more severe. Bacteraemia is more 
common, notably due to non-typhoid Salmonella. Diarrhoea caused by 
Clostridioides difcile should be considered if there has been prior expo-
sure to antibiotics, as is often the case in patients with symptomatic HIV.
CMV colitis presents with chronic large bowel symptoms and fever in 
patients with CD4 counts below 100 cells/mm3. On colonoscopy, ulcers 
are seen, mostly involving the left side of the colon. Biopsy of ulcers 
shows typical ‘owl's-eye’ inclusion bodies.
Small bowel diarrhoea
Chronic small bowel diarrhoea may be due to HIV enteropathy, which is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. It typically presents with chronic watery diarrhoea 
and wasting without fever. Infection with one of three unicellular organ-
isms is responsible for most cases: cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis 
and cystoisosporiasis (formerly known as isosporiasis) (Box 14.11). All 
three organisms are intracellular parasites that invade enterocytes. If the 
diagnosis is not made by stool microscopy on at least two specimens, a 
duodenal biopsy should be performed (Fig. 14.8).
About 40% of patients with disseminated MAC infections have watery 
diarrhoea. Fever is a prominent feature of MAC infection, which helps 
differentiate it from cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis and cystoiso-
sporiasis. Intestinal tuberculosis typically involves the ileocaecal area and 
may present with fever, weight loss and diarrhoea, but the diarrhoea is 
seldom profuse.
Hepatobiliary disease
Chronic viral hepatitis
Hepatitis B and/or C (HBV and HCV) co-infection is common in PLWH 
due to shared risk factors for transmission. The natural history of both 
HBV and HCV is altered by HIV co-infection. In the ART era, chronic liver 
disease from viral hepatitis has emerged as a major cause of morbidity 
and mortality. HBV and HCV are further described in Chapter 24
Hepatitis B
HBV infection is common in several groups of people at risk of HIV 
infection: residents of low- and middle-income countries, injection 
drug- users, people with haemophilia and men who have sex with men 
(MSM). HBV status should be checked at baseline in all PLWH. HIV 
co-infection increases HBV viraemia, is associated with less elevation of 
transaminase, and increases the risk of liver brosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma. All patients with HBV infection should be treated with ART, 
including the nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) tenofovir, 
which is also effective for HBV. A are of hepatitis may be associated with 
improved immune function after starting ART or discontinuing antiretro-
virals that have anti-HBV activity. HBV co-infection increases the risk of 
antiretroviral hepatotoxicity.
Hepatitis C
HCV infection is common in injection drug-users and people with hae-
mophilia. HIV co-infection increases HCV viraemia and increases the risk 
of liver brosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Treatment for HCV should 
be commenced together with ART. As with HBV co-infection, a are of 
hepatitis may be associated with improved immune function after start-
ing ART, and there is an increased risk of antiretroviral hepatotoxicity. 
Response to anti-HCV therapy is similar to that seen in HIV-negative 
people.
HIV cholangiopathy
HIV cholangiopathy, a form of secondary sclerosing cholangitis, may 
occur in patients with severe immune suppression. Papillary steno-
sis is common and is amenable to cautery via endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which provides symptomatic relief. 
Acalculous cholecystitis is a common complication of cholangiopathy. 
ART may improve the condition.
Respiratory disease
Pulmonary disease is common and is the major reason for hospital 
admission in advanced HIV disease. Inuenza and COVID-19 are more 
Fig. 14.7 Oesophageal candidiasis. Endoscopy showing typical pseudomembranous 
candidiasis.
14.11  Common causes of chronic watery diarrhoea
Cryptosporidiosis
Microsporidiosis
Cystoisosporiasis
Organism
Protozoan
Fungus
Protozoan
Species
Cryptosporidium 
parvum C. 
hominis
Enterozoon 
bieneusi
Encephalitozoon 
intestinalis etc.
Cystoisospora 
belli
Animal host
Multiple
Multiple
No
Distribution
Global
Global
Tropics
Stool 
examination
Acid-fast stain
Trichrome stain 
Polymerase chain 
reaction
Acid-fast stain
Specic 
treatment
No established 
therapy
Albendazole 
(some species)
Co-trimoxazole
Fig. 14.8 Cryptosporidiosis. Duodenal biopsy may be necessary to conrm 
cryptosporidiosis or microsporidiosis. The arrow indicates an oöcyst.

[[p402]]
Presenting problems in HIV infection    361
14
severe in PLWH. Most patients who are admitted for respiratory dis-
eases will have either bacterial pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis 
or PCP. PCP is more common in high-income countries, while tuber-
culosis is more common in low- and middle-income countries. An 
approach to the differential diagnosis of all three conditions is given 
in Box 14.12
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (Pneumocystis
pneumonia, PCP)
The key presenting feature of PCP is progressive dyspnoea with a dura-
tion of less than 12 weeks. Dry cough and fever are common. The chest 
X-ray typically shows a bilateral interstitial inltrate spreading out from the 
hilar regions (Fig. 14.9) but may be normal initially. High-resolution CT scan 
is more sensitive than chest X-ray, usually showing typical ‘ground-glass’ 
interstitial inltrates. Pneumatoceles may occur and may rupture, result-
ing in a pneumothorax. The diagnosis is made with silver stains, PCR or 
immunouorescence of broncho-alveolar lavage or induced sputum (note 
that spontaneously produced sputum should not be sent, as the yield is 
low). Treatment is with high-dose co-trimoxazole, together with adjunctive 
systemic glucocorticoids if the patient is hypoxic (see Box 14.10).
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is the most common cause of admission in countries with a 
high tuberculosis incidence. Pulmonary tuberculosis in patients with mild 
immune suppression typically presents as in HIV-uninfected patients, 
with a chronic illness and apical pulmonary cavities (p. 518). However, in 
patients with CD4 counts below 200 cells/mm3, there are four important 
differences in the clinical presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis:
 Tuberculosis progresses more rapidly, with a subacute or even 
acute presentation. The diagnosis therefore needs to be made and 
therapy commenced promptly. A trial of empirical therapy is often 
justied while awaiting the results of mycobacterial cultures.
 The chest X-ray appearance alters: cavities are rarely seen, pulmo-
nary inltrates are no longer predominantly in apical areas, and pleu-
ral effusions and hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy are common 
(Fig. 14.10). A normal chest X-ray is not unusual in symptomatic 
patients with tuberculosis conrmed on sputum culture. These atypi-
cal ndings can result in a delayed or missed diagnosis.
 Sputum smears, which are positive in most HIV-uninfected adults with 
pulmonary tuberculosis, are negative in more than half of patients. The 
main reason for this is the absence of pulmonary cavities.
 Many patients have disseminated tuberculosis, sometimes with 
a classic miliary pattern on chest X-ray, but more commonly 
presenting with atypical pulmonary inltrates together with extrapul-
monary tuberculosis. The most common sites of concomitant 
extrapulmonary tuberculosis are the pleura and lymph nodes. A 
rapid diagnosis can be made with the urine lipoarabinomannan 
lateral ow assay.
Tuberculosis in PLWH responds well to standard short-course therapy 
(p. 522).
Bacterial pneumonia
The incidence of bacterial pneumonia is increased about 100-fold by 
HIV infection. The severity, likelihood of bacteraemia, risk of recurrent 
pneumonia and mortality are all increased compared with HIV-negative 
patients. The aetiology is similar to that of community-acquired pneu-
monia in HIV-uninfected patients with comorbidity: S. pneumoniae
14.12  Comparative features of bacterial pneumonia, 
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and pulmonary tuberculosis
Bacterial 
pneumonia
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii 
pneumonia 
(PCP)
Pulmonary 
tuberculosis
Duration
Acute
Subacute
Variable
Dyspnoea
Common
Prominent
Occasional
White cell 
count
Increased
Normal
Normal/low
Chest X-ray
Inltrate
Consolidation
Interstitial
Nodular
Bilateral 
inltrate
Occasional
Usual
Common
Effusion
Occasional
No
Common
Nodes
Rare
No
Common
Fig. 14.9 Pneumocystis pneumonia: typical chest X-ray appearance. Note the 
interstitial bilateral inltrate.
Fig. 14.10 Chest X-ray of pulmonary tuberculosis in advanced HIV infection.
Lower-zone inltrates and hilar or mediastinal nodes in a patient with a CD4 count of 
< 200 cells/mm3

[[p403]]
362    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
is the most common cause, followed by Haemophilus inuenzae, 
Enterobacterales (e.g. Klebsiella pneumoniae) and Staphylococcus 
aureus. The prevalence of atypical bacteria in PLWH with pneumonia is 
similar to that in the general population. Treatment is with a broad-spec-
trum β-lactam (e.g. ceftriaxone, amoxicillin–clavulanate), with the addi-
tion of a macrolide if the pneumonia is severe).
Uncommon bacteria causing pneumonia include Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Nocardia (which mimics tuberculosis) and Rhodococcus 
equi (which can cause pulmonary cavities).
Miscellaneous causes of pulmonary inltrates
Pulmonary cryptococcosis may present as a component of disseminated 
disease or be limited to the lungs. The chest X-ray appearances are var-
iable. Cryptococcomas occur less commonly than in HIV-uninfected 
people. The most common radiographic pattern seen in HIV infection 
is patchy consolidation, often with small areas of cavitation resembling 
tuberculosis. Pleural involvement is rare. The disseminated endemic 
mycoses (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, emergomycosis and 
talaromycosis) often cause diffuse pulmonary inltrates, mimicking mil-
iary tuberculosis.
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis is a slowly progressive disorder 
causing a diffuse reticulonodular inltrate. It is caused by a benign poly-
clonal lymphocytic interstitial inltrate and is part of the diffuse inltrative 
lymphocytosis syndrome (DILS), described later in this chapter. Patients 
may have other features of DILS, notably parotidomegaly.
KS often spreads to the lungs. Typical chest X-ray appearances are 
large, irregular nodules, linear reticular patterns and pleural effusions. 
Bronchoscopy is diagnostic.
Nervous system and eye disease
The central and peripheral nervous systems are commonly involved in HIV, 
either as a direct consequence of HIV infection or due to opportunistic 
diseases. An approach to common presentations is outlined in Fig. 14.11
Cognitive impairment
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders
HIV is a neurotropic virus and invades the CNS early during infection. 
Meningoencephalitis may occur at seroconversion. PLWH often have 
abnormalities on neuropsychiatric testing. The term HIV-associated 
neurocognitive disorder (HAND) describes a spectrum of disorders: 
asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment, minor neurocognitive disor-
der and HIV-associated dementia (also called HIV encephalopathy). The 
proportion of patients with symptomatic HAND increases with declining 
CD4 counts. HIV-associated dementia is a subcortical dementia char-
acterised by impairment of executive function, psychomotor retardation 
and impaired memory. There is no diagnostic test for HIV-associated 
dementia. CT or MRI shows diffuse cerebral atrophy out of keeping with 
age. It is important to exclude depression, cryptococcal meningitis and 
neurosyphilis. ART usually improves HIV-associated dementia but milder 
forms of HAND often persist.
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML) is a progressive dis-
ease that presents with stroke-like episodes and cognitive impairment. 
Vision is often impaired due to involvement of the occipital cortex. PML is 
caused by the JC virus. A combination of characteristic appearances on 
MRI (Fig. 14.12) and detection of JC virus DNA in the cerebrospinal uid 
(CSF) by PCR is diagnostic. No specic treatment exists and prognosis 
remains poor despite ART.
CMV encephalitis
This presents with behavioural disturbance, cognitive impairment and a 
reduced level of consciousness. Focal signs may also occur. Detection 
of CMV DNA in the CSF supports the diagnosis. Response to anti-CMV 
therapy is usually poor.
Space-occupying lesions
Space-occupying lesions in AIDS patients typically present over days to 
weeks. The most common cause is toxoplasmosis. As toxoplasmosis 
responds rapidly to therapy, a trial of anti-toxoplasmosis therapy should 
be given to all patients presenting with space-occupying lesions while 
the results of diagnostic tests are being awaited.
Cerebral toxoplasmosis
Cerebral toxoplasmosis is caused by reactivation of residual Toxoplasma 
gondii cysts from past infection, which results in the development of 
space-occupying lesions. The characteristic ndings on imaging are multi-
ple space-occupying lesions with ring enhancement on contrast and sur-
rounding oedema (Fig. 14.13). Toxoplasma serology shows evidence of 
previous exposure (positive immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibodies); a negative 
Neurological presentation
Space-occupying
lesion
Cognitive
impairment
Meningitis
Toxoplasmosis
PCNSL
Tuberculoma
Cryptococcoma
Cryptococcal
Tuberculous
Pneumococcal
HIV
HAND
Depression
Neurosyphilis
Cryptococcal
meningitis
PML
CMV
encephalitis
Fig. 14.11 Presentation and differential diagnosis of HIV-related neurological 
disorders. (CMV = cytomegalovirus; HAND = HIV-associated neurocognitive 
disorder; PCNSL = primary CNS lymphoma; PML = progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy)
Fig. 14.12 Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy. Non-enhancing white-
matter lesions without surrounding oedema are seen.

[[p404]]
Presenting problems in HIV infection    363
14
serological test effectively rules out toxoplasmosis but a positive test is 
not specic. The standard therapy for toxoplasmosis is sulfadiazine with 
pyrimethamine, together with folinic acid, to reduce the risk of bone mar-
row suppression (see Box 14.10). However, co-trimoxazole has been 
shown to be as effective and less toxic, and is also much more widely 
available. Response to a trial of therapy is usually diagnostic, with clinical 
improvement in 1–2 weeks and shrinkage of lesions on imaging in 2–4 
weeks. Denitive diagnosis is by brain biopsy, but this is seldom necessary.
Primary CNS lymphoma
Primary CNS lymphomas (PCNSLs) are high-grade B-cell lymphomas 
associated with EBV infection. Characteristically, imaging demonstrates 
a single homogeneously enhancing, periventricular lesion with surround-
ing oedema (Fig. 14.14). If it is considered safe to perform a lumbar 
puncture, PCR for EBV DNA in the CSF has a high sensitivity and spec-
icity for PCNSL. Brain biopsy is denitive but carries a risk of morbidity 
and may be non-diagnostic in up to one-third. The prognosis is poor.
Tuberculoma
Lesions resemble toxoplasmosis on imaging, except that oedema tends 
to be less marked and single lesions occur more commonly. There may be 
evidence of tuberculosis elsewhere. The CSF may show features consistent 
with tuberculous meningitis. Response to antituberculosis therapy is slow 
and paradoxical expansion of lesions despite therapy is not uncommon.
Stroke
There is a higher incidence of stroke in patients with HIV disease. 
Atherosclerosis is accelerated by the presence of inammation due to 
the immune response to HIV, which is not completely suppressed by 
ART, and by dyslipidaemia caused by some antiretroviral drugs. HIV vas-
culopathy, which is thought to be a vasculitis, can also cause a stroke. 
It is important to exclude tuberculous meningitis and meningovascular 
syphilis in all PLWH who present with a stroke.
Meningitis
Cryptococcal meningitis
Cryptococcus neoformans is the most common cause of meningitis in 
AIDS patients. Patients usually present subacutely with headache, vom-
iting and decreased level of consciousness. Neck stiffness is present in 
less than half. CSF pleocytosis is often mild or even absent, and protein 
and glucose concentrations are variable. It is important to request CSF 
cryptococcal antigen tests in all PLWH undergoing lumbar puncture, as 
this test has a high sensitivity and specicity. Treatment is with ampho-
tericin B (liposomal amphotericin B if this is available) plus ucytosine 
for 1 week, followed by uconazole (see Box 14.10). Raised intracranial 
pressure is common and should be treated with repeated therapeutic 
lumbar punctures, as this is a communicating hydrocephalus, removing 
sufcient CSF to reduce pressure to less than 20 cmH2O.
Tuberculous meningitis
The presentation and CSF ndings of tuberculous meningitis are similar 
to those in HIV-negative patients except that concomitant tuberculosis at 
other sites is more common in HIV infection.
Peripheral nerve disease
HIV infection causes axonal degeneration, resulting in a sensorimotor 
peripheral neuropathy in about one-third of AIDS patients. The inci-
dence increases with lower CD4 counts, older age and increased height. 
Sensory symptoms predominate. Treatment involves foot care, analgesia 
and analgesic adjuvants. ART has minimal effect on halting or reversing 
the process.
Acute inammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy is an uncom-
mon manifestation, usually occurring in primary infection. It resembles 
Guillain–Barré syndrome, except that CSF pleocytosis is more promi-
nent. Mononeuritis may also occur, commonly involving the facial nerve.
Myelopathy and radiculopathy
The most common cause of myelopathy in HIV infection is cord compres-
sion from tuberculous spondylitis. Vacuolar myelopathy is seen in advanced 
disease and is due to HIV. It typically presents with a slowly progressive 
paraparesis with no sensory level. MRI of the spine is important to exclude 
other causes. Most patients have concomitant HIV-associated dementia.
CMV polyradiculitis presents with painful legs, progressive accid para-
paresis, saddle anaesthesia, absent reexes and sphincter dysfunction. 
CSF shows a neutrophil pleocytosis (which is unusual for a viral infection), 
and the detection of CMV DNA by PCR conrms the diagnosis. Functional 
recovery is poor despite treatment with ganciclovir or valganciclovir.
Fig. 14.13 Cerebral toxoplasmosis. Multiple ring-enhancing lesions with 
surrounding oedema are characteristic.
Fig. 14.14 Primary CNS lymphoma. A single enhancing periventricular lesion with 
moderate oedema is typical.

[[p405]]
364    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
Psychiatric disease
Signicant psychiatric morbidity is common and is a major risk factor 
for poor adherence. Reactive depression is the most common disorder. 
Diagnosis is often difcult, as many patients have concomitant HAND. 
Substance misuse is common in many groups of people at risk of HIV. 
Some of the HIV antiretroviral drugs cause psychiatric adverse effects.
Retinopathy
CMV retinitis presents with painless, progressive visual loss in patients 
with severe immune suppression. On fundoscopy, the vitreous is clear. 
Haemorrhages and exudates are seen in the retina (p. 350), often with 
sheathing of vessels (‘frosted branch angiitis’). The disease usually starts 
unilaterally but progressive bilateral involvement occurs in most untreated 
patients. Diagnosis is usually clinical, but if there is doubt, demonstrating 
CMV DNA by PCR of vitreous uid is diagnostic. Treatment with ganci-
clovir or valganciclovir stops progression of the disease but lost vision 
does not recover. Some patients may develop immune recovery uveitis 
in response to ART, with intraocular inammation, macular oedema and 
cataract formation that require prompt treatment with oral and intraocular 
glucocorticoids to prevent further visual loss.
Three other conditions may mimic CMV retinitis: ocular toxoplasmosis, 
which typically presents with a vitritis and retinitis without retinal haem-
orrhages; HIV retinopathy, a microangiopathy that causes cotton wool 
spots, which are not sight-threatening; and varicella zoster virus, which 
can cause rapidly progressive outer retinal necrosis.
Rheumatological disease
The immune dysregulation associated with HIV infection may result in 
autoantibody formation, usually in low titres. Mild arthralgias and a bro-
myalgia-like syndrome are common in PLWH.
Arthritis
HIV can cause a seronegative arthritis, which resembles rheumatoid 
arthritis. A more benign oligoarthritis may also occur. Reactive arthritis is 
more severe in HIV infection (p. 1035).
Diffuse inltrative lymphocytosis syndrome
Diffuse inltrative lymphocytosis syndrome (DILS) is a benign disorder 
involving polyclonal CD8 lymphocytic inltration of tissues, which has
some features in common with Sjögren syndrome. It is linked to 
human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1. Most patients have a marked 
CD8 lymphocytosis. DILS usually presents in patients with mild immune 
suppression. The most common manifestation is bilateral parotid gland 
enlargement; the glands are often massive, with lymphoepithelial cysts 
on histology (Fig. 14.15). Sicca symptoms are common but usually mild. 
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis is the most common manifestation 
outside the salivary glands. Generalised lymphadenopathy may occur, 
with nodes larger than those seen with persistent generalised lymphad-
enopathy of HIV. Hepatitis, mononeuritis, polyarthritis and polymyositis 
may also occur. The manifestations outside the salivary glands usually 
respond to systemic glucocorticoids. Parotid gland enlargement may 
be treated by aspiration of parotid cysts and instillation of a sclerosant 
for cosmetic reasons; surgery is best avoided. DILS may regress on 
ART but response is variable.
Haematological abnormalities
Disorders of all three major cell lines may occur in HIV. In advanced dis-
ease, haematopoiesis is impaired due to the direct effect of HIV and by 
cytokines. Pancytopenia may occur as a consequence of HIV but it is 
important to exclude a disorder inltrating the bone marrow, such as 
mycobacterial or fungal infections, or lymphoma.
Anaemia
Normochromic, normocytic anaemia is very common in advanced HIV dis-
ease. Opportunistic diseases may cause anaemia of chronic disease (e.g. 
tuberculosis) or marrow inltration (e.g. MAC, tuberculosis, lymphoma, 
fungi). Anaemia is a common adverse effect of zidovudine, which also 
causes a macrocytosis. Red cell aplasia is rare and may be caused either 
by parvovirus B19 infection or by the NRTIs lamivudine and emtricitabine.
Neutropenia
Isolated neutropenia is occasionally due to HIV but is nearly always 
caused by drug toxicity (e.g. zidovudine, co-trimoxazole, ganciclovir).
Thrombocytopenia
Mild thrombocytopenia is common in PLWH. Transient thrombocyto-
penia is frequently found in primary infection. The most common disorder 
causing severe thrombocytopenia is immune-mediated platelet destruc-
tion resembling idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (p. 988). This 
responds to glucocorticoids or intravenous immunoglobulin, together 
with ART. Splenectomy should be avoided if possible because it fur-
ther increases the risk of infection with encapsulated bacteria. Severe 
thrombocytopenia with a microangiopathic anaemia also occurs in a 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura-like illness, which has a better 
prognosis and fewer relapses than the classical disease.
Renal disease
Acute kidney injury is common, usually due to acute infection or nephro-
toxicity of drugs (e.g. tenofovir (see Box 18.25), amphotericin B). HIV-
associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the most important cause of chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) and is seen more frequently in patients of African 
descent and those with low CD4 counts. Progression to end-stage dis-
ease is more rapid than with most other causes of CKD, and renal size 
is usually preserved. HIVAN presents with nephrotic syndrome, CKD 
or a combination of both. ART has some effect in slowing progression 
of HIVAN. Other important HIV-associated renal diseases include HIV 
immune complex kidney diseases and thrombotic microangiopathy. With 
the overall improvement in life expectancy from ART, conditions such as 
diabetes mellitus, hypertension and vascular disease add to the burden 
of CKD. Outcomes of renal transplantation are good in patients on ART.
Fig. 14.15 CT scan of parotid glands. Multiple cysts (arrows) seen in a patient 
with the diffuse inltrative lymphocytosis syndrome.

[[p406]]
Prevention of opportunistic infections    365
14
Cardiac disease
HIV-associated cardiomyopathy resembles idiopathic dilated cardiomy-
opathy (p. 474) but progresses more rapidly. ART may improve cardiac 
failure but does not reverse established cardiomyopathy. Pericardial dis-
ease due to opportunistic diseases is not uncommon; globally, the most 
common cause is tuberculous pericardial effusion. Tuberculous constric-
tive pericarditis is less common than in HIV-uninfected people. KS and 
lymphoma may cause pericardial effusions. Septic pericarditis, usually 
due to S. pneumoniae, is uncommon.
HIV is associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction due 
to accelerated atherogenesis caused by the inammatory state, which 
is not completely suppressed by ART, and by dyslipidaemia caused by 
some antiretroviral drugs.
HIV-related cancers
The AIDS-dening cancers are KS (see above), cervical cancer and 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). NHL may occur at any CD4 count but 
is more commonly seen with counts below 200 cells/mm3. Almost all 
NHLs are B-cell tumours and most are stage 3 or 4. Long-term remission 
rates similar to those in patients without HIV can be achieved with NHL 
in AIDS patients using ART and chemotherapy (including the anti-B-cell 
monoclonal antibody rituximab if it is a B-cell tumour).
The incidence of several other cancers induced by viruses is also 
increased in PLWH (Box 14.13). Regular cytological examination of the 
cervix should be performed to detect pre-malignant lesions, which are 
easier to treat – studies are under way to determine optimal strategies 
to reduce the risk of anal cancer in people who practise receptive anal 
sex. In general, the incidence of cancers that are not induced by viruses 
is similar to that in the general population.
Prevention of opportunistic infections
The best way to prevent opportunistic infections is to improve the CD4 
count with ART. However, infections continue to occur in the ART era as 
CD4 counts take time to improve if ART is initiated in patients with pro-
found immune suppression, immune reconstitution on ART may be sub-
optimal, and CD4 counts may decline if antiretroviral resistance develops.
Preventing exposure
The best method for avoiding infection is to prevent exposure to the 
infectious agent. However, this stratgey is possible only for a few oppor-
tunistic infections. Many opportunistic infections occur after reactivation 
of latent/dormant infection after prior exposure; examples include herpes 
simplex virus, zoster (shingles), CMV, toxoplasmosis, cryptococcosis 
and the endemic mycoses.
Safe water and food
Cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis and cystoisosporiasis may be water-
borne. If there is no access to safe water, then water should be boiled 
before drinking. Food-borne illnesses are also important in HIV infec-
tion, notably Salmonella species. Toxoplasma exposure is related to eat-
ing raw or undercooked meat. PLWH should be informed about food 
hygiene and the importance of adequately cooking meat.
Tuberculosis
Preventing exposure to tuberculosis is important when there is an 
infectious case in the household, in clinics and in hospitals. Adequate 
ventilation, masks and safe coughing procedures reduce the risk of 
exposure.
Malaria vector control
All PLWH living in malarious areas should practise vector control, as 
malaria occurs more frequently and is more severe in PLWH. The most 
cost-effective way to achieve this is by using insecticide-impregnated 
bed nets. Other modalities of vector control that are of benet to the 
community, such as reducing standing water and spraying with residual 
insecticides and larvicides, should also be implemented.
Safer sex
PLWH should practise safer sex to reduce the transmission of HIV. Even 
if their partners are PLWH, condoms should be used, as HIV mutants 
that have developed antiretroviral drug resistance can be transmitted. 
Safer sex will also lower the risk of acquiring herpes simplex virus and 
human herpesvirus 8.
Pets
Toxoplasma gondii can be acquired from kittens or cat litter, and people 
living with HIV infection should avoid handling either. Cryptosporidiosis 
can be transmitted from animals, and patients should be advised to 
wash their hands after handling animals.
Chemoprophylaxis
Chemoprophylaxis is the use of antimicrobial agents to prevent infec-
tions. Primary prophylaxis is used to prevent opportunistic infections 
that have not yet occurred. Secondary prophylaxis is used to prevent 
recurrence of opportunistic infections because many may recur after 
an initial response to therapy (see Box 14.10). Secondary prophylaxis 
can be discontinued when ART results in immune reconstitution, with 
CD4 counts increasing to over 200 cells/mm3, but for CMV and MAC, 
prophylaxis can be stopped if CD4 counts increase to more than 100 
cells/mm3
Co-trimoxazole primary prophylaxis
Co-trimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim) reduces the incidence 
of several opportunistic infections (Box 14.14), resulting in lower hospi-
talisation and mortality rates. The indications for initiating co-trimoxazole 
are either clinical evidence of immune suppression (WHO clinical stages 
3 or 4) or laboratory evidence of immune suppression (CD4 count < 200 
cells/mm3). In low-income countries where malaria and/or severe bacterial 
infections are highly prevalent, the WHO recommends initiating co-trimox-
azole regardless of CD4 counts or clinical stage. The recommended dose 
14.13  Approximate incidence ratio of virus-related cancers 
compared to the general population
Viral cancers
Incidence ratio
Human herpesvirus 8-related
Kaposi's sarcoma
3600
Epstein–Barr virus-related
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma
80
10
Human papillomavirus-related
Cervical cancer
Vulval cancer
Anal cancer
Penile cancer
6
6
30
4
Hepatitis B/C virus-related
Hepatocellular carcinoma
5

[[p407]]
366    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
of co-trimoxazole is 960 mg daily. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis can be dis-
continued when CD4 counts increase to more than 200 cells/mm3 on ART, 
except in low-income countries where it should be continued life-long.
Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis is well tolerated. The most common 
side-effect is hypersensitivity, causing a maculo-papular rash. If therapy 
is discontinued, desensitisation or rechallenge under antihistamine cover 
should be attempted, unless the rash was accompanied by systemic 
symptoms or mucosal involvement. Prophylactic doses of co-trimoxa-
zole can also cause neutropenia, but this is very uncommon and routine 
monitoring of blood counts is not necessary. If co-trimoxazole cannot be 
tolerated, then dapsone 100 mg daily should be substituted. Dapsone 
is equally effective at reducing the incidence of P. jirovecii pneumonia 
(PCP), but has little or no effect on reducing the other opportunistic infec-
tions prevented by co-trimoxazole.
Tuberculosis preventive therapy
Trials in patients not on ART showed that preventive therapy, either with 
isoniazid or combinations of rifamycins with isoniazid, reduces the risk of 
tuberculosis only in PLWH with a positive tuberculin skin test. However, 
recent evidence indicates that tuberculin skin tests do not predict ben-
et in patients starting ART or established on ART in high tuberculosis 
prevalence settings.
There is no CD4 count or clinical threshold for starting tuberculosis 
preventive therapy. It is important to rule out active tuberculosis before 
starting preventive therapy, and symptom screening has been shown to 
be adequate to achieve this (Box 14.15). The usual duration of isoniazid 
preventive therapy is 6 months. Rifampicin or rifapentine combined with 
isoniazid for 12 weeks has been shown to be at least as effective as 6–12 
months of isoniazid.
Mycobacterium avium complex prophylaxis
In high-income countries, a macrolide (azithromycin or clarithromycin) is 
recommended to prevent MAC in patients with a CD4 count below 50 
cells/mm3, which can be discontinued once the CD4 count has risen 
to over 100 cells/mm3 on ART. MAC is uncommon in low- and middle- 
income countries and primary prophylaxis is thus not warranted.
Preventing cryptococcosis
Serum cryptococcal antigen test should be done in patients with a CD4 
count below 100 cells/mm3. If this is positive, pre-emptive therapy with 
uconazole should be commenced.
Immunisation
There are signicant problems associated with vaccination in HIV infec-
tion. First, vaccination with live organisms is contraindicated in patients 
with severe immune suppression, as this may result in disease from the 
attenuated organisms. Secondly, immune responses to vaccination 
are impaired in PLWH. If the CD4 count is below 200 cells/mm3, then 
immune responses to immunisation are poor. Therefore, it is preferable 
to wait until the CD4 count has increased to more than 200 cells/mm3 on 
ART before immunisation is given; this is essential if live virus vaccines 
are used. All patients should be given a conjugate pneumococcal vac-
cine and annual inuenza vaccination. Hepatitis B vaccination should be 
given to those who are not immune. In the UK, the following additional 
vaccines are also recommended:
 hepatitis A: in those at risk
 human papillomavirus: in people < 40 years old
 measles, mumps and rubella (MMR): in those with negative measles 
serology
 meningococcus: in people < 25 years old, those with asplenia or 
complement deciency, during outbreaks
 diphtheria/tetanus/acellular pertussis (dTaP)/inactivated poliovirus 
vaccine (IPV): meeting general indications
 chickenpox: if seronegative; those who are seropositive should 
receive the shingles vaccine.
Bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG) is contraindicated in PLWH.
Antiretroviral therapy
ART has transformed HIV from a progressive illness with a fatal outcome 
into a chronic manageable disease with a near-normal life expectancy.
The goals of ART are to:
 reduce the viral load to an undetectable level for as long as possible
 improve the CD4 count to over 200 cells/mm3 so that severe HIV-
related disease is unlikely
 improve the quantity and quality of life without unacceptable drug 
toxicity
 reduce HIV transmission.
Many of the antiretroviral drugs that were initially used have largely 
been abandoned because of toxicity or poor efcacy. The pill burden of 
currently recommended ART is low; the currently recommended rst-
line regimens are available as a single pill. The drugs that are currently 
recommended are shown in Box 14.16, and their targets in the HIV life 
cycle in Fig. 14.1
Selecting antiretroviral regimens
The standard combination antiretroviral regimens are two NRTIs together 
with an NNRTI, protease inhibitor (PI) or integrase inhibitor. However, 
effective combinations have been developed with just two drugs. 
Currently used PIs are always administered with the pharmacoenhancers 
(‘boosters’) ritonavir or cobicistat, which dramatically increase the con-
centrations of other PIs by inhibiting their metabolism by the cytochrome 
P450 isoenzyme CYP3A.
14.14 Opportunistic infections reduced by co-trimoxazole
 Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
 Cerebral toxoplasmosis
 Bacterial pneumonia
 Bacteraemia
 Cystoisosporiasis
 Malaria
14.15  Symptom screen for tuberculosis before isoniazid 
preventive therapy
All of the following must be absent:
 Active cough
 Weight loss
 Night sweats
 Fever
14.16  Currently preferred antiretroviral drugs
Classes
Drugs
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NRTIs)
Abacavir, emtricitabine, lamivudine, 
tenofovir
Non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
Efavirenz*, rilpivirine (only if viral load 
< 100 000)
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Atazanavir*, darunavir, lopinavir*
Integrase inhibitors
Dolutegravir, bictegravir
*These drugs are no longer recommended as rst-line options due to their toxicity.

[[p408]]
Antiretroviral therapy    367
14
By far the commonest preferred agents for rst-line ART globally are 
a second-generation integrase inhibitor (bictegravir or dolutegravir) com-
bined with the NRTIs tenofovir plus emtricitabine or lamivudine (which 
have the same mechanism of action and so are never combined).
In high-income countries ART regimen switches for virological failure 
are guided by the results of resistance testing (see below). In low- and 
middle-income countries, where resources for resistance testing are lim-
ited or absent, a standardised second-line regimen is recommended
Starting ART
Guidelines now recommend starting ART in all people with conrmed 
HIV infection, irrespective of CD4 count or clinical status. Early initiation 
of ART, compared with the previous strategy of deferring ART until CD4 
thresholds or clinical disease occurs, has been shown to reduce mor-
bidity and mortality, and has the additional benet of reducing the risk of 
transmission. In asymptomatic PLWH initiating ART on the same day that 
the diagnosis is conrmed has been shown to improve retention in care. 
Disclosure of HIV status, joining support groups and using patient-nom-
inated treatment supporters should be encouraged, as these have been 
shown to improve adherence. Recognition and management of depres-
sion and substance abuse is important.
In patients with major opportunistic infections, ART should generally 
be started within 2 weeks, with two important exceptions: in cryptococ-
cal meningitis, ART should be deferred for 5 weeks, as earlier initiation 
increases the risk of death; and in tuberculosis, ART should be deferred 
until 8 weeks (except if the CD4 count is < 50 cells/mm3), as earlier initi-
ation increases the risk of the immune reconstitution inammatory syn-
drome (see below).
Monitoring efcacy
The most important measure of ART efcacy is the viral load. A base-
line viral load should be measured prior to initiating treatment. Viral load 
measurement should be repeated 4 weeks after starting ART, when 
there should be at least a 10-fold decrease. The viral load should be sup-
pressed after 6 months. Once the viral load is suppressed, measurement 
should be repeated 6 to 12 monthly. Failure of ART is dened by the viral 
load becoming detectable after suppression. In most guidelines, a viral 
load threshold is used to dene virological failure, e.g. more than 200 
(UK) or more than 1000 (WHO) copies/mL. Adherence support should 
be enhanced if virological failure is detected.
CD4 counts can be monitored together with the viral load, but there is 
little point in repeating the CD4 count in patients who maintain virological 
suppression and whose CD4 count is > 350 cells/mm3. The CD4 count 
increases rapidly in the rst month, followed by a more gradual increase. 
In the rst year, the CD4 count typically increases by 100–150 cells/mm3, 
and about 80 cells/mm3 per annum thereafter until the normal range is 
reached, provided the viral load is suppressed. However, CD4 responses 
are highly variable: in about 15%–30% of patients the CD4 count does 
not increase despite virological suppression, and in a similar proportion 
of patients the CD4 response is good despite the presence of virological 
failure. If ART is stopped, the CD4 count rapidly falls to the baseline value 
before ART was commenced.
Antiretroviral resistance
Reverse transcription is error-prone, generating many mutations. If the 
viral load is suppressed on ART, viral replication is suppressed and resist-
ance mutations will not be selected. If there is ongoing replication on ART, 
due to either resistant mutations or suboptimal adherence, mutations 
conferring resistance to antiretroviral drugs will be selected. Antiretroviral 
drugs differ in their ability to select for HIV resistance mutations. Some 
drugs (e.g. emtricitabine, lamivudine, efavirenz, raltegravir) have a low 
genetic barrier to resistance, rapidly selecting for a single mutation con-
ferring high-level resistance. PIs and the second-generation integrase 
inhibitors (bictegravir and dolutegravir) select for resistance mutations 
slowly, and multiple mutations may need to accumulate before the drug's 
efcacy is lost. Patients who develop antiretroviral resistance will eventu-
ally develop clinical failure if the regimen is not changed, and may transmit 
resistant virus to others.
Antiretroviral resistance is assessed by sequencing the relevant 
viral genes to detect mutations that are known to confer resistance. 
The patient must be taking ART when the test is performed, as oth-
erwise the wild-type virus will predominate and resistant mutations 
will not be detected. However, the resistant proviral DNA archived in 
latent CD4 cells will re-emerge rapidly on re-exposure to the antiretro-
viral. In high- income countries resistance testing is recommended at 
baseline (to detect primary resistance) and at every conrmed virolog-
ical failure, in order to select the most appropriate antiretrovirals in a 
new regimen.
ART complications
Immune reconstitution inammatory syndrome
Immune reconstitution inammatory syndrome (IRIS) is a common early 
complication of ART, especially in patients who start ART with CD4 
counts below 50 cells/mm3. IRIS presents either with paradoxical deteri-
oration of an existing opportunistic disease (including infections that are 
responding to appropriate therapy) or with the unmasking of a new infec-
tion. The clinical presentation of IRIS events is often characterised by an 
exaggerated immune response, with pronounced inammatory features. 
For example, patients with CMV retinitis developing IRIS on ART develop 
a uveitis; inammatory haloes occur around KS lesions. Paradoxical 
tuberculosis IRIS events are common but it is important to exclude mul-
tidrug resistance, which could be responsible for the deterioration. IRIS 
is associated with a mortality of around 5% but this is higher when it 
complicates CNS infections.
The management of IRIS is to continue ART and to ensure that the 
opportunistic disease is adequately treated. Symptomatic treatments are 
helpful. Glucocorticoids are often used for more severe IRIS manifesta-
tions but they should not be given to patients with KS, as this can result 
in rapid progression of KS lesions.
Antiretroviral adverse drug reactions
Currently recommended antiretrovirals are generally well tolerated. 
Integrase inhibitors may cause insomnia. NNRTIs commonly cause 
hypersensitivity rashes; efavirenz commonly causes mild neuropsychi-
atric effects, but tolerance develops in a few weeks in most patients. 
The NRTI tenofovir occasionally causes nephrotoxicity and loss of bone 
mineral density, but the newer pro-drug tenofovir alafenamide is less 
toxic. PIs may cause gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting and 
diarrhoea), and some are associated with dyslipidaemia.
ART in special situations
Pregnancy
All pregnant women should have HIV testing at an early stage in pregnancy. 
The CD4 count falls by about 25% during pregnancy due to haemodilu-
tion. The course of HIV disease progression is not altered by pregnancy. In 
the pre-ART era, the rate of mother-to-child transmission was 15%–40%, 
with rates being inuenced by several factors (see Box 14.3).
ART has dramatically reduced the risk of mother-to-child transmission 
of HIV to less than 1%. All pregnant women who are ART-naïve should 
start ART as soon as possible. Pregnant women on ART may need to 
have their regimens modied as only a limited number of antiretrovirals 
are recommended in pregnancy. Close viral load monitoring is essential 
during pregnancy.
Caesarean section is associated with a lower risk of mother-to-child 
transmission than vaginal delivery, but the mode of delivery does not 
affect transmission risk if the viral load is suppressed on ART.

[[p409]]
368    HIV INFECTION AND AIDS
HIV is also transmitted by breastfeeding. In high-income countries, 
exclusive formula feeding is generally recommended. In resource-poor 
settings, however, formula feeding is associated with a risk of infant mor-
bidity and mortality, which may negate the benet of not transmitting 
HIV to the infant. There is minimal risk of transmitting HIV by breast-
feeding in women with a suppressed viral load on ART. Furthermore, 
providing antiretrovirals to infants (usually nevirapine monotherapy) while 
they are breastfeeding has been shown to reduce the risk of transmis-
sion. Breastfeeding is therefore now encouraged in resource-poor set-
tings. Infants should be exclusively breastfed for the rst 6 months, as 
mixed feeding (with formula or solids) is associated with a higher risk of 
transmission.
Old age
The specic manifestations of HIV infection in older people are shown 
in Box 14.17
Prevention of HIV
An effective HIV vaccine remains elusive due to the extensive genetic 
diversity of HIV and the lack of a safe attenuated virus. Measures for the 
prevention of HIV transmission are shown in Box 14.18
Pre-exposure prophylaxis
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with daily tenofovir plus emtricitabine 
has been shown to reduce the risk of HIV acquisition in people who are 
at ongoing high risk (e.g. from sex or injecting drug use) and is well toler-
ated. Regular HIV testing should be done in people on PrEP.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is recommended after a potential 
exposure to HIV when the risk is deemed to be signicant after a careful 
risk assessment, in both occupational and non-occupational settings. 
The rst dose should be given as soon as possible. The effectiveness 
of PEP diminishes with time and it is ineffective (and therefore should 
not be started) if given more than 72 hours after exposure. Tenofovir 
together with emtricitabine is the most widely used dual NRTI combina-
tion, together with either a PI or an integrase inhibitor depending on ART 
exposure in the source patient. PEP should not be given if the exposed 
person is HIV-infected. HIV antibody testing should be performed 3 
months after exposure.
Further information
Websites with updated clinical guidelines
aidsinfo.nih.gov AIDSinfo, a service of the US Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS).
bhiva.org British HIV Association.
who.int/health-topics/hiv-aids World Health Organization.           
14.17 HIV infection in old age
 Epidemiology: the HIV-positive population is ageing due to the life-prolonging 
effects of ART.
 Immunity: age-related decline increases the risk of infections. CD4 counts 
decline more rapidly as age extends beyond 40 years, resulting in faster 
disease progression. CD4 responses to ART decrease with increasing age.
 Dementia: HIV causes cerebral atrophy and neurocognitive disorders; dementia 
is therefore more common and more severe than in the HIV-uninfected older 
adults.
 Vascular disease: HIV is associated with an increased risk, exacerbated by 
some antiretrovirals that cause dyslipidaemia or insulin resistance.
 Fragility fractures: bone mineral density is lower in PLHW, which can be 
exacerbated by the NRTI tenofovir.
 Polypharmacy: treatment of co-morbidities is complex due to drug–drug 
interactions with antiretrovirals.
14.18 Prevention measures for HIV transmission
Sexual
 Sex education programmes in schools
 Easily accessible voluntary counselling and testing centres
 Promotion of safer sex practices (delaying sexual debut, condom use, fewer 
sexual partners)
 Effective ART for HIV-infected individuals
 Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for high-risk groups
 Male circumcision
 Post-exposure prophylaxis
Parenteral
 Blood product transmission: donor questionnaire, routine screening of donated 
blood
 Injection drug use: education, needle/syringe exchange, avoidance of ‘shooting 
galleries’, methadone maintenance programmes
Perinatal
 Routine ‘opt-out’ antenatal HIV antibody testing
 Measures to reduce vertical transmission (see text)
Occupational
 Education/training: universal precautions, needlestick injury avoidance
 Post-exposure prophylaxis

[[p410]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 14.1.  HIV infects cells bearing the CD4 receptor. Which co-receptor is 
required for HIV to enter the cell?
A. CD8
B. Chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5)
C. CD20
D. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
E. CD3
Answer: B.
Entry of HIV into the cell commences with binding of the envelope 
glycoprotein gp120 to the CD4 receptor. This results in a conforma-
tional change in gp120 that permits binding to one of two chemokine 
co-receptors, CCR5 or CXCR4. The chemokine co-receptor CCR5 is 
utilised during initial infection, but subsequently the virus may adapt to 
use CXCR4. Individuals who are homozygous for the CCR5 delta 32 
mutation do not express CCR5 on CD4 cells and are immune to HIV 
infection.
 14.2.  Select the most important measure of the efcacy of 
antiretroviral therapy.
A. CD4 lymphocyte count
B. Weight gain
C. Viral load
D. Resolution of HIV symptoms
E. Absence of opportunistic infections
Answer: C.
The most important measure of effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
is a decrease in the level of HIV viraemia measured by quantitative PCR 
of HIV RNA, or ‘viral load’. Baseline viral load should be measured prior 
to initiating ART and this should be repeated 4 weeks after starting 
ART, when there should be at least a 10-fold decrease. Once the viral 
load is suppressed (as dened according to local guidance) measure-
ment should be repeated every 6–12 months.
The CD4 count is the most important laboratory indicator of the degree 
of immune suppression in HIV infection and CD4 counts usually increase 
rapidly in the rst month after starting ART. However, CD4 responses are 
highly variable between patients and do not provide a rapid, sensitive 
and reliable measurement of the effectiveness of ART.
Weight gain, resolution of HIV symptoms and absence of opportunis-
tic infections are all clinical markers of effective ART. However, as these 
are dependent on recovery of effective immune function, they change 
too slowly to provide a rapid, sensitive and reliable measurement of the 
initial and ongoing effectiveness of ART.
 14.3.  Access to antiretroviral therapy has markedly changed the 
epidemiology of HIV. Which of the following statements is 
correct about global epidemiology of HIV over the 5-year period 
2014–2019?
A. Prevalence has decreased and incidence has decreased
B. Prevalence has decreased and incidence has increased
C. Prevalence has remained similar and incidence has decreased
D. Prevalence has increased and incidence has decreased
E. Prevalence has decreased and incidence has remained similar
Answer: D.
The incidence and prevalence of HIV infection are measures of the 
number of new infections per year and the total number of people living 
with HIV (PLWH) respectively.
In 2019 it was estimated that there were 1.7 million new HIV infections, 
compared with 3.1 million in 2001 and 2.6 million in 2009; and there 
were 38 million PLWH, compared with 28.6 million in 2001 and 33.3 
million in 2009.* Therefore, the incidence of HIV infection has decreased 
but the prevalence has increased.
Although behavioural modication is likely to have contributed to the 
decrease in new infections, the main inuence on both incidence and 
prevalence has been expansion of access to effective antiretroviral ther-
apy (ART). ART reduces the incidence of new infections by reducing the 
likelihood of PLWH infecting other people and increases the prevalence 
by prolonging the survival of PLWH.
*UNAIDS data: https://www.unaids.org/en/media/unaids/contentassets/
documents/unaidspublication/2010/20101123_globalreport_en%
5B1%5D.pdf

[[p411]]
Sexually transmitted infections
15
DJ Clutterbuck
Clinical examination in sexually transmitted infection 370
Aetiology 372
Clinical assessment 372
Presenting problems 372
Urethral discharge 372
Genital itch, rash and discomfort 373
Vaginal discharge 374
Genital ulceration 374
Genital lumps 375
Proctitis 375
Lower abdominal pain 375
Epidemiology 375
Prevention 376
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections 377
Syphilis 377
Gonorrhoea 379
Chlamydial infection 379
Mycoplasma genitalium 380
Other sexually transmitted bacterial infections 380
Sexually transmitted viral infections 380
Genital herpes simplex 380
Human papillomavirus and anogenital warts 382
Molluscum contagiosum 382
Viral hepatitis 383

[[p412]]
370    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
Clinical examination in sexually transmitted infection
Observation
Skin of penis
(Retract foreskin if present)
Genital warts
Ulcers
Be aware of normal anatomical
features such as coronal papillae,
or prominent sebaceous or
parafrenal glands
Consent
Explain what genital
examination will involve and
confirm informed consent.
Presence of a chaperone is
routine
Vagina and cervix
Abnormal discharge
Warts
Ulcers
Inflammation
In women with lower abdominal
pain, bimanual examination for
adnexal tenderness (pelvic
inflammatory disease)
Labia majora and minora
Ulcers
Vulvitis
Note normal vestibular papillae
and sebaceous glands
 Mouth
 Eyes
 Joints
 Skin:
    Rash of secondary syphilis
    Scabies
    Manifestations of HIV (Ch. 14)
Skin of pubic area 
Warts
Tinea cruris
Coronal papillae
Inguinal glands
Significant enlargement
Speculum
Vulval carcinoma
Sampling discharge at urethral
meatus
Perianal warts
Proctoscope
Proctitis
Scrotal contents
Abnormal masses or tenderness
(epididymo-orchitis)
8
Rectum
10
Perineum and perianal skin
Warts
Ulcers
Inflammation
9
7
4
3
2
Abdomen
Abnormal masses or tenderness
Tip: Gentle abdominal palpation
is a non-threatening prelude to
genital examination in an anxious
patient
1
Urethral meatus
Pthirus pubis (crab louse)
2
3
1
10
9
8
4
5
7
6
Insets (Coronal papillae, Discharge at urethral meatus, Perianal warts, Vulval carcinoma) From Clutterbuck DJ. Specialist training in sexually 
transmitted infections and HIV. St Louis: Mosby, Elsevier Inc.; 2004. (Proctitis) From McMillan A, Young H, Ogilvie MM, Scott GR. Clinical practice 
in sexually transmissible infections. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2002.

[[p413]]
Clinical examination in sexually transmitted infection    371
15
Identifying STIs in the population
 Testing for STIs in those who present with clinical symptoms identies only a 
small minority of prevalent infections and other methods of case-nding are 
widely employed.
 STI testing for asymptomatic individuals is provided through specialist clinics 
and primary care providers but also directly to populations at risk through 
screening programmes and opportunistic testing.
 Point-of-care testing (PoCT) in the community, home-based self-testing 
(where the test is performed at home) and self-sampling (where it is posted 
to a laboratory) are well proven technologies used internationally for HIV and 
increasingly for syphilis testing.
 Self-sampling for chlamydia and gonorrhoea testing is widely used in the UK 
both for home-based testing and in clinics for convenience and efciency. 
Technology allows testing for an increasing range of organisms, including 
Mycoplasma genitalium, Trichomonas vaginalis and others to be undertaken on 
the same sample.
 STI testing may be offered remotely from clinical assessment – through online 
ordering of self-sampling or self-testing kits, or tests provided in non-clinical 
outreach settings such as youth groups or sex-on-premises venues such as gay 
saunas. 
Examples of risk factors for STIs
Demographic factors
 Younger age (<25)*
 Men who have sex with men (MSM)
 Prior STI diagnosis
Behavioural factors
 Frequent partner change or concurrent partners
 Non-use of condoms, condom errors
 Use of drugs during sex (‘chemsex’)
 Use of geospatial mobile phone dating applications (‘dating apps’) 
*But note that the possibility of STI should never be excluded on the grounds of older age alone.
Investigations for STIs
 Samples for combined nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT) for gonorrhoea 
and chlamydia are taken from anatomical sites at risk – these may be identied 
by face-to-face or online assessment of gender, partner gender and sexual 
practices.
 First-void urine (FVU) is the specimen of choice to test for infection of the male 
urethra and a self-taken swab is preferred for vaginal samples. Clinician-
obtained urethral, cervical or vaginal swabs are alternatives. Pharyngeal 
and rectal swabs may be indicated by sexual history and are often offered 
universally to MSM.
 For gonorrhoea, either as an alternative or adjunct to NAAT testing, swabs from 
the pharynx, urethra, cervix or rectum plated directly on a selective medium 
such as modied New York City (MNYC), or sent in an appropriate transport 
medium, can be cultured for assessment of antimicrobial sensitivities. NAAT-
based sensitivity testing is increasingly available.
 Blood for serological tests including syphilis (STS), e.g. enzyme immunoassay 
(EIA) for antitreponemal immunoglobulin G (IgG) ± IgM antibody. Repeat testing 
may be necessary in the event of negative test results in the rst few weeks 
following exposure.
 Human immunodeciency virus (HIV) test. HIV testing should always be offered 
as part of STI testing. Informed consent is required, but extensive pre-test 
discussion is not.
 Serological tests for hepatitis B (and sometimes hepatitis A and/or C) are offered 
to those at epidemiological risk.
 Additional tests routinely used in the investigation of symptomatic patients in 
sexual health clinics include direct microscopy of Gram-stained samples from 
the male urethra for the diagnosis of urethritis, or of wet-mount and Gram-
stained samples from the vagina for the diagnosis of Trichomonas vaginalis, 
bacterial vaginosis, aerobic vaginitis or candidiasis. 
Sexual health and gender identity
 Medical care in all settings must be inclusive of all patients regardless of sexual 
orientation or gender identity. This has particular relevance in sexual health.
 Gender identity is a characteristic protected by law in the UK and many other 
jurisdictions.
 Denitions of terms commonly used:
 Gender identity: An individual’s innate sense of their own gender, which may 
or may not be congruent with the sex they were assigned at birth.
 Cisgender/Cis: A cis person’s gender identity is generally congruent with the 
sex they were assigned at birth.
 Trans: an umbrella term to describe people whose gender identity differs 
from the sex they were assigned at birth. There is a spectrum of trans 
identities, including but not limited to: trans woman, trans man, transgender, 
genderqueer, non-binary, agender.
 Non-binary (genderqueer): a term for individuals whose gender identity does not 
align with either of the binary categories of ‘man’, ‘woman’, or ‘male’, ‘female’.
 Long-established social norms, health care structures, clinical practice and 
teaching may create barriers to inclusive care for trans and non-binary 
individuals (for example by failing to provide cervical screening to trans men 
who have a cervix, or providing only male and female options in waiting rooms, 
services or on registration forms).
 Clinicians and services can ensure inclusivity by asking about gender identity, 
preferred pronouns and gender of partners and providing tests and investigations 
on the basis of anatomical sites at risk rather than by binary gender. 
Tips on sexual history-taking
1. A simple framing statement before taking the sexual history helps avoid any 
sense of apology or embarrassment. ‘So, thinking about your sex life …’; 
‘Some questions about your sex life …’.
2. Use open language to avoid the impression of being judgemental; inclusive 
words such as ‘partner’ rather than ‘boyfriend’.
3. Avoid euphemisms (‘down below’). Straightforward anatomical terms are 
advisable (in the UK ‘vagina’ is generally understood but ‘vulva’ often is not). 
‘So, you mean on the lips of your vagina?’
4. Focusing on events helps to avoid labels and generalisations. ‘When did you last 
have sex, any sort of sex …?’, ‘When did you last have sex with anyone else/
any other partner?’
5. Use permission-giving in questioning (explicit permission for a range of 
answers). ‘Have your partners been men, women or both?’
6. Invite the ‘non-acceptable’ or non-sanctioned answer. ‘So was that without a 
condom …?’
7. Understand and mitigate the ways in which your own values might affect your 
questioning. ‘When was your last previous partner?’ (assumes serial monogamy 
– so avoid). 

[[p414]]
372    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
Aetiology
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are infections usually but not exclu-
sively transmitted via the moist mucous membranes of the penis, vulva, 
vagina, cervix, anus, rectum, mouth and pharynx during sexual activity. 
STIs include syphilis, gonorrhoea, genital herpes, genital warts, chlamydia, 
Mycoplasma genitalium, trichomoniasis and lymphogranuloma venereum 
(LGV). Chancroid and granuloma inguinale are STIs seen in tropical coun-
tries but are rare in the UK. Sexually transmissible blood-borne viruses 
including human immunodeciency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B and C (see 
Ch. 14) are those in which sexual contact is an important, but not the only 
mode of transmission. Enteric hepatitis virus A and sexually transmitted 
enteric infections (STEI) including Salmonella and Shigella may be spread 
by oro-anal sexual contact, although this is responsible for only a minority 
of cases. Other viruses, including Zika virus and SARS-CoV-2 (the coro-
navirus causing COVID-19) (see Ch. 13) are found in semen and may be 
sexually transmitted, although this is not a commonly recognised route of 
acquisition. Untreated STIs can lead to chronic pain or infertility and can 
lead to genital cancers such as cervical and anal carcinoma. Ulcerative 
STIs increase the risk of transmission of untreated HIV about threefold 
and up to a third of worldwide HIV transmissions are thought to be attrib-
utable to herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2. STIs in pregnancy can cause 
serious complications, including stillbirth, neonatal death, prematurity, neo-
natal sepsis, low birth weight and congenital abnormalities (Box 15.1), or 
disseminated infection in the mother. Other conditions, including bacterial 
vaginosis (BV) and genital candidiasis, are not regarded as STIs, although 
they are common causes of vaginal discharge. Genital itch, discomfort or 
rash with a wide variety of underlying causes in sexually active individuals 
also present to sexual health clinicians.
Clinical assessment
The use of a recognisable set of signs and symptoms to identify the 
likely infective cause and guide antimicrobial treatment without diagnos-
tic testing is termed syndromic management and has been a mainstay 
of clinical care of STIs worldwide for several decades. The risk of wide-
spread antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is currently one of the greatest 
challenges in STI control, so syndromic management is increasingly 
supported by improvements in availability, reliability and speed of diag-
nostic testing technologies, in particular nucleic acid amplication testing 
(NAAT). However, diagnosis on the basis of observed syndromes (e.g. 
vaginal discharge) remains valuable even in resource-rich settings where 
sophisticated tests are widely available. The majority of those presenting 
with genital syndromes do not have STI. Conversely, around 50% of all 
gonorrhoea and syphilis and 80% of chlamydial infections are asymp-
tomatic and many of those who are symptomatic do not seek care. 
A detailed understanding of symptoms and of social and behavioural 
risk factors for STI in an individual directs examination, investigations 
indicated and anatomical sites sampled. For example, rectal samples 
are indicated in those who have had condomless receptive anal sex. A 
good sexual history is key to identifying these factors (Box 15.2).
STI in children
The presence of an STI in a child may be indicative of sexual abuse, 
although vertical transmission may explain some presentations in the 
rst 2 years. In an older child and in adolescents, STI may be the 
result of voluntary sexual activity. Specic issues regarding the man-
agement of STI and other infections in adolescence are discussed in 
Box 13.23
Presenting problems
Urethral discharge
Discharge from the male urethra is a very common presenting problem 
whereas discharge from the female urethra alone is rare. Male urethral 
discharge caused by gonorrhoea (gonococcal urethritis) is distinguished 
from the more frequently seen non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU). Causes 
of NGU include Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium and less 
frequently Trichomonas vaginalis, HSV, other mycoplasmas, urea plas-
mas or adenoviruses. Some cases are thought not to have an infectious 
aetiology and are termed non-specic urethritis (NSU).
Gonococcal urethritis usually causes symptoms within 7 days of expo-
sure. The discharge is typically profuse and purulent. Chlamydial urethri-
tis has an incubation period of 1–4 weeks, and tends to result in milder 
symptoms than gonorrhoea. However, a conrmed microbiological 
diagnosis should always be the aim.
15.1 Possible outcomes of STI in pregnancy
Organism
Mode of transmission
Outcome for fetus/neonate
Outcome for mother
Treponema pallidum
Transplacental
Ranges from no effect to severe stigmata 
or miscarriage/stillbirth
None directly relating to the pregnancy
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Intrapartum
Severe conjunctivitis
Possibility of ascending infection post partum
Chlamydia trachomatis
Intrapartum
Conjunctivitis, pneumonia
Possibility of ascending infection post partum
Herpes simplex
Usually intrapartum, but 
transplacental infection may 
occur rarely
Ranges from no effect to severe 
disseminated infection
Rarely, primary infection during 2nd/3rd 
trimesters becomes disseminated, with high 
maternal mortality
Human papillomaviruses
Intrapartum
Anogenital warts or laryngeal papillomas 
are very rare
Warts may spread and enlarge during 
pregnancy, but usually regress post partum
15.2 History-taking for STI
 Symptoms: genital ulceration, rash, irritation, pain, swelling and urinary 
symptoms, especially dysuria. Urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, pelvic pain 
or dyspareunia. Testicular pain, abdominal and systemic symptoms.
 Medical history: medical problems including previous STI, allergies, medication 
(prescribed, over the counter, recreational drugs including ‘chemsex’), 
vaccinations (hepatitis A and B, HPV); obstetric and gynaecological history, 
cervical smears and contraception.*
 Sexual history: last sexual contact, partner gender, partner status (one 
off/regular/other), partner geographical origin, consent to sex, payment/
transactional sex. Other recent partners.
 Sexual practices: digital or penile insertive or receptive vaginal or anal, 
orogenital or oro-anal, protection (condoms, PrEP).
(HPV = human papilloma virus; PrEP = pre-exposure prophylaxis)
*In any sexual health consultation with a woman of reproductive age, contraception should 
always be discussed and where possible provided.

[[p415]]
Presenting problems    373
15
investigations for gonorrhoea are undertaken; if no GNDC are seen, a 
label of NGU is applied. In all settings, a FVU sample or swab should be 
taken for a combined nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT) for gonor-
rhoea, chlamydia and, where available, M. genitalium
Management
Syndromic management with prescription of multiple antimicrobials to 
cover the possibility of chlamydia, M. genitalium and sometimes gon-
orrhoea may be appropriate where diagnostic tests are unavailable or 
results delayed. Antibiotic use and selection is inuenced by concerns 
about antibiotic resistance in both N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium. 
Microscopy ndings allow a more accurate presumptive diagnosis. 
Additional treatment for gonorrhoea may be given on receipt of sensitivity 
results obtained by culture or NAAT technology (p. 103).
Genital itch, rash and discomfort
Genital symptoms including itch, irritation or discomfort may present 
acutely or as chronic problems with or without rash. Causes are infectious, 
non-infectious or multifactorial. Box 15.3 provides a guide to diagnosis.
Balanitis usually presents acutely and refers to inammation of the 
glans penis, often extending to the under-surface of the prepuce (fore-
skin), in which case it is called balanoposthitis. Candidiasis affecting the 
glans penis or vulvovagina is sometimes associated with immune de-
ciency, diabetes mellitus and the use of broad-spectrum antimicrobials, 
Fig. 15.1 A Gram-stained urethral smear from a man with gonococcal 
urethritis. Gram-negative diplococci are seen within polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
15.3 Differential diagnosis of genital itch and/or rash
Likely diagnosis
Acute or 
chronic
Itch
Pain
Discharge
Specic characteristics
Diagnostic test
Treatment
Candidiasis
Acute
✓
–
White
Post-coital in men
Microscopy
Antifungal cream, e.g. 
clotrimazole or single dose oral 
antifungal, e.g. uconazole 
150mg
Candidiasis
Chronic/
recurrent
✓
±
White
Usually cyclical, rare in 
men
Microscopy (culture 
for yeasts other than 
Candida albicans in 
recurrent/refractory 
disease)
Oral antifungal, e.g. uconazole 
150mg weekly for 6 months
Dermatoses, e.g. 
eczema or psoriasis
Either
✓
–
–
Similar to lesions 
elsewhere on skin
Clinical
Mild topical glucocorticoid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
Genital herpes
Acute
±
✓
–
Atypical ulcers are not 
uncommon
Swab for HSV NAAT
Oral antiviral, e.g. aciclovir
Pthirus pubis (‘crab 
lice’) infection
Either
✓
–
–
Lice and nits seen 
attached to pubic hairs
Can be by microscopy 
but usually visual
According to local sensitivities  
Often permethrin
Lichen planus
(p. 1103)
Either
±
–
–
Violaceous papules ±
Wickham's striae
Clinical
None or mild topical 
glucocorticoid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
Lichen sclerosus
Chronic
±
–
–
Ivory–white plaques, 
scarring
Clinical or biopsy
Strong topical glucocorticoid, 
e.g. clobetasol
Plasma cell balanitis 
of Zoon (penis)
Chronic
✓
±
Shiny, inamed 
circumscribed areas
Clinical or biopsy
Strong topical glucocorticoid, 
e.g. clobetasol
Circinate balanitis 
(penis)
Either
–
–
–
Painless erosions with 
raised edges; usually as 
part of SARA (p. 1035)
Clinical
Mild topical glucocorticoid, e.g. 
hydrocortisone
Anaerobic (erosive) 
balanitis
Acute
±
–
Yellow
Offensive tight prepuce 
and poor hygiene may be 
aggravating factors
Clinical
Saline bathing ± metronidazole
Vulvodynia and vulvo 
vestibulitis
✓
Dyspareunia common, 
pain on touching 
erythematous area
Clinical
Refer to specialist vulva clinic
(HSV = herpes simplex virus; NAAT = nucleic acid amplication test; SARA = sexually active reactive arthritis)
Investigations
If microscopy facilities are available, a Gram-stained smear of urethral 
exudate (Fig. 15.1) reveals signicant numbers of polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes (PMNL). Urethritis is dened as ≥ 5 PMNL per high-power 
eld in the UK (the US Centers for Disease Control recommends a 
lower threshold of ≥ 2). If Gram-negative intracellular diplococci (GNDC) 
are also seen, a working diagnosis of gonorrhoea is made and further 

[[p416]]
374    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
glucocorticoids or antimitotic drugs. Chronic persistent or recurrent itch, 
commonly affecting the vulva, may be due to recurrent candidiasis with 
hypersensitivity to candidal antigens. Avoiding irritants such as scented 
hygiene products, soaps and detergents may be helpful in any case of 
chronic itch or discomfort.
The importance of psychological issues such as relationship or STI 
concerns, or a psychiatric diagnosis as a cause or a consequence of 
chronic or recurrent genital symptoms should always be considered.
Vaginal discharge
The normal physiological vaginal discharge may vary considerably over 
the menstrual cycle and under the inuence of other hormonal changes 
such as puberty, pregnancy or prescribed contraception. An increase or 
change in vaginal discharge may also be due to a number of infective 
and non-infective conditions (Box 15.4). Worldwide, the most common 
treatable STI causing vaginal discharge is trichomoniasis; other possibil-
ities include gonorrhoea and chlamydia. However, even in areas of high 
STI prevalence, most of those presenting with vaginal discharge alone 
will not have STI, so syndromic management of rst presentation of vagi-
nal discharge is often appropriate. Symptoms can help to distinguish the 
causes and anatomical origin of a vaginal discharge including:
 an increased discharge without any itch or irritation accompanied 
by an unpleasant or shy odour, worse after sexual intercourse and 
during menstruation, indicates the possibility of BV
 vulval itching accompanied by a thick, white vaginal discharge,  
vulval burning, external dysuria and supercial dyspareunia may 
indicate candidiasis
 a purulent or mucopurulent discharge, with bloodstaining and/or 
post-coital or intermenstrual bleeding indicates the possibility of a 
discharge originating from an inamed cervix, more commonly asso-
ciated with STI including chlamydia and gonorrhoea.
Testing for STI should usually be decided by risk assessment 
rather than symptoms and usually includes vulvovaginal swabs for 
NAAT tests for chlamydia, gonorrhoea and with increasing availabil-
ity Trichomonas vaginalis. Speculum examination, supported in spe-
cialist sexual health services by testing with narrow range pH paper 
and Gram-stain microscopy, allows rapid diagnosis in many cases. 
A homogeneous off-white discharge, vaginal pH greater than 4.5, 
and microscopy revealing reduced lactobacilli with Gram-variable 
organisms coating vaginal squamous cells (so-called Clue cells, Fig. 
15.2), suggests BV. If there is vulval and vaginal erythema, a curdy 
discharge, vaginal pH less than 4.5, and fungal spores and pseudo-
hyphae on microscopy, the diagnosis is candidiasis. A profuse yellow 
or green discharge with signicant vulvovaginal inammation and a 
very high pH suggests trichomoniasis, conrmed by nding motile 
agellate protozoa on a wet-mount microscopy slide, by culture or 
by NAAT testing.
A purulent discharge from an inamed cervix may contain GNDC on 
Gram-stain microscopy, allowing presumptive treatment for gonorrhoea. 
However, clinical examination and microscopy has very low sensitivity for 
N. gonorrhoeae in women, so NAAT and/or culture tests for STI should 
always be taken in women with behavioural or demographic risk factors 
for STI.
Treatment of infections causing vaginal discharge is shown in Box 15.4
Genital ulceration
The most common cause of genital ulceration is genital herpes, but the 
possibility of other diagnoses including syphilis and LGV must be consid-
ered in all cases, with a higher index of suspicion if the patient is a MSM 
or has had a sexual partner from a region where tropical STIs are more 
common. Clinical signs and symptoms can help to distinguish between 
herpes and syphilis but certainty requires diagnostic testing. In herpes, 
multiple painful ulcers typically affect the introitus, labiae and perineum 
of the female genitalia and the glans, coronal sulcus or shaft of penis 
(Fig. 15.3). The presence of multiple lesions at different stages (erythe-
matous, vesicular/blistering, ulcerating and resolving) is strongly support-
ive of a herpes diagnosis. Perianal herpes ulcers may be seen and are 
usually associated with receptive anal sex. Inguinal lymphadenopathy 
and systemic features, such as fever and malaise, are more common in 
women than in men.
In contrast, the classic lesion of primary syphilis (chancre) is single, 
painless and indurated; however, multiple (usually < 5) lesions are com-
monly seen and anal chancres are often painful. Ulcers also occur in the 
primary stage of LGV and should be considered in MSM, especially if 
inguinal lymphadenopathy ensues.
15.4 Infections that cause vaginal discharge
Cause
Clinical features
Treatment (in pregnancy 
seek specialist advice)
Candidiasis
Vulval and vaginal 
inammation
Fluconazole1 150 mg orally 
as a single dose or
Curdy white discharge 
adherent to walls of 
vagina
Clotrimazole2 500 mg 
pessary once at night and 
clotrimazole cream twice 
daily
Low vaginal pH
Trichomoniasis
Vulval and vaginal 
inammation
Metronidazole3 400 mg orally 
twice daily for 5–7 days or
Frothy yellow/green 
discharge
Metronidazole3 2 g orally as 
a single dose
Bacterial 
vaginosis
No inammation
Metronidazole3 2 g stat or 
400 mg twice daily orally for 
5–7 days or
White homogeneous 
discharge
Metronidazole3 vaginal gel 
0.75% daily for 5 days or
High vaginal pH
Clindamycin1,4 vaginal 
cream 2% daily for 7 days
Aerobic vaginitis: 
streptococcal/
staphylococcal 
infection
Purulent vaginal 
discharge
Choice of antibiotic depends 
on sensitivity tests
1Avoid in pregnancy and breastfeeding.2Clotrimazole, and clindamycin damage latex condoms 
and diaphragms. 3Avoid alcoholic drinks until 48 hours after nishing treatment. Avoid high-dose 
regimens in pregnancy or breastfeeding. 4Clostridioides difcile
use of clindamycin cream.
Fig. 15.2 Gram stain of a Clue cell from a patient with bacterial vaginosis. The 
margin of this vaginal epithelial cell is obscured by a coating of anaerobic organisms. 
From McMillan A, Young H, Ogilvie MM, Scott GR. Clinical practice in sexually 
transmissible infections. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2002.

[[p417]]
Epidemiology    375
15
Diagnosis is made by gently swabbing the lesion(s) for detection of 
HSV DNA and increasingly for Treponema pallidum by NAAT. A swab for 
testing for LGV (see Box 15.12) may be taken in MSM. In specialist sex-
ual health services, syphilis may be diagnosed in-clinic by dark-ground 
microscopy of material obtained from a chancre. Serological tests for 
syphilis should always be performed in patients presenting with genital 
ulcer.
Other infective causes seen in the UK include varicella zoster virus 
(p. 282) and trauma with secondary infection. Tropical STIs, such 
as chancroid and granuloma inguinale, are rare and are described in 
Box 15.12
Non-infective inammatory causes include lichen sclerosus, aph-
thosis, Stevens–Johnson syndrome (see Ch. 27), Behçet’s disease 
(p. 1047) and xed drug reactions. In older patients, squamous cell car-
cinoma and vulval or penile intra-epithelial neoplasia (VIN and PIN) should 
be considered and excluded by biopsy in cases of doubt. The possibility 
of a pre-existing underlying pathology with a co-incident infection should 
be considered if lesions recur or fail to resolve.
Genital lumps
The most common cause of genital ‘lumps’ is warts. These are clas-
sically found in areas of friction during sex, such as the parafrenal skin 
and prepuce of the penis, the inner aspect of the vulval labiae, the 
fourchette and perineum. Warts may also be seen on the keratinised 
epithelium of the shaft of the penis, pubis or inner thighs and less com-
monly in the urethral meatus. Perianal warts are relatively common in 
both men and women even in the absence of a history of receptive 
anal sex.
The differential diagnosis includes molluscum contagiosum and skin 
tags. Normal anatomical features may be confused with warts by young 
men and women and occasionally by clinicians. These include coronal 
papillae, parafrenal glands or sebaceous glands (Fordyce spots) in men 
and vulval papillae and sebaceous glands in women.
Proctitis
Proctitis due to STI is almost exclusively diagnosed in MSM, but occa-
sionally presents in women. STIs that may cause proctitis include gon-
orrhoea, chlamydia, herpes and syphilis. Lymphogranuloma venereum 
(LGV), caused by sub strains L1–-3 of Chlamydia trachomatis, is now a 
common cause of severe proctitis in MSM in the UK.
Symptoms include mucopurulent anal discharge, rectal bleeding, pain 
and tenesmus. Examination may show mucopus and erythema with 
contact bleeding (p. 370). In addition to the diagnostic tests listed on 
page 371, a PCR test for HSV should be performed, with NAAT for LGV 
subtypes if chlamydia NAAT is positive. Treatment is directed at the indi-
vidual infections.
Gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhoea may indicate sexually 
transmitted enteric infection (STEI) with organisms such as Salmonella, 
Shigella, Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium and Entamoeba histolytica
(see Ch. 13).
Lower abdominal pain
Lower abdominal and pelvic pain presenting in women of reproductive 
age has a wide differential diagnosis. In sexually active women, this 
includes complications of early pregnancy as well as those of STI. Pelvic 
inammatory disease (PID) is usually the result of infection ascending 
from the endocervix to cause inammation of the endometrium, fallo-
pian tubes and ovaries, sometimes extending to the parametrium and 
the pelvic peritoneum or causing tubo-ovarian abscess. A diagnosis of 
chlamydia, gonorrhoea or M. genitalium infection supports the diagnosis 
but PID commonly occurs without STI. A denitive diagnosis of PID can 
only be made by laparoscopy, which is not practical or appropriate in 
the majority of cases. Early treatment improves outcomes, so a clinical 
diagnosis is made with a low threshold for initiating empirical antibiotic 
treatment. Other symptoms suggesting PID include deep dyspareunia, 
abnormal vaginal discharge and/or bleeding and symptoms of systemic 
infection such as fever and malaise. On examination, lower abdomi-
nal tenderness is usually bilateral, and bimanual vaginal examination 
reveals adnexal tenderness with or without cervical motion tenderness. 
Diagnostic tests (p. 371) should include a pregnancy test because the 
differential diagnosis includes ectopic pregnancy.
If a clinical diagnosis of PID is thought likely, broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics active against gonorrhoea, chlamydia and Gram-negative organisms, 
such as ceftriaxone, doxycycline and metronidazole, should be initiated 
immediately. Hospital admission for intravenous therapy may be required 
in severe cases. Delaying treatment increases the likelihood of adverse 
sequelae, such as abscess formation, and tubal scarring that may lead 
to ectopic pregnancy, infertility or chronic pain.
Acute or chronic pain in the male pelvis may be attributable to infec-
tive prostatitis or abacterial prostatic pain syndromes. Infections are usu-
ally associated with organisms causing urinary infection and STI is not 
implicated.
Epidemiology
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there were over 
376 million cases of the four major curable STIs (syphilis, gonorrhoea, 
chlamydia and trichomoniasis) in adults aged 15–49 throughout the 
world in 2016, with 90% in lower-income countries. Most of the compli-
cations of untreated STI, including chronic pain, infertility, genital cancers 
and the increased risk of acquiring HIV infection, disproportionately affect 
women.
STI transmission depends partly on the number of sexual partners 
(high rates of partner change) and concurrency (having sex with more 
than one partner during the same time period) in any given popula-
tion. Hence increases in STI prevalence are driven by changes in sexual 
Fig. 15.3 Penile herpes simplex (HSV-2) infection.

[[p418]]
376    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
behaviour, ways of increasing sexual mixing (nding new partners out-
side a social group or geographical area ), such as travel or the use of 
mobile phone apps, and early sexual debut. Rates of different infections 
may also be affected by microbiological factors such as the emergence 
of strains carrying genetic mutations conferring antimicrobial resistance 
or causing asymptomatic infection. Human biological factors include 
changes in the prevalence of particular sexual behaviours (such as oral 
or anal sex), increased geographical mobility within and between coun-
tries, or the rates of vaccination and use of protection, for example 
condoms and pre-exposure HIV prophylaxis (PrEP). Consequently, STI 
incidence can vary dramatically by geography and over time, affected 
by structural changes such as economic decline, mass migration, leg-
islation or changes in social mores and sexual behaviour, but also the 
availability of tests and services, treatment, prevention and vaccination 
programmes. In common with other infectious diseases, demographic 
risk factors relating to race, age, gender and sexual orientation com-
bined with geographical and social deprivation (‘syndemics’) are often 
associated with increased STI prevalence in subpopulations across the 
world. These factors are also commonly barriers to access to educa-
tion, prevention, testing and treatment services. For those affected by 
multiple risk factors, the population from whom they choose a sexual 
partner is likely to be a more signicant determinant of STI risk than 
their individual sexual behaviours. The inability of individuals (in particu-
lar women) to make choices about consent to sex and reproductive 
health, including the necessity of transactional sex (exchange of sex for 
money, goods or protection) is an important additional factor for many 
such populations.
Prevention
STI prevention involves making deliberate changes to affect the 
epidemiological factors described above at all levels to reduce the risk 
of acquisition of infection (Box 15.5). This may involve structural and 
legislative interventions (such as UK marriage equality, gender recogni-
tion laws) and deliberate social inuencing (such as addressing HIV or 
trans stigma through TV drama). Primary biomedical and behavioural 
interventions (to prevent acquisition of infection) such as hepatitis B vac-
cination for MSM may be applied to populations or individuals at risk. 
Secondary prevention includes the early detection of infection to reduce 
the spread of infection by limiting the period of infectivity and mitigate 
harm and often involves designing services to provide equity of access 
to groups affected by higher prevalence of infection (e.g. chlamydia 
screening for young people, antenatal HIV testing in maternity services). 
Tertiary prevention includes biomedical interventions such as ensuring 
access to effective early treatment for the individual to prevent onward 
transmission. Partner notication (contact tracing) is a cornerstone of 
STI prevention (Box 15.6). It involves identifying recent sexual contacts 
at risk of infection to allow testing and in some cases the provision of 
treatment without conrming the individual is infected (termed epidemio-
logical treatment). Partner notication may be undertaken by the patient, 
sometimes with professional help, or by the provider (clinician), requiring 
high levels of sensitivity and respect for condentiality and anonymity. It 
is increasingly supported by technology such as dedicated partner noti-
cation apps and online systems. The benets of provision of antibiotics 
for partners without a conrmed diagnosis must be carefully weighed 
15.5 Examples of public health interventions to prevent STI in subpopulations with increased prevalence
Primary prevention: 
Structural/societal
Primary prevention: 
Biomedical
Primary prevention: 
Behavioural
Secondary prevention
Tertiary prevention
Syphilis in MSM
Marriage equality
Prophylactic antibiotics 
(research only)
Inclusive schools 
sex and relationship 
education (SRE)
Free online syphilis 
self-testing provision
App-based partner 
notication, 1-to-1 
behaviour change 
interventions
Targeted MSM services
HPV-related cervical 
cancer in low-income 
women
Gender equal pay 
legislation
HPV vaccination
Condom skills 
demonstration in youth 
services
Cervical (pre) cancer 
screening
Surgical treatment for 
CIN (e.g. loop diathermy)
Countering ‘anti-Vacc’ 
propaganda through 
social media
Smoking cessation 
medication
HIV in transgender 
women
Hate crime legislation
Promotion and provision 
of PrEP
Safer sex advice in 
holistic gender services
Outreach HIV testing 
services
Treatment as Prevention 
(TasP)
Trans-inclusive health 
services
PrEP for partners
(CIN = cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia; HPV = human papilloma virus; MSM = men who have sex with men; PrEP = pre-exposure prophylaxis)
15.6 Management goals in diagnosed bacterial STI
Goal
Interventions
Prevention of onward 
transmission
Advice to abstain until treatment 
completed
Notication of sexual partners for testing/
epidemiological treatment
Prevention of antimicrobial 
resistance
Antibiotic selection based on current 
local resistance data
Antimicrobial test-of-cure
Culture/NAAT based antimicrobial 
resistance testing
Identify other undiagnosed  
STI/BBV infection
Routine testing for other STIs, including 
HIV
Prevention of viral STIs for  
those at increased risk
Vaccination (HPV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B)
PrEP for HIV
Opportunistic health 
improvement
Contraceptive advice and provision
Address problematic alcohol/recreational 
drug use
Brief behaviour change interventions
(BBV = blood-borne virus; HPV = human papilloma virus; NAAT = nucleic acid amplication 
test; PrEP = pre-exposure prophylaxis)

[[p419]]
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections    377
15
against the risks of antibiotic resistance in the community. Behaviour 
change interventions, applied to populations or individuals at increased 
STI risk, sometimes following an initial STI diagnosis, have a good evi-
dence base. However, proving or excluding a direct effect of population 
interventions that are ‘distal’ to the outcome measure (i.e. STI rates), 
such as schools sex and relationships education (SRE) or mass media 
campaigns, is extremely challenging due to multiple confounding factors.
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections
Syphilis
Syphilis is caused by infection, through abrasions in the skin or mucous 
membranes, with the spirochaete Treponema pallidum subspecies 
pallidum. In adults the infection is usually sexually acquired; however, 
transmission by kissing, blood transfusion and percutaneous injury has 
been reported. Congenital syphilis, caused by transplacental infection of 
the fetus, remains rare in the UK, but an estimated one million pregnant 
women worldwide had active syphilis in 2016, causing about 200 000 
stillbirths or neonatal deaths. Rates of infectious syphilis have risen in the 
UK over the last decade to levels last seen in the 1940s. About 75% of 
syphilis cases in the UK are in MSM.
The natural history of untreated syphilis is variable. Primary and sec-
ondary syphilis symptoms resolve spontaneously without treatment, 
meaning that the disease may go unrecognised and untreated with a risk 
of late complications. Infection may remain latent throughout, or clinical 
features may develop at any time.
Acquired syphilis 
Early syphilis 
Primary syphilis
Following exposure, the incubation period is typically around 21 days, 
with a range of 9–90 days. A primary lesion or chancre (Fig. 15.4) devel-
ops at the site of infection, usually in the genital area. A dull red macule 
develops, becomes papular and then erodes to form an indurated ulcer 
(chancre). Chancres may be multiple or atypical. The draining ingui-
nal lymph nodes may become moderately enlarged, mobile, discrete 
and rubbery. The chancre and the lymph nodes are both painless and 
non-tender, unless there is concurrent or secondary infection. Without 
treatment, the chancre will resolve within 2–6 weeks to leave a thin 
atrophic scar.
Chancres may develop on the vaginal wall and on the cervix. 
Extragenital chancres are found in up to a third of MSM, affecting sites 
such as the nger, lip, tongue, tonsil, nipple, anus or rectum. Anal chan-
cres often resemble ssures and may be painful.
Secondary syphilis
This occurs 6–8 weeks after the development of the chancre, when tre-
ponemes disseminate to produce a multisystem disease. Constitutional 
symptoms, such as mild fever, malaise and headache, are common. 
Over 75% of patients present with a rash on the trunk and limbs that 
may later involve the palms and soles; this is initially macular but evolves 
to maculopapular or papular forms, which are generalised, symmetrical 
and non-irritable. Scales may form on the papules later. Lesions are red, 
changing to a ‘gun-metal’ grey as they resolve. Without treatment, the 
rash may last for up to 12 weeks and is easily confused with psoriasis, 
pityriasis rosea, scabies, allergic drug reaction, erythema multiforme or 
pityriasis (tinea) versicolor, particularly if risk factors for syphilis infection 
have not been identied. Primary HIV infection (Ch. 14) is an important 
differential diagnosis.
Condylomata lata (papules coalescing to plaques) may develop 
in warm, moist sites such as the vulva or perianal area. Generalised 
non-tender lymphadenopathy is present in over 50% of patients. 
Mucosal lesions, known as mucous patches, may affect the genitalia, 
mouth, pharynx or larynx. Rarely, conuence produces characteristic 
‘snail track ulcers’ in the mouth.
Other features of secondary syphilis may present with or without 
rash; these include meningitis, cranial nerve palsies, anterior or post-
erior uveitis, hepatitis, gastritis, glomerulonephritis or periostitis. Although 
neurosyphilis has often been regarded as a manifestation of late syphilis, 
the commonest presentation of neurosyphilis in the UK is neurovascular 
syphilis presenting in the secondary stage.
The clinical manifestations of secondary syphilis will resolve without 
treatment but relapse occurs in up to 25% of cases within the 2 years of 
infection. The disease then enters the phase of latency.
Latent syphilis
This phase is characterised by the presence of positive syphilis serology 
or the diagnostic cerebrospinal uid (CSF) abnormalities of neurosyph-
ilis in an untreated patient with no evidence of clinical disease. In early 
latency (within 2 years of infection), syphilis may be transmitted sex-
ually. In late latent syphilis the patient is no longer sexually infectious. 
Transmission of syphilis from a pregnant woman to her fetus, and rarely 
by blood transfusion, is possible for several years following infection.
Late syphilis 
Late latent syphilis
Without treatment, over 60% of patients will suffer little or no ill health from 
untreated syphilis, although many of these have asymptomatic patholog-
ical changes identiable at autopsy. This is termed late latent syphilis. 
Other manifestations of late syphilis are now rarely seen in the UK, partly 
because of the prescription of antibiotics for other illnesses, such as res-
piratory tract or skin infections, may treat syphilis serendipitously.
Cardiovascular syphilis
The commonest late manifestation of untreated syphilis is involvement of 
the ascending aorta and sometimes the aortic arch, presenting between 
10 and 30 years after infection as aortic incompetence, angina and aortic 
aneurysm (p. 442).
Benign tertiary syphilis
A chronic granulomatous lesion called a gumma is characteristic and 
may be single or multiple, developing 3–10 years after infection. It is rarely 
seen in the UK. Mucosal lesions may occur in the mouth, pharynx, larynx 
or nasal septum, appearing as punched-out ulcers. Gummas of the tibia, 
skull, clavicle and sternum have been described, as has involvement of 
Fig. 15.4 Primary syphilis. A painless ulcer (chancre) is shown in the coronal 
sulcus of the penis. This is usually associated with inguinal lymphadenopathy. From 
Clutterbuck DJ. Specialist training in sexually transmitted infections and HIV. St Louis: 
Mosby, Elsevier Inc.; 2004.

[[p420]]
378    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
the brain, spinal cord, liver, testis and, rarely, other organs. Resolution of 
active disease should follow treatment, though some tissue damage may 
be permanent. Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria (p. 959) may be seen.
Neurosyphilis
This may also take years to develop. Asymptomatic infection is associated 
with CSF abnormalities in the absence of clinical signs. Meningovascular 
disease, tabes dorsalis and general paralysis of the insane constitute the 
symptomatic forms (p. 1178).
Congenital syphilis
Where antenatal serological screening is routinely practised with high 
uptake, including the UK, congenital syphilis is rare. Antisyphilitic treat-
ment in pregnancy treats the fetus, if infected, as well as the mother.
Treponemal infection may give rise to a variety of outcomes after 
4 months of gestation, when the fetus becomes immunocompetent:
 miscarriage or stillbirth, prematurely or at term
 birth of a syphilitic baby (a very sick baby with hepatosplenomegaly, 
bullous rash and perhaps pneumonia)
 birth of a baby who develops signs of early congenital syphilis during 
the rst few weeks of life (Box 15.7)
 birth of a baby with latent infection who either remains well or devel-
ops congenital syphilis/stigmata later in life (see Box 15.7).
Investigations in adult cases
Nucleic acid testing such as PCR for Treponema pallidum is available 
increasingly routinely for the diagnosis of early syphilis in samples of 
serum collected from chancres, or from moist or eroded lesions in sec-
ondary syphilis. Dark eld microscopy remains in use as the fastest near 
patient test in many specialist sexual health services.
Serological tests for syphilis (STS) such as treponemal enzyme immu-
noassays (EIAs) for IgG and IgM antibodies are more commonly used for 
routine testing in most settings and for antenatal screening. Other tre-
ponemal and non-treponemal tests are usually done if an initial screening 
test is positive or for follow up for positive cases and are listed in Box 15.8. 
Syphilis IgM becomes positive at approximately 2 weeks, while non-
treponemal tests become positive about 4 weeks after primary syphilis.
Following treatment, non-treponemal tests are routinely monitored 
for declining titres, usually to low or undetectable levels within 12–18 
months for primary or secondary syphilis. In patients with longstanding 
untreated late syphilis there may be high antibody titres with little change 
even after adequate treatment. Consequently, positive syphilis serology 
may be found during the investigation of other conditions (e.g. demen-
tia), reecting infection that has been treated deliberately or by accident, 
many years previously. Interpretation of results requires knowledge of 
any treatment, which may include antibiotics given for other indications.
Biological false-positive reactions occur occasionally; these are most 
commonly seen with Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) or 
rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests, which do not require laboratory facilities 
so are used as screening tests in many countries. False positives are 
identied when treponemal tests are negative. Acute false-positive reac-
tions may be associated with infections, such as infectious mononucle-
osis, chickenpox and malaria, and may also occur in pregnancy. Chronic 
false-positive reactions may be associated with autoimmune diseases.
The CSF should also be examined in patients with clinical signs of 
neurosyphilis (p. 1178) and in both early and late congenital syphilis.
Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram are useful 
in the investigation of cardiovascular syphilis. Biopsy may be required to 
diagnose gumma.
Endemic treponematoses, such as yaws, endemic (non-venereal) 
syphilis (bejel) and pinta (see Ch. 13), are caused by treponemes that are 
morphologically indistinguishable from T. pallidum and cannot be reliably 
differentiated by serological tests.
Investigations in suspected congenital syphilis
A newborn baby may have positive serological tests due to passively 
transferred maternal antibodies, but non-treponemal tests should 
become negative within 3–6 months of birth if the mother is adequately 
treated and child is uninfected. A neonate with a positive EIA test for 
antitreponemal IgM suggests early congenital syphilis. A diagnosis of 
congenital syphilis mandates investigation of the mother, her partner and 
any siblings.
Management
Penicillin remains the drug of choice for all stages of infection almost 
80 years after its introduction. A single dose of 2.4 megaunits of 
long-acting intramuscular benzathine benzylpenicillin is recommended 
for early syphilis (< 2 years' duration), or three doses at weekly inter-
vals for late syphilis. A 14-day course of intramuscular procaine penicil-
lin 2.4 megaunits once daily with oral probenecid 500 mg 4 times daily 
is recommended for the treatment of neurosyphilis, supplemented by 
a 3-day course of prednisolone (see below). Oral doxycycline is indi-
cated for patients allergic to penicillin, except in pregnancy (see below). 
Azithromycin showed promise as an alternative treatment but resistance 
has been reported. All patients must be followed up until clinical signs 
have resolved and for partner notication. Serology is usually repeated 
for a year following treatment.
Pregnancy
Penicillin is the treatment of choice in pregnancy. If there is penicillin 
hypersensitivity, options include penicillin desensitisation, treatment with 
15.7 Clinical features of congenital syphilis
Early congenital syphilis (neonatal period)
 Maculopapular rash
 Condylomata lata
 Mucous patches
 Fissures around mouth, nose  
and anus
 Rhinitis with nasal discharge 
(snufes)
 Hepatosplenomegaly
 Osteochondritis/periostitis
 Generalised lymphadenopathy
 Choroiditis
 Meningitis
 Anaemia/thrombocytopenia
Late congenital syphilis
 Benign tertiary syphilis
 Periostitis
 Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria
 Neurosyphilis
 8th nerve deafness
 Interstitial keratitis
 Clutton’s joints (painless effusion 
into knee joints)
Stigmata
 Hutchinson’s incisors (anterior–
posterior thickening with notch on 
narrowed cutting edge)
 Mulberry molars (imperfectly formed 
cusps/decient dental enamel)
 High arched palate
 Maxillary hypoplasia
 Saddle nose (following snufes)
 Rhagades (radiating scars around 
mouth, nose and anus following 
rash)
 Salt and pepper scars on retina 
(from choroiditis)
 Corneal scars (from interstitial 
keratitis)
 Sabre tibia (from periostitis)
 Bossing of frontal and parietal bones 
(healed periosteal nodes)
15.8 Serological tests for syphilis
Non-treponemal tests: detect antibodies non-specic to syphilis antigens
 Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
 Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test
Treponemal antibody tests: specic for antibody to syphilis antigens
 Treponemal antigen-based enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for IgG and IgM
 Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay (TPHA)
 T. pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA)
 Fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) test

[[p421]]
Sexually transmitted bacterial infections    379
15
erythromycin (with penicillin for the baby at birth because it crosses the 
placenta poorly), or intramuscular ceftriaxone 500 mg daily for 10 days 
(2 g daily for late infection/neurosyphilis).
Treatment reactions 
 Anaphylaxis. Penicillin is a common cause; adrenaline and resuscita-
tion equipment should be immediately to hand (p. 183).
 Jarisch Herxheimer reaction. This is an acute febrile reaction that 
follows treatment and is characterised by headache, malaise and 
myalgia; it resolves within 24 hours. It is common in early syphilis 
and rare in late syphilis. Fetal distress or premature labour can occur 
in pregnancy. The reaction may also cause worsening of neurolog-
ical (cerebral artery occlusion) or ophthalmic (uveitis, optic neuritis) 
disease, myocardial ischaemia (inammation of the coronary ostia) 
and laryngeal stenosis (swelling of a gumma). Prednisolone  
40–60 mg daily for 3 days is recommended to prevent the reaction 
in patients with these forms of the disease; antibiotic treatment can 
be started 24 hours after the rst steroid dose. In high-risk situations 
the rst antibiotic dose should be given in hospital.
 Procaine reaction. Fear of impending death occurs immediately after 
the accidental intravenous injection of procaine penicillin and may 
be associated with short-lived hallucinations or ts. Aspiration before 
any intramuscular injection is mandatory.
Gonorrhoea
Gonorrhoea is caused by the Gram-negative diplococcus Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae and usually involves columnar epithelium in the lower gen-
ital tract, rectum, pharynx and eyes. Transmission is usually the result 
of vaginal, anal or oral sex. Gonococcal conjunctivitis may be caused 
by accidental infection from contaminated ngers. Untreated mothers 
may infect babies during delivery, resulting in ophthalmia neonatorum 
(Fig. 15.5).
Clinical features
The incubation period is usually 2–10 days. Infection of the male urethra 
causes urethral discharge and dysuria; only a minority are asymptomatic. 
The female urethra, paraurethral glands/ducts, Bartholin's glands/ducts 
or endocervical canal may be infected, but about 80% of women are 
asymptomatic. There may be vaginal discharge or dysuria but these 
symptoms may be due to co-existing infections, such as chlamydia 
(see below), trichomoniasis or candidiasis. Intermenstrual or post-coital 
bleeding suggests involvement of the cervix and lower abdominal/pelvic 
pain and dyspareunia suggests that the infection has ascended to the 
upper genital tract (PID)
Rectal infection is seen in MSM and in women due either to anal sex 
or to contamination from a urogenital site. It is usually asymptomatic but 
may present with anal discomfort, discharge or rectal bleeding.
Clinical examination may show no abnormality, but mucopurulent or 
purulent urethral discharge may be seen at infected sites. This is often 
obvious at the male urethra (p. 372). Discharge may be expressed from 
the female urethra, paraurethral ducts or Bartholin's ducts. The cervix 
may be inamed, with mucopurulent discharge and contact bleeding. 
Proctoscopy may reveal either no abnormality, or clinical evidence of 
proctitis (p. 375) such as inamed rectal mucosa and mucopus.
Pharyngeal gonorrhoea is usually symptomless and is largely attrib-
uted to receptive orogenital sex. Gonococcal conjunctivitis is an uncom-
mon complication of adults and neonates, presenting with purulent 
discharge from the eye(s), severe inammation of the conjunctivae and 
oedema of the eyelids, pain and photophobia. Conjunctivitis must be 
treated urgently to prevent corneal damage.
Other complications arise if diagnosis or treatment is delayed 
(Box 15.9). Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) is rare. Symptoms 
include arthritis of one or more joints, pustular skin lesions, tenosynovitis 
and fever. Gonococcal endocarditis has been described.
Investigations
Gram-negative diplococci may be seen on microscopy of smears from 
infected sites (see Fig. 15.1). Pharyngeal smears are not helpful due to 
the presence of commensal Neisseria spp., which have the same micro-
scopic appearance. Nucleic acid amplication tests (NAAT) are a widely 
used diagnostic test (see Box 15.1), with culture on selective medium in 
positive cases for antibiotic sensitivity surveillance. Nucleic acid probes 
for specic antibody resistance mutations (e.g. to ciprooxacin) are 
increasingly available, with the prospect of whole-genome sequencing 
in the near future.
Management of adults
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is a highly adaptable organism and has devel-
oped high-level resistance to a range of antibiotics over time, with 
frequent changes to recommended antibiotics and dosage. Multi-drug-
resistant gonorrhoea (MDRGC) has emerged as a signicant concern in 
recent years. Current UK treatment recommendations are for a single 
1g dose of IM ceftriaxone. Longer courses of antibiotics are required for 
complicated infection. NAAT-based antibiotic sensitivity testing available 
at the time of diagnosis offers the possibility of selective use of antibiotics 
previously rendered unsuitable for blind treatment (see Box 15.10).
The partner(s) of patients with gonorrhoea should be seen as soon 
as possible.
Chlamydial infection
Chlamydia is transmitted and presents in a similar way to gonorrhoea. 
In women, the cervix and urethra are commonly involved. Infection is 
asymptomatic in about 80%, but may cause intermenstrual and/or 
post-coital bleeding, dysuria or vaginal discharge. Lower abdominal pain 
and dyspareunia are features of PID. Examination may reveal muco-
purulent cervicitis, contact bleeding from the cervix, evidence of PID or 
no obvious clinical signs.
Fig. 15.5 Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum. From McMillan A, Scott GR. 
Sexually transmitted infections: a colour guide. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
Elsevier Ltd; 2000.
15.9 Complications of delayed therapy in gonorrhoea
 Acute prostatitis
 Epididymo-orchitis
 Bartholin’s gland abscess
 Pelvic inammatory disease (may lead to infertility or ectopic pregnancy)
 Disseminated gonococcal infection

[[p422]]
380    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
15.11 Treatment of chlamydial infection
Uncomplicated infection
 First choice: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days1
 Second choice: Azithromycin 1 g orally as a single dose followed by 500 mg once 
daily for 2 days
Infection with possible complications (epididymo-orchitis, PID, SARA)2
 First choice: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 14 days1
 Second choice: Ooxacin 400 mg orally twice daily for 14 days3
1Contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding. 2With additional antibiotics to cover other 
possible organisms. 3Quinolones are now less commonly used rst line because of concerns 
about rare permanent and disabling side-effects.
(PID = pelvic inammatory disease; SARA = sexually acquired reactive arthritis)
Other complications include perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome, 
p. 856), chronic pelvic pain, conjunctivitis and sexually acquired reac-
tive arthritis (SARA) (p. 1035). Perinatal transmission may lead to oph-
thalmia neonatorum and/or pneumonia in the neonate. The majority of 
chlamydial infections clear spontaneously without treatment but others 
persist. The individual’s risk of ‘silent’ tubal damage and subsequent 
infertility or ectopic pregnancy following asymptomatic chlamydial infec-
tion is low, but is a concern because of the high prevalence of chlamydial 
infection in the sexually active population.
In men, urethral symptoms are usually milder than those of gonorrhoea 
and may be absent in over 50% of cases. Conjunctivitis is also milder 
than in gonorrhoea; pharyngitis does not occur, although chlamydia is 
detected in pharyngeal samples in a small proportion of individuals. The 
incubation period varies from 1 week to a few months. Without treat-
ment, symptoms may resolve but the patient remains infectious for sev-
eral months. Complications, such as epididymo-orchitis and SARA are 
rare. Sexually transmitted pathogens, such as chlamydia or gonococci, 
are usually responsible for epididymo-orchitis in men aged less than 
35 years, whereas bacteria such as Gram-negative enteric organisms 
are more commonly implicated in older men.
Treatments for chlamydia (Box 15.11) are also used for empirical treat-
ment of NGU. Antibiotic resistance has not yet been a signicant issue. 
Sexual partners should be traced and may be tested and/or treated epi-
demiologically depending on circumstances. Technologies supporting 
testing, treatment and partner notication for chlamydia include app-
based notication systems and electronic treatment vouchers which can 
be redeemed at community pharmacies.
Mycoplasma genitalium
Mycoplasma genitalium is strongly associated with NGU (p. 372) and 
is implicated in the pathogenesis of PID. Its role in the development of 
other STI syndromes is not clear. A very high proportion of M. genita-
lium isolates in the UK are resistant to macrolides. This has led to doxy-
cycline replacing azithromycin as the rst choice empirical treatment of 
chlamydial infection and NGU. Where azithromycin is used, the multi-
ple-dose regimen shown in Box 15.11 is preferred over a single dose 
because this may be both more effective and reduce the risk of macro-
lide resistance developing in M. genitalium
Other sexually transmitted bacterial infections
Chancroid, granuloma inguinale and LGV as causes of genital ulcers in 
the tropics are described in Box 15.12. LGV now much more commonly 
presents as proctitis in MSM, having been acquired in Europe (p. 375).
Sexually transmitted viral infections
Genital herpes simplex
Infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) or type 2 (HSV-2) 
produces a wide spectrum of clinical problems (p. 290), and facilitates 
the transmission of untreated HIV. Herpes is usually acquired sexually 
(vaginal, anal, orogenital or oro-anal), but perinatal transmission to the 
neonate may also occur. Primary infection at the site of HSV entry may 
be symptomatic or asymptomatic. HSV then establishes latency in local 
sensory ganglia, intermittently reactivating to cause either symptomatic 
or asymptomatic recurrences at the same site with viral shedding, during 
which transmission may occur. Most transmissions are thought to orig-
inate from people unaware of their infection. Although HSV-1 is classi-
cally associated with orolabial herpes and HSV-2 with anogenital herpes, 
HSV-1 accounts for more than 50% of anogenital infections in the UK.
Clinical features
Symptomatic episodes usually involve the external genitalia with irrita-
ble vesicles that soon rupture to form small, tender ulcers which scab 
and heal without scarring (Fig. 15.6 and see Fig. 15.3). A symptomatic 
episode at the time of acquisition is usually the most severe, but may 
occasionally be delayed following asymptomatic primary infection. 
Constitutional symptoms such as fever, headache and malaise are com-
mon. Complications, such as urinary retention due to autonomic neu-
ropathy, and aseptic meningitis, are occasionally seen. Inguinal lymph 
nodes become enlarged and tender, and there may be nerve root pain in 
the 2nd and 3rd sacral dermatomes. Lesions at other sites (e.g. urethra, 
vagina, cervix, perianal area, anus or rectum) may cause dysuria, urethral 
or vaginal discharge, or anal, perianal or rectal pain. First episodes usu-
ally heal within 2–4 weeks without treatment; recurrences are similar but 
usually milder and of shorter duration than the initial attack
Extragenital lesions may develop at other sites, such as the buttock, 
nger or eye, due to auto-inoculation.
HSV-1 and HSV-2 episodes are clinically identical, but recurrences 
occur more often in HSV-2 infection and their frequency tends to 
decrease more slowly with time. Prodromal symptoms, such as irritation 
or burning at the affected site, or neuralgic pain affecting buttocks, legs 
or hips often occur prior to a symptomatic recurrence.
Diagnosis
Swabs are taken from vesicular uid or ulcers for detection of HSV-1 
and 2 DNA by NAAT. Type-specic antibody tests for HSV-1 and 2 are 
available but not routinely used for diagnosis.
Management 
First episode
Oral antiviral treatment will shorten the duration of symptoms if started 
within 5 days of the beginning of the episode, or while lesions are still 
forming. Occasionally, intravenous therapy may be indicated if oral 
15.10 Treatment of uncomplicated anogenital gonorrhoea
Uncomplicated anogenital or pharyngeal infection
 Ceftriaxone 1 g IM as a single dose
 Ciprooxacin 500 mg orally as a single dose1,2
Pregnancy and breastfeeding
 Ceftriaxone 1 g IM as a single dose
 Spectinomycin 2 g IM stat3
Disseminated gonorrhoea
 Ceftriaxone 1 g IM or IV once daily or
 Cefotaxime 1 g IV 3 times daily
 Switched to an oral alternative according to sensitivities after 48 hrs  
and continued for 7 days
1Contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding. 2Only where nucleic acid amplication test 
(NAAT) or culture-based sensitivity testing shows sensitivity at all sites. 3Not routinely available.
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)

[[p423]]
Sexually transmitted viral infections    381
15
therapy is poorly tolerated or aseptic meningitis occurs. Many possible 
oral dosage regimens are used, including:
 aciclovir 400 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
 valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily for 5 days.
Topical and oral analgesia is helpful and patients are advised to use a 
warm shower spray to ease urination. Catheterisation via the suprapu-
bic route is occasionally required for urinary retention. Treatment may be 
continued for longer than 5 days if new lesions develop.
Recurrent genital herpes
Symptomatic recurrences are usually mild and may require no specic 
treatment other than saline bathing, although the psychosexual impact 
of herpes stigma in a minority of patients should be considered. For more 
severe or prolonged episodes, patient-initiated treatment within 24 hours 
of onset, with one of the following oral regimens, should reduce the dura-
tion of the recurrence:
 aciclovir 800 mg 3 times daily for 2 days
 valaciclovir 500 mg twice daily for 5 days.
In a few patients, treatment started at the onset of prodromal symp-
toms may abort recurrence.
Those with recurrences that are severe and/or frequent may benet 
from suppressive therapy. Daily treatment should be given for a minimum 
of 1 year before stopping to assess recurrence rate. The rate of decay in 
frequency of recurrence is low, so only about 20% of patients will expe-
rience signicantly reduced rates. For others, resumption of suppres-
sive therapy is justied. Aciclovir 400 mg twice daily is most commonly 
prescribed.
Fig. 15.6 Herpetic ulceration of the vulva. From McMillan A, Scott GR. Sexually 
transmitted infections: a colour guide. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 
2000
15.12 Salient features of lymphogranuloma venereum, chancroid and granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis)
Infection and 
distribution
Organism
Incubation 
period
Genital lesion
Lymph nodes
Diagnosis
Management
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV)
E/W Africa, India, 
SE Asia, S America, 
Caribbean
Chlamydia 
trachomatis types 
L1, 2, 3
3–30 days
Small, transient, 
painless ulcer, 
vesicle, papule; often 
unnoticed
Tender, usually 
unilateral, matted, 
suppurative bubo; 
inguinal/femoral 
nodes involved1
Swab from ulcer 
or bubo pus for 
Chlamydia, NAAT 
with LGV subtypes if 
positive
Doxycycline2 100 mg 
twice daily orally for 21 
days or
Erythromycin 500mg 
orally 4 times daily
Chancroid
Africa, Asia, Central 
and S America
Haemophilus 
ducreyi (short 
Gram-negative 
bacillus)
3–10 days
Single or multiple 
painful ulcers with 
ragged undermined 
edges
As above but 
unilocular, 
suppurative bubo; 
inguinal nodes 
involved in ~50%
Microscopy and 
culture of scrapings 
from ulcer or pus 
from bubo
Azithromycin3 1 g orally 
once or
Ceftriaxone 250mg IM 
once or
Ciprooxacin2 500mg 
orally twice daily for 
3 days
Granuloma inguinale
Australia, India, 
Caribbean, S Africa, 
S America, Papua 
New Guinea
Klebsiella 
granulomatis
(Donovan bodies)
3–40 days
Ulcers or hypertrophic 
granulomatous 
lesions; usually 
painless4
Initial swelling of 
inguinal nodes, then 
spread of infection 
to form abscess or 
ulceration through 
adjacent skin
Microscopy of 
cellular material for 
intracellular bipolar-
staining Donovan 
bodies
Azithromycin3 1 g orally 
weekly or 500mg orally 
daily or
Doxycycline2 100mg 
orally twice daily or
Ceftriaxone 1 g IM daily
N.B. Partners of patients with LGV, chancroid and granuloma inguinale should be investigated and treated, even if asymptomatic.
1LGV acquired as a rectal infection in MSM commonly presents as proctitis. 2Doxycycline and ciprooxacin are contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding. 3The safety of azithromycin in pregnancy 
and breastfeeding has not been fully assessed. 4Mother-to-baby transmission of granuloma inguinale may rarely occur. 
(IM = intramuscular; NAAT = nucleic acid amplication test)

[[p424]]
382    SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
Management in pregnancy
The risk of disseminated infection is increased in pregnancy, particularly 
in the third trimester. A pregnant woman with no previous anogenital 
herpes and a partner with a history of HSV infection should be advised 
on avoiding acquisition, which may include consistent condom use dur-
ing pregnancy to reduce genital-to-genital transmission. Antibody test-
ing can identify the type-specic HSV serostatus of a woman and her 
partner and inform the advice given. Treatment with aciclovir is usually 
offered for genital herpes acquired during pregnancy after appropriate 
discussion; although aciclovir is not licensed for use in pregnancy in the 
UK, there is considerable clinical evidence to support its safety.
Vaginal delivery is routine in most women with herpes in pregnancy. 
Caesarean section is sometimes considered if there is a recurrence at the 
beginning of labour, although the risk of neonatal herpes through vaginal 
transmission is very low. Caesarean section is often recommended if pri-
mary infection occurs after 34 weeks because the risk of viral shedding 
in labour is very high and the antibody response to HSV which develops 
in the mother and protects the neonate by transplacental transmission 
may not have fully developed.
Human papillomavirus and anogenital warts
Human papillomavirus (HPV) subtypes (p. 1091) that preferentially infect 
the genital skin and are mainly sexually transmitted include benign gen-
otypes (HPV-6 and 11) causing anogenital warts as well as genotypes 
such as 16 and 18, which do not cause genital warts but are associated 
with cervical, vulval, penile and anal intra-epithelial neoplasia (CIN, VIN, 
PIN and AIN) and the associated invasive cancers, as well as with can-
cers of the oropharynx. HPV is commonly transmitted through non-pen-
etrative sex so affects individuals from the early years of adolescence 
onwards. Asymptomatic infection without any clinical sequelae is usual 
with all subtypes and infection with multiple subtypes is common.
Clinical features
Anogenital warts caused by HPV may be single or multiple, exo-
phytic, papular or at. Rarely, a giant condyloma (Buschke–Löwenstein 
tumour) develops, with local tissue destruction. Because of the associ-
ation with intra-epithelial neoplasia, warts with an atypical appearance 
should be biopsied. Perianal warts (p. 370) are more common in MSM, 
but are also found in women and in heterosexual men. In pregnancy, 
warts may dramatically increase in size and number, making treatment 
difcult. Rarely, they are large enough to obstruct labour so delivery by 
caesarean section is required. Perinatal transmission of HPV occasion-
ally leads to anogenital warts and rarely to laryngeal papillomas in the 
neonate.
Management
The use of condoms can help prevent the transmission of HPV to non-
infected partners, but as condoms do not cover all of the genital 
skin, protection is incomplete. Vaccination against genital HPV infection 
is routine in many countries. There are three types of vaccine:
 A bivalent vaccine offers protection against HPV types 16 and  
18, which account for approximately 75% of cervical cancers in  
the UK.
 A quadrivalent vaccine offers additional protection against HPV 
types 6 and 11, which account for over 90% of genital warts.
 A nonavalent vaccine protects against ve additional high-risk types 
(31, 33, 45, 52 and 58).
All vaccines have been shown to be highly effective in the prevention 
of cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia in young women, and the quadriva-
lent and nonavalent vaccines have also been demonstrated to be highly 
effective in protecting against HPV-associated genital warts. HPV vacci-
nation is usually administered prior to the onset of sexual activity, typically 
at age 11–13, in a course of three injections. In the UK, vaccination has 
been offered to girls since 2007 (with quadrivalent vaccine from 2012) 
and the recommendation was extended to boys from 2020.
Benign anogenital warts sometimes resolve spontaneously without 
treatment and in the vast majority of cases are a harmless, if sometimes 
distressing, inconvenience. Topical self-administered treatments com-
monly prescribed for use at home include:
 Podophyllotoxin, 0.5% solution or 0.15% cream (contraindicated in 
pregnancy)
 Imiquimod cream (contraindicated in pregnancy), also used in the 
treatment of HPV-associated intra-epithelial neoplasia
 Catephen, an extract of the green tea plant, Camellia sinensis
Ablative therapies, usually performed by a clinician, are sometimes 
used rst line or for warts that are keratinised, extensive or resistant to 
topical treatment.
 Cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen to freeze warty tissue often requires 
repeated clinic visits, although home cryotherapy is available. It is 
one of the few options for treatment of warts in pregnancy.
 Hyfrecation – surgical electrofulguration using the heat from an electric 
current to destroy tissue – is suitable for external and internal warts.
 Surgical removal may be used to excise extensive and/or refractory 
warts, especially pedunculated perianal lesions, under local or gen-
eral anaesthesia.
Molluscum contagiosum
Infection by molluscum contagiosum virus, both sexual and non-sexual, 
produces esh-coloured, umbilicated, hemispherical papules usually up 
to 5 mm in diameter after an incubation period of 3–12 weeks (Fig. 15.7). 
Lesions are often multiple and, once established in an individual, may 
spread by auto-inoculation. Infection in childhood is common; many 
individuals are immune by adulthood. If not, sexually acquired infection 
causes lesions on the genitalia, lower abdomen and upper thighs. The 
diagnosis is usually clinical. Typically, lesions persist for several months 
before spontaneous resolution occurs. Treatment regimens are therefore 
cosmetic; they include cryotherapy, hyfrecation or topical applications of 
0.15% podophyllotoxin cream (contraindicated in pregnancy). The hard, 
pearly central core of each lesion can be removed using a needle and 
results in resolution, but this carries a risk of scarring.
Fig. 15.7 Molluscum contagiosum of the shaft of the penis. From McMillan 
A, Scott GR. Sexually transmitted infections: a colour guide. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2000.

[[p425]]
15
Further information    383
Viral hepatitis
The hepatitis viruses A–D (p. 884) may be sexually transmitted:
 Hepatitis A (HAV). Enteric infection may be transmitted through 
insertive oro-anal, digital-anal sex or peno-anal sex. Outbreaks of 
hepatitis A occur in MSM populations, most recently across Europe 
in 2016–18.
 Hepatitis B (HBV). Hepatitis B is highly transmissible through all 
forms of penetrative sex, including oral sex, and is seen more com-
monly in groups with higher rates of partner change including sex 
workers and MSM, or with partners from endemic areas. Hepatitis D 
(HDV) may also be sexually transmitted.
 Hepatitis C (HCV). Hepatitis C is much less transmissible through 
sex than HBV. Sex involving mucosal trauma (such as anal sex) 
carries a higher risk and sexually transmitted HCV is seen more 
commonly in MSM, particularly those co-infected with HIV, than in 
other populations.
Active immunisation against HAV and HBV should be offered to sus-
ceptible people at risk of infection. Many STI clinics offer a combined 
HAV and HBV vaccine to all MSM.
Partner notication, for testing and advice on preventing onward 
transmission, is offered to all those diagnosed with sexually transmitted 
viral hepatitis, with vaccination for HAV and HBV. No active or passive 
immunisation is available for protection against HCV but the consistent 
use of condoms is likely to protect susceptible partners until the index 
patient is able to complete treatment.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Mitchell L, Howe B, Ashley Price D, eds. Oxford handbook of genitourinary 
medicine, HIV, and sexual health, 3rd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
2018. 
Website
bashh.org/guidelines British Association for Sexual Health and HIV; updates on 
treatment of all STIs.

[[p426]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p427]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 15.1. The preferred treatment for uncomplicated chlamydial infection 
has changed from single dose azithromycin to a 7-day course 
of doxycycline primarily because of concerns about the 
development of antimicrobial resistance in which organism? 
A. Chlamydia trachomatis
B. Mycoplasma genitalium
C. Haemophilus ducreyi
D. Treponema pallidum
E. Trichomonas vaginalis
Answer: B.
Rates of macrolide resistance in Mycoplasma genitalium in the UK 
are thought to be around 40%, probably driven by the widespread use 
of single dose azithromycin for the treatment of chlamydial infection in 
sexually active individuals. Treatment of antibiotic resistant M. genitalium
in symptomatic individuals such as men with non-gonococcal urethritis 
(NGU) can be difcult. Azithromycin has never been a rst-line treatment 
for syphilis in the UK, but resistance does occur in Treponema pallidum. 
Azithromycin is a potential treatment for chancroid and resistance in 
Haemophilus ducreyi is not currently widely reported.
 15.2. A 49-year-old woman who has had two new male partners in the 
past 4 weeks presents to her general practitioner with vaginal 
discharge having a ‘shy’ smell which is worse after sex. She 
has had 3 days of intermenstrual bleeding which is unusual, 
but no abdominal or pelvic pain. On examination a thin grey 
discharge is seen without evidence of vulvitis. The optimal 
management plan is:
A.  Empirical treatment for bacterial vaginosis (BV) with 
clindamycin cream and a cervical smear test
B.  Swabs for NAAT for gonorrhoea and chlamydia and await 
results
C.  High vaginal swab for microscopy for Trichomonas vaginalis
(TV) and bacterial vaginosis and empirical treatment with oral 
metronidazole
D.  Swabs for NAAT testing for gonorrhoea, chlamydia and 
Trichomonas vaginalis and empirical treatment with oral 
metronidazole.
E.  Treatment with IM ceftriaxone, oral doxycycline and 
metronidazole for possible gonococcal, chlamydial, TV or BV 
infection
Answer: D.
The commonest cause of a vaginal discharge with smell is bact-
erial vaginosis. BV does not cause inammation or cervical bleeding. 
Intermenstrual bleeding is common in perimenopausal women. In a 
postmenopausal woman it may be a cause for concern but STIs should 
be excluded before investigating other causes. STIs have a much higher 
prevalence in young people but are seen in older sexually active indi-
viduals, particularly those with multiple partners. Both gonorrhoea and 
chlamydial infection cause cervicitis so should be excluded. Trichomonas 
vaginalis does not usually cause a cervicitis without signicant vaginal 
inammation and vulvititis, but should also be considered. NAAT testing 
for TV is not universally available but may be possible. Empirical treat-
ment with metronidazole will usually cure both TV and BV. Syndromic 
management – giving treatment to cover all possible infections – would 
not usually be a preferred approach where testing is available unless 
there were symptoms and signs of ascending infection (pelvic inamma-
tory disease).
 15.3. A 21-year-old woman presented to a walk-in sexual health clinic 
complaining of a painful rash on her vulva for the past 4 days, 
which she had not had before. She said that 7 days ago she had 
left her male partner because he had disclosed that he had been 
having sex with several other partners, both male and female, 
during their relationship so she would like testing for other STI. 
She uses recreational drugs and occasionally injects. She does 
not have a current sexual partner.
 
On examination you identied a vesicular rash on her vulva that 
you diagnosed clinically as genital herpes, for which you treated 
her empirically with oral aciclovir 400 mg 3 times daily for 5 days. 
She had no symptoms or signs to suggest other STI or BBV 
infection. You carried out relevant diagnostic tests and full testing 
for other STI and BBV. She returns to the clinic a few days later 
to see a Health Adviser, who telephones to ask your advice on 
management and advises of the following results:
PCR for Chlamydia trachomatis – positive
HIV1 Ag/Ab test – negative
PCR for Neisseria gonorrhoeae – negative
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) – negative
Hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc) – positive
Hepatitis C antibody – positive
PCR of vesicle uid for herpes simplex virus type 1  
(HSV1) – negative
PCR of vesicle uid for herpes simplex virus type 2  
(HSV2) – positive
Treponema pallidum EIA – positive
 
Which one of the following actions would be appropriate on the 
basis of the above results?
A.  Advise treatment with oral azithromycin 1 g orally followed by 
500 mg once daily for 2 days
B. Send a further blood sample for hepatitis B PCR (viral load)
C.  Send a further blood sample for hepatitis C PCR (viral load)
D.  Initiate suppressive therapy for HSV 2 with aciclovir 400 mg 
12-hourly for 3 months
E.  Advise treatment with a single dose of 2.4 megaunits of long-
acting intramuscular benzathine benzylpenicillin
Answer: C.
The positive Chlamydia PCR indicates current infection. However, the 
recommended treatment is with doxycycline rather than azithromycin, 
to take into account possible coexisting infection with macrolide-resist-
ant Mycoplasma genitalium. The positive anti-HBc indicates past infec-
tion with hepatitis B and the negative HBsAg indicates an absence of 
current infection; there is therefore no indication to test her viral load. 
The positive hepatitis C antibodies are a marker of either current or past 
infection so should be investigated further by hepatitis C PCR, which, if 
positive, would indicate current infection. A rst episode of genital herpes 
is usually treated with a 5-day course of aciclovir; longer-term suppres-
sive therapy is reserved for patients who have severe and/or frequent 
recurrences. The T. pallidum EIA is a screening test for both IgG and 
IgM, so may indicate either past or current infection; therefore further 
investigation is necessary (with T. pallidum IgM and a non-treponemal 
test) rather than treatment for syphilis.
 15.4. A 23-year-old man presents for the rst time to a specialist 
sexual health service with a 4-day history of dysuria and purulent 
urethral discharge. He has had condomless insertive vaginal, oral 
and anal sex with three female sexual partners over the last 3 
weeks. Direct microscopy of a Gram-stained sample of urethral 
discharge shows many pus cells and Gram-negative intracellular 
diplococci. The preferred management plan is:

[[p428]]
A.  Take samples for gonorrhoea NAAT testing and culture from 
the urethra, and blood for HIV and syphilis serology, treat 
empirically for urethral gonorrhoea with IM ceftriaxone 1 g 
single dose and notify the most recent female partner
B.  Take samples for NAAT testing for Neisseria gonorrhoea and 
Chlamydia trachomatis from the urethra and pharynx, along 
with cultures for gonococcal antimicrobial sensitivities and 
HIV and syphilis serology. Treat for suspected gonorrhoea 
with IM ceftriaxone 1 g single dose. Obtain details of three 
recent partners for partner notication
C.  Take samples for NAAT testing for Neisseria gonorrhoea
and Chlamydia trachomatis from the urethra and pharynx 
and blood for HIV and syphilis serology and treat with oral 
doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 7 days for possible 
chlamydial infection. Treat for gonorrhoea and notify partners 
depending upon antimicrobial sensitivity results.
D.  Take samples for NAAT testing and culture for gonococcal 
antimicrobial sensitivities from the urethra, treat for both 
gonorrhoea and chlamydial infection and notify all three 
recent partners
E.  Perform NAAT testing for Neisseria gonorrhoea and 
Chlamydia trachomatis from the urethra, pharynx and rectum 
along with cultures for gonococcal antimicrobial sensitivities 
and blood for HIV and syphilis serology. Treat for suspected 
gonorrhoea with IM ceftriaxone 1 g single dose. Obtain 
details of the most recent partner for partner notication.
Answer: B.
Gram-stained microscopy has high sensitivity and specicity for the 
diagnosis of urethral gonorrhoea in men. Immediate treatment with cef-
triaxone 1 g IM single dose on the basis of a presumptive diagnosis is 
appropriate but treatment for possible co-existing chlamydial infection is 
not routinely given. Resistance to ceftriaxone remains rare but is a major 
concern, so optimal management includes culture for antimicrobial sen-
sitivity which should be taken from all potentially exposed sites, which 
would usually include the rectum in women and MSM but not in men-
who-have-sex-with-women (MSW). Testing for HIV and syphilis should be 
part of routine testing for STI in all cases in all individuals. Symptoms of 
urethral gonorrhoea in men usually develop within 7 days of contact with 
an infected individual, however in symptomatic men all partners within the 
last 4 weeks would usually be traced for testing and/or treatment.

[[p429]]
Cardiology
16
DE Newby
NR Grubb
Clinical examination of the cardiovascular system 386
Functional anatomy and physiology 388
Anatomy 388
Physiology 389
Investigation of cardiovascular disease 391
Electrocardiogram 391
Cardiac biomarkers 393
Chest X-ray 394
Echocardiography 394
Computed tomography 395
Magnetic resonance imaging 396
Cardiac catheterisation 396
Electrophysiology 397
Radionuclide imaging 397
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease 397
Chest pain on exertion 398
Severe prolonged chest pain 398
Breathlessness 398
Syncope 398
Palpitation 399
Cardiac arrest 399
Abnormal heart sounds 400
Heart failure 401
Cardiac arrhythmias 408
Principles of management of cardiac arrhythmias 419
Anti-arrhythmic drugs 419
Non-pharmacological treatments 421
Coronary artery disease 424
Angina pectoris 426
Acute coronary syndrome 431
Non-cardiac surgery in patients with heart disease 439
Peripheral arterial disease 440
Diseases of the aorta 442
Aortic aneurysm 442
Aortic dissection 444
Aortitis 445
Marfan syndrome 445
Coarctation of the aorta 446
Hypertension 446
Diseases of the heart valves 451
Rheumatic heart disease 451
Mitral valve disease 453
Aortic valve disease 457
Tricuspid valve disease 460
Pulmonary valve disease 461
Prosthetic valves 462
Infective endocarditis 462
Congenital heart disease 465
Diseases of the myocardium 472
Myocarditis 472
Cardiomyopathy 473
Cardiac tumours 476
Diseases of the pericardium 476

[[p430]]
386  CARDIOLOGY
Clinical examination of the cardiovascular system
Observation
Hands
Clubbing
Splinter haemorrhages
and other stigmata of
infective endocarditis
Radial pulse
Rate
Rhythm
Blood pressure
Carotid pulses
Volume
Character
Bruits
(see opposite)
Jugular venous pulse
(see opposite)
Height
Waveform
Face, mouth and eyes
Pallor
Central cyanosis
Dental caries
Fundi (retinopathy) 
Stigmata of
hyperlipidaemia
and thyroid disease
Precordium
Inspect
Palpate
(see opposite)
Auscultation
(see opposite)
Back
Lung crepitations
Sacral oedema
Femoral pulses
Radio-femoral delay
Bruits
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
Ascites      
Aortic aneurysm
Bruits
12
10
9
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
Symptoms and well-being
 Breathlessness
 Distress etc.
Body habitus
 Body mass (obesity, cachexia)
 Marfan and other syndromes
Tissue perfusion
 Skin temperature
 Sweating
 Urine output
Legs
Peripheral pulses
Oedema
13
Poor oral hygiene in a
patient with infective
endocarditis
Xanthelasma
Vasculitis in a
patient with
infective
endocarditis
Cyanosis and clubbing in a
patient with complex cyanotic
congenital heart disease
Peripheral
oedema in a
patient with
congestive
cardiac failure
Splinter haemorrhage
Jugular venous pulse
Malar flush
Tendon xanthomas
(hyperlipidaemia)
11
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
8
9
10
11
12
13
6
Insets (Splinter haemorrhage, jugular venous pulse, malar ush, tendon xanthomas) From Newby D, Grubb N. Cardiology: an illustrated colour text. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
Elsevier Ltd; 2005.

[[p431]]
Clinical examination of the cardiovascular system  387
16
4
Examination of the  
arterial pulse
The character of the pulse is determined 
bystroke volume and arterial compliance, 
andis best assessed by palpating a major 
artery, such as the carotid or brachial 
artery.
Aortic regurgitation, anaemia, sepsis and 
other causes of a large stroke volume 
typically produce a bounding pulse with a 
high amplitude and wide pulse pressure 
(panel A).
Aortic stenosis impedes ventricular 
emptying. If severe, it causes a slow-rising, 
weak and delayed pulse (panel A).
Sinus rhythm produces a pulse that is 
regular in time and volume. Arrhythmias 
may cause irregularity. Atrial brillation 
produces a pulse that is irregular in time 
and volume (panel B).
Normal pulse
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic stenosis
A
B
5   Examination of the jugular 
venous pulse
The internal jugular vein, superior vena 
cava and right atrium are in continuity, so 
the height of the jugular venous pulsation 
reects right atrial pressure. When the 
patient is placed at 45°, with the head 
supported and turned to the left, the jugular 
venous pulse is visible along the line of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle (see opposite). 
In health it is normally just visible above the 
clavicle.
The height of the jugular venous pulse is 
determined by right atrial pressure and is 
therefore elevated in right heart failure and 
reduced in hypovolaemia.
If the jugular venous pulse is not easily 
seen, it may be exposed by applying rm 
pressure over the abdomen.
In sinus rhythm, the two venous 
peaks, thea and v waves, approximate 
toatrialand ventricular systole, 
respectively.
The x descent reects atrial relaxation and 
apical displacement of the tricuspid valve 
ring. The y descent reects atrial emptying 
early in diastole. These signs are subtle.
Tricuspid regurgitation produces giant 
v waves that coincide with ventricular 
systole.
Ventricular
Systole Diastole
a
c
x
v
y
a
c
x
Distinguishing venous/arterial 
pulsation in the neck
 The venous pulse has two peaks in each 
cardiac cycle; the arterial pulse has one 
peak.
 The height of the venous pulse varies 
with respiration (falls on inspiration) and 
position.
 Abdominal compression causes the venous 
pulse to rise.
 The venous pulse is not easily palpable 
and can be occluded with light pressure.
7  Palpation of the precordium
Technique
Place ngertips over apex (1) to assess for 
position and character. Place heel of hand 
over left sternal border (2) for a parasternal 
heave or ‘lift’. Assess for thrills in all areas, 
including the aortic and pulmonary areas 
(3). Normal position is the 5th or 6th 
intercostal space, at the mid-clavicular line.
Common abnormalities of the apex 
beat
 Volume overload, such as mitral or aortic 
regurgitation: displaced, thrusting
 Pressure overload, such as aortic stenosis, 
hypertension: discrete, heaving
Dyskinetic, such as left ventricular 
aneurysm: displaced, incoordinate
Other abnormalities
 Palpable S1 (tapping apex beat: mitral 
stenosis)
 Palpable P2 (severe pulmonary 
hypertension)
 Left parasternal heave or ‘lift’ felt by heel 
of hand (right ventricular hypertrophy)
Palpable thrill (aortic stenosis)
8  Auscultation of the heart
 Use the diaphragm to examine at the apex, lower 
left sternal border (tricuspid area) and upper left 
(pulmonary area) and right (aortic area) sternal 
borders.
 Use the bell to examine low-pitched noises, 
particularly at the apex for the mid-diastolic 
murmur of mitral stenosis.
 Time the sounds and murmurs by feeling the 
carotid pulse; the rst heart sound (S1) just 
precedes the upstroke of the pulse and the 
second heart sound (S2) is out of step with it. 
If present, a third heart sound (S3) immediately 
follows S2, and a fourth heart sound (S4) just 
precedes S1. Systolic murmurs are synchronous 
with the pulse.
 Listen for radiation of systolic murmurs, over 
the base of the neck (aortic stenosis) and in the 
axilla (mitral incompetence).
 Listen over the left sternal border with the 
patient sitting forward (aortic incompetence), 
then at the apex with the patient rolled on to the 
left side (mitral stenosis).
The haemodynamic effects of respiration are discussed on page 391, and the analysis and interpretation of heart sounds and murmurs on page400.

[[p432]]
388  CARDIOLOGY
Cardiovascular disease is the commonest cause of death worldwide. 
The World Health Organization estimates that more people have died 
from cardiovascular disease since 1990 than any other category of 
illness, including infectious diseases. Strategies for the treatment and 
prevention of heart disease can be highly effective and have been sub-
jected to rigorous evaluation by randomised trials. The evidence base for 
the treatment of cardiovascular disease is stronger than for almost any 
other disease group.
Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death, with 3.8 million 
men and 3.4 million women dying each year. Although the incidence 
has been falling in some countries, it is rising in lower-income countries, 
where it accounts for more than 60% of the global burden of coronary 
heart disease. Valvular heart disease is also common but the aetiology 
varies in different parts of the world. In South Asia and in Africa it is pre-
dominantly due to rheumatic fever, whereas calcic aortic valve disease 
is the commonest problem in high-income countries.
Prompt recognition of the development of heart disease is limited by 
two key factors. First, it is often clinically silent for prolonged periods and 
coronary heart disease can proceed to an advanced stage before the 
patient notices any symptoms. Second, the diversity of symptoms attrib-
utable to heart disease is limited, so different pathologies may frequently 
present with the same symptoms.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Anatomy
The heart acts as two serial pumps that share several electrical and 
mechanical components. The right heart circulates blood to the lungs 
where it is oxygenated, and the left heart circulates it to the rest of the 
body (Fig. 16.1). The atria are thin-walled structures that act as priming 
pumps for the ventricles which provide most of the energy required to 
maintain the circulation. The atria are situated posteriorly within the medi-
astinum where the left atrium (LA) sits anterior to the oesophagus and 
descending aorta. The right atrium (RA) receives blood from the superior 
and inferior venae cavae and the coronary sinus. The LA receives blood 
from four pulmonary veins, two from each of the left and right lungs. 
The ventricles are thick-walled structures that pump blood through large 
vascular beds under pressure. The atria and ventricles are separated by 
the annulus brosus, which forms the skeleton for the atrioventricular 
(AV) valves and electrically insulates the atria from the ventricles. The right 
ventricle (RV) is about 2–3 mm thick and triangular in shape. It extends 
from the annulus brosus to near the cardiac apex and sits anterior and 
to the right of the left ventricle (LV). The anterosuperior surface of the 
RV is rounded and convex, and its posterior extent is bounded by the 
interventricular septum, which bulges into the chamber. Its upper extent 
forms the conus arteriosus or outow tract, from which the pulmonary 
artery arises. The LV is more conical in shape and in cross-section is 
nearly circular. It extends from the LA to the apex of the heart. The LV 
myocardium is approximately 10 mm thick because it pumps blood at a 
higher pressure than the RV.
Normally, the heart occupies less than 50% of the transthoracic diam-
eter in the frontal plane, as seen on a chest X-ray. On the patient’s left, 
the cardiac silhouette is formed by the aortic arch, the pulmonary trunk, 
the left atrial appendage and the LV. On the right, the silhouette is formed 
by the RA and the superior and inferior venae cavae, and the lower right 
border is formed by the RV (Fig. 16.2). In disease states or congenital 
cardiac abnormalities, the silhouette may change as a result of hyper-
trophy or dilatation.
Coronary circulation
The left main and right coronary arteries arise from the left and right 
sinuses of the aortic root, distal to the aortic valve (Fig. 16.3). Within 
2.5 cm of its origin, the left main coronary artery divides into the left ant-
erior descending artery (LAD), which runs in the anterior interventricular 
groove, and the left circumex artery (CX), which runs posteriorly in the 
atrioventricular groove. The LAD gives branches to supply the anterior 
part of the septum (septal perforators) and the anterior, lateral and apical 
walls of the LV. The CX gives marginal branches that supply the lateral, 
posterior and inferior segments of the LV. The right coronary artery (RCA) 
runs in the right atrioventricular groove, giving branches that supply the 
RA, RV and inferoposterior aspects of the LV. The posterior descending 
artery runs in the posterior interventricular groove and supplies the inf-
erior part of the interventricular septum. This vessel is a branch of the RCA 
in approximately 90% of people (dominant right system) and is supplied 
by the CX in the remainder (dominant left system). The coronary anatomy 
varies greatly from person to person and there are many normal variants.
Pulmonary artery
Systolic 15–30
Diastolic     5–15
Mean 
10–20
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Systolic 90–140
Diastolic 60–90
Mean 
70–105
Aorta
Left atrium
4–12
Left ventricle
Systolic
End-diastolic
90–140
  4–12
Right atrium
0–5
Right ventricle
Systolic 
End-diastolic 
15–30
  0–5
Fig. 16.1 Direction of blood ow through the heart. The blue arrows show deoxygenated blood moving through the right heart to the lungs. The red arrows show 
oxygenated blood moving from the lungs to the systemic circulation. The normal pressures are shown for each chamber in mmHg.

[[p433]]
Functional anatomy and physiology  389
16
The RCA supplies the sinoatrial (SA) node in about 60% of individuals 
and the AV node in about 90%. Proximal occlusion of the RCA therefore 
often results in sinus bradycardia and may also cause AV nodal block. 
Abrupt occlusion of the RCA, due to coronary thrombosis, results in 
infarction of the inferior part of the LV and often the RV. Abrupt occlusion 
of the LAD or CX causes infarction in the corresponding territory of the 
LV, and occlusion of the left main coronary artery is usually fatal.
The venous system follows the coronary arteries but drains into the 
coronary sinus in the atrioventricular groove, and then to the RA. An 
extensive lymphatic system drains into vessels that travel with the coro-
nary vessels and then into the thoracic duct.
Conduction system
The SA node is situated at the junction of the superior vena cava and RA 
(Fig. 16.4). It comprises specialised atrial cells that depolarise at a rate 
inuenced by the autonomic nervous system and by circulating catecho-
lamines. During normal (sinus) rhythm, this depolarisation wave propa-
gates through the atria via sheets of atrial myocytes. The annulus brosus 
forms a conduction barrier between atria and ventricles,  preventing 
transmission of conduction except through the AV node. The AV node 
is a midline structure, extending from the right side of the interatrial sep-
tum, penetrating the annulus brosus anteriorly. It conducts relatively 
slowly, producing a necessary time delay between atrial and ventricular 
contraction. The His–Purkinje system is composed of the bundle of His 
extending from the AV node into the interventricular septum, the right 
and left bundle branches passing along the ventricular septum and into 
the respective ventricles, the anterior and posterior fascicles of the left 
bundle branch, and the smaller Purkinje bres that ramify through the 
ventricular myocardium. The tissues of the His–Purkinje system conduct 
very rapidly and allow near-simultaneous depolarisation of the entire ven-
tricular myocardium.
Nerve supply of the heart
The heart is innervated by both sympathetic and parasympathetic bres. 
Adrenergic nerves from the cervical sympathetic chain supply muscle 
bres in the atria and ventricles, and the electrical conducting system. 
Activation of β1-adrenoceptors in the heart results in positive inotropic 
and chronotropic effects, whereas activation of β2-adrenoceptors in 
vascular smooth muscle causes vasodilatation. Parasympathetic pre- 
ganglionic bres and sensory bres reach the heart through the vagus 
nerves. Cholinergic nerves supply the AV and SA nodes via muscarinic 
(M2) receptors. Under resting conditions, vagal inhibitory activity pre-
dominates and the heart rate is slow. Adrenergic stimulation, associ-
ated with exercise, emotional stress, fever and so on, causes the heart 
rate to increase. In disease states, the nerve supply to the heart may 
be affected. For example, in heart failure the sympathetic system may 
be up-regulated, and in diabetes mellitus the nerves themselves 
maybedamaged by autonomic neuropathy so that there is little variation 
in heart rate.
Physiology
Myocardial contraction
Myocardial cells (myocytes) are about 50–100 µm long; each cell branches 
and interdigitates with adjacent cells. An intercalated disc permits elec-
trical conduction via gap junctions, and mechanical conduction via the 
fascia adherens, to adjacent cells (Fig. 16.5A). The basic unit of contrac-
tion is the sarcomere (2 µm long), which is aligned to those of adjacent 
myobrils, giving a striated appearance due to the Z-lines (Fig.16.5B and 
C). Actin laments are attached at right angles to the Z-lines and interdig-
itate with thicker parallel myosin laments. The cross-links between actin 
RA
RV
LV
Superior
vena cava
Aortic valve
Tricuspid
valve
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary
valve
Left atrial
appendage
Aorta
Base of
the heart
Apex of
the heart
Inferior
vena cava
Mitral valve
Fig. 16.2 Surface anatomy of the heart. The positions of the major cardiac 
chambers and heart valves are shown. (LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; 
RV = right ventricle)
Aorta
Circumflex
artery (CX)
Right coronary
artery (RCA)
Sinoatrial node
Left main coronary artery
Left coronary artery
Pulmonary artery
and valve
Left anterior
descending
artery (LAD)
Apex
Obtuse
marginal artery
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Atrioventricular
node
Posterior
descending artery
Diagonal
branches
Septal
perforator
branches
Fig. 16.3 The coronary arteries: anterior view.
Sinoatrial node
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular
(AV) node
Right bundle
branch
Right
ventricle
Left atrium
Left bundle
branch
Left anterior
fascicle
Left posterior
fascicle
Purkinje fibres
Left ventricle
Fig. 16.4 The cardiac conduction system. Depolarisation starts in the 
sinoatrial node and spreads through the atria (blue arrows), and then through 
the atrioventricular node (black arrows). Depolarisation then spreads through the 
bundle of His and the bundle branches to reach the ventricular muscle (red arrows). 
Repolarisation spreads from epicardium to endocardium (green arrows).

[[p434]]
390  CARDIOLOGY
and myosin molecules contain myobrillar adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase), which breaks down adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to provide 
the energy for contraction (Fig. 16.5E). Two chains of actin molecules 
form a helical structure, with a second molecule, tropomyosin, in the 
grooves of the actin helix, and a further molecule complex, troponin, 
attached to every seventh actin molecule (Fig. 16.5D).
During the plateau phase of the action potential, calcium ions enter 
the cell and are mobilised from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. They bind to 
troponin and thereby precipitate contraction by shortening of the sarco-
mere through the interdigitation of the actin and myosin molecules. The 
force of cardiac muscle contraction, or inotropic state, is regulated by 
the inux of calcium ions through ‘slow calcium channels’. The extent to 
which the sarcomere can shorten determines stroke volume of the ven-
tricle. It is maximally shortened in response to powerful inotropic drugs 
or marked exercise. However, the enlargement of the heart seen in heart 
failure is due to slippage of the myobrils and adjacent cells rather than 
lengthening of the sarcomere.
Cardiac peptides
Cardiomyocytes secrete peptides that have humoral effects on the 
 vasculature and kidneys. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a 28-amino 
acid peptide that acts as a vasodilator, reducing blood pressure (BP), 
and as a diuretic, promoting renal excretion of water and sodium. It is 
released by atrial myocytes in response to stretch. Brain natriuretic pep-
tide (BNP; originally identied in extracts of porcine brain) is a 32-amino 
acid peptide produced by ventricular cardiomyocytes in response to 
stretch, as occurs in heart failure. Like ANP, it has diuretic properties. 
Neprilysin, an enzyme produced by the kidney and other tissues, breaks 
down ANP, BNP and other proteins and, in so doing, acts as a vasocon-
strictor. It forms a therapeutic target in patients with heart failure.
Circulation
The RA receives deoxygenated blood from the superior and inferior 
venae cavae and discharges blood to the RV, which in turn pumps it 
into the pulmonary artery. Blood is oxygenated as it passes through the 
pulmonary arterial and alveolar capillary bed before draining into the 
pulmonary veins and LA. Blood then passes into the LV which pumps 
it into the aorta (see Fig. 16.1). During ventricular contraction (systole), 
the tricuspid valve in the right heart and the mitral valve in the left heart 
close, and the pulmonary and aortic valves open. In diastole, the pulmo-
nary and aortic valves close, and the two AV valves open. Collectively, 
these atrial and ventricular events constitute the cardiac cycle of lling 
and ejection of blood from one heart beat to the next. Blood passes 
from the heart through the large central elastic arteries into muscular 
arteries before encountering the resistance vessels, and ultimately the 
capillary bed, where there is exchange of nutrients, oxygen and waste 
products of metabolism. The central arteries, such as the aorta, are 
predominantly composed of elastic tissue with little or no vascular 
smooth muscle cells. When blood is ejected from the heart, the com-
pliant aorta expands to accommodate the volume of blood before the 
elastic recoil sustains BP and blood ow following cessation of cardiac 
contraction. This ‘Windkessel’ effect prevents excessive rises in systolic 
Intercalated disc
Myocyte
10 m
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Transverse tubules
Mitochondrion
Muscle
fibre
Mitochondrion
T-tubule
Z-line
Sarcolemma
Actin
subunit
Tropomyosin
Troponin
1
2
3
Tropomyosin
Actin
Myosin body
Z-line
Troponin complex
Myosin head
ATP
ADP
Ca2+
E
C
A
B
D
Myofibril-like unit
(1.0 m diameter)
Fig. 16.5 Schematic of myocytes and the contraction process within a muscle bre.
calcium ions, which bind to troponin, displacing tropomyosin. The binding site is exposed. (3) Tilting of the angle of attachment of the myosin head, resulting in bre shortening. 
(ADP = adenosine diphosphate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate)

[[p435]]
Investigation of cardiovascular disease  391
16
BP while sustaining diastolic BP, thereby reducing cardiac afterload and 
 maintaining coronary perfusion. These benets are lost with progressive 
arterial stiffening, which occurs with ageing and advanced renal disease. 
Passing down the arterial tree, vascular smooth muscle cells progres-
sively play a greater role until the resistance arterioles are encoun-
tered. Although all vessels contribute, the resistance vessels (diameter 
50–200 µm) provide the greatest contribution to systemic vascular resist-
ance, with small changes in radius having a marked inuence on blood 
ow; resistance is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius 
(Poiseuille’s Law). The tone of these resistance vessels is tightly regulated 
by humoral, neuronal and mechanical factors. Neurogenic constriction 
operates via α-adrenoceptors on vascular smooth muscle, and dilatation 
via muscarinic and β2-adrenoceptors. In addition, systemic and locally 
released vasoactive substances inuence tone; vasoconstrictors include 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine), angiotensin II and endothelin-1, whereas 
adenosine, bradykinin, prostaglandins and nitric oxide are vasodilators. 
Resistance to blood ow rises with viscosity and is mainly inuenced by 
the haematocrit.
Coronary blood vessels receive sympathetic and parasympathetic 
innervation. While stimulation of α-adrenoceptors causes vasocon-
striction and stimulation of β2-adrenoceptors causes vasodilatation, the 
predominant effect of sympathetic stimulation in coronary arteries is 
vasodilatation. Parasympathetic stimulation also causes modest dilata-
tion of normal coronary arteries. Because of these homeostatic mech-
anisms that regulate vessel tone, narrowing or stenosis in a coronary 
artery does not limit ow, even during exercise, until the cross-sectional 
area of the vessel is reduced by at least 70%.
Endothelium
The endothelium plays a vital role in the control of vascular homeosta-
sis. It synthesises and releases many vasoactive mediators that cause 
vasodilatation, including nitric oxide, prostacyclin and endothelium-de-
rived hyperpolarising factor, and vasoconstriction, including endothelin-1 
and angiotensin II. A balance exists whereby the release of such factors 
contributes to the maintenance and regulation of vascular tone and BP. 
Damage to the endothelium may disrupt this balance and lead to vascu-
lar dysfunction, tissue ischaemia and hypertension.
The endothelium has a major inuence on key regulatory steps in the 
recruitment of inammatory cells and on the formation and dissolution 
of thrombus. Once activated, the endothelium expresses surface recep-
tors such as E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule type 1 (ICAM-1) 
and platelet–endothelial cell adhesion molecule type 1 (PECAM-1), which 
mediate rolling, adhesion and migration of inammatory leucocytes into 
the subintima. The endothelium also stores and releases the multimeric 
glycoprotein von Willebrand factor, which promotes thrombus formation 
by linking platelet adhesion to denuded surfaces, especially in the arterial 
vasculature. In contrast, once intravascular thrombus forms, tissue plas-
minogen activator is rapidly released from a dynamic storage pool within 
the endothelium to induce brinolysis and thrombus dissolution. These 
processes are critically involved in the development and progression of 
atherosclerosis, and endothelial function and injury are seen as central to 
the pathogenesis of many cardiovascular disease states.
Respiration
Cardiac output, BP and pulse rate change with respiration as the result 
of changes in blood ow to the right and left heart, as summarised in 
Box 16.1. During inspiration, the fall in intrathoracic pressure causes 
increased return of venous blood into the chest and right side of the 
heart, which increases cardiac output from the RV. However, blood is 
sequestered in the lungs due to the increased capacitance of the pulmo-
nary vascular bed, leading to a reduction in blood ow to the LV and a 
slight fall in BP. With expiration the opposite sequence of events occurs; 
there is a fall in venous return to the right heart with a reduction in RV 
output, and a rise in the venous return to the left side of the heart with an 
increase in LV output. As the result of these changes, BP normally falls 
during inspiration but rises during expiration. These changes are exag-
gerated in patients with severe airways obstruction secondary to asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) leading to pulsus par-
adoxus, which describes an exaggerated fall in BP during inspiration. 
As well as being found in airways obstruction, pulsus paradoxus is also 
characteristic of cardiac tamponade. Here, cardiac lling is constrained 
by external pressure, and on inspiration, compression of the RV impedes 
the normal increase in ow during inspiration. The interventricular sep-
tum then moves to the left, impeding left ventricular lling and cardiac 
output. This produces an exaggerated fall in BP (> 10 mmHg fall during 
inspiration).
Investigation of cardiovascular disease
Several investigations may be required in the diagnosis of cardiac disease 
and assessment of its severity. Basic tests, such as electrocardiography, 
chest X-ray and echocardiography, can be performed in an outpatient 
clinic or at the bedside, whereas more complex procedures such as car-
diac catheterisation, radionuclide imaging, computed tomography (CT) 
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) require specialised facilities.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is used to assess cardiac rhythm and con-
duction as well as the diagnosis of myocardial ischaemia and infarction.
The ECG is recorded by electrodes on the body surface which detect 
the electrical depolarisation of myocardial tissue produced from a small 
dipole current. These signals are amplied and either printed or  displayed 
on a monitor (Fig. 16.6). During sinus rhythm, the SA node triggers atrial 
depolarisation, producing a P wave. Depolarisation proceeds slowly 
QRS duration
(0.10 sec)
P wave
(0.12 sec)
PR interval
(0.20 sec)
QT interval 
(0.42 sec at rate of 60/min)
P
Q
S
T wave: ventricular
repolarisation
P wave: 
atrial depolarisation 
 T
R
QRS complex: ventricular 
depolarisation
Fig. 16.6 The electrocardiogram. The components correspond to depolarisation 
and repolarisation, as depicted in Fig. 16.4. The upper limit of the normal range for 
each interval is given in brackets.
16.1 Haemodynamic effects of respiration
Inspiration
Expiration
Jugular venous pressure
Falls
Rises
Blood pressure
Falls (up to 10 mmHg)
Rises
Heart rate
Accelerates
Slows
Second heart sound
Splits*
Fuses*
*Inspiration prolongs right ventricular ejection, delaying P 2, and shortens left ventricular 
ejection, bringing forward A2; expiration produces the opposite effects.

[[p436]]
392  CARDIOLOGY
through the AV node, which is too small to produce a depolarisation 
wave detectable from the body surface. The bundle of His, bundle 
branches and Purkinje system are then activated, initiating ventricular 
myocardial depolarisation, which produces the QRS complex. The mus-
cle mass of the ventricles is much larger than that of the atria, so the QRS 
complex is larger than the P wave. The interval between the onset of the 
P wave and the onset of the QRS complex is termed the ‘PR interval’ 
and largely reects the duration of AV nodal conduction. Injury to the left 
or right bundle branch delays ventricular depolarisation, widening the 
QRS complex. Selective injury of one of the left fascicles (hemiblock) 
affects the electrical axis. Repolarisation is slower and spreads from the 
epicardium to the endocardium. Atrial repolarisation does not cause a 
detectable signal but ventricular repolarisation produces the T wave. The 
QT interval represents the total duration of ventricular depolarisation and 
repolarisation.
The 12-lead ECG
The 12-lead ECG (Box 16.2) is generated from 10 electrodes that are 
attached to the skin. One electrode is attached to each limb and six elec-
trodes are attached to the chest. In addition, the left arm, right arm and 
left leg electrodes are attached to a central terminal acting as an addi-
tional virtual electrode in the centre of the chest (the right leg electrode 
acts as an earthing electrode). The 12 ‘leads’ of the ECG refer to record-
ings made from pairs or sets of these electrodes. They comprise three 
groups: three dipole limb leads, three augmented voltage limb leads and 
six unipole chest leads.
Leads I, II and III are the dipole limb leads and refer to recordings 
obtained from pairs of limb electrodes. Lead I records the signal between 
the right (negative) and left (positive) arms. Lead II records the signal 
between the right arm (negative) and left leg (positive). Lead III records 
the signal between the left arm (negative) and left leg (positive). These 
three leads thus record electrical activity along three different axes in 
the frontal plane. Leads aVR, aVL and aVF are the augmented voltage 
limb leads. These record electrical activity between a limb electrode and 
a modied central terminal. For example, lead aVL records the signal 
between the left arm (positive) and a central (negative) terminal, formed 
by connecting the right arm and left leg electrodes (Fig. 16.7). Similarly 
augmented signals are obtained from the right arm (aVR) and left leg 
(aVF). These leads also record electrical activity in the frontal plane, with 
each lead 120° apart. Lead aVF thus examines activity along the axis 
+90°, and lead aVL along the axis 30°, and so on.
When depolarisation moves towards a positive electrode, it produces 
a positive deection in the ECG; depolarisation in the opposite direction 
produces a negative deection. The average vector of ventricular depo-
larisation is known as the frontal cardiac axis. When the vector is at right 
16.2 How to read a 12-lead electrocardiogram: examination 
sequence
Rhythm strip (lead II)
To determine heart rate and rhythm
Cardiac axis
Normal if QRS complexes +ve in leads I and II
P-wave shape
Tall P waves denote right atrial enlargement (P 
pulmonale) and notched P waves denote left 
atrial enlargement (P mitrale)
PR interval
Normal = 0.12–0.20 sec. Prolongation denotes 
impaired atrioventricular nodal conduction. A 
short PR interval occurs in Wolff–Parkinson–
White syndrome
QRS duration
If >  0.12 sec, ventricular conduction is 
abnormal (left or right bundle branch block)
QRS amplitude
Large QRS complexes occur in slim young 
patients and in patients with left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Q waves
May signify previous myocardial infarction
ST segment
ST elevation may signify myocardial infarction, 
pericarditis or left ventricular aneurysm; ST 
depression may signify ischaemia or infarction
T waves
T-wave inversion has many causes, including 
myocardial ischaemia or infarction, and 
electrolyte disturbances
QT interval
Normal < 0.44 sec (male), 0.46 sec (female) 
corrected for heart rate. QT prolongation may 
occur with congenital long QT syndrome, lowK+, 
Mg2+ or Ca2+, and some drugs (seeBox 16.28)
ECG conventions
Depolarisation towards electrode: +ve 
deection
Depolarisation away from electrode: ve 
deection
Sensitivity: 10 mm = 1 mV
Paper speed: 25 mm per sec
Each large (5 mm) square = 0.2 sec
Each small (1 mm) square = 0.04 sec
Heart rate = 1500/RR interval (mm) (i.e. 300 ÷ 
number of large squares between beats)
III (120°)
aVF (90°)
II (60°)
I (0°)
120°
I (0°)
I (0°)
A
B
C
II (60°)
II (60°)
aVR (210°)
aVL (–30°)
Fig. 16.7 The appearance of the ECG from different leads in the frontal plane.

[[p437]]
Investigation of cardiovascular disease  393
16
angles to a lead, the depolarisation in that lead is equally negative and 
positive (isoelectric). In Fig. 16.7A, the QRS complex is isoelectric in aVL, 
negative in aVR and most strongly positive in lead II; the main vector 
or axis of depolarisation is therefore 60°. The normal cardiac axis lies 
between 
30° and +90°. Examples of left and right axis deviation are 
shown in Fig. 16.7B and C
There are six chest leads, V1–V6, derived from electrodes placed on 
the anterior and lateral left side of the chest, over the heart. Each lead 
records the signal between the corresponding chest electrode (positive) 
and the central terminal (negative). Leads V1 and V2 lie approximately 
over the RV, V3 and V4 over the interventricular septum, and V5 and V6
over the LV (Fig. 16.8). The LV has the greater muscle mass and contrib-
utes the major component of the QRS complex.
The shape of the QRS complex varies across the chest leads. 
Depolarisation of the interventricular septum occurs rst and moves from 
left to right; this generates a small initial negative deection in lead V6
(Q wave) and an initial positive deection in lead V1 (R wave). The second 
phase of depolarisation is activation of the body of the LV, which creates 
a large positive deection or R wave in V6 (with reciprocal changes in V1). 
The third and nal phase involves the RV and produces a small negative 
deection or S wave in V6.
Exercise ECG
In exercise or stress electrocardiography, a 12-lead ECG is recorded dur-
ing exercise on a treadmill or bicycle ergometer. It is similar to a resting 
ECG, except that the limb electrodes are placed on the shoulders and 
hips rather than the wrists and ankles. The Bruce Protocol is the most 
commonly used. During an exercise ECG, BP is recorded and symp-
toms are assessed. Common indications for exercise testing are shown 
in Box 16.3. The test is considered positive if angina occurs, BP falls 
or fails to increase, or if there are ST segment shifts of more than 1 mm 
(see Fig. 16.57). Exercise testing is useful in conrming the diagnosis of 
coronary artery disease in patients with suspected angina, and under 
these circumstances has reasonable sensitivity and excellent specicity 
(see Box 16.3). False-negative results can occur in patients with coronary 
artery disease, and not all patients with a positive test have coronary 
disease. This is especially true in low-risk individuals, such as asympto-
matic young or middle-aged women, in whom an abnormal response is 
more likely to represent a false-positive than a true-positive test. Stress 
testing is contraindicated in the presence of acute coronary syndrome, 
decompensated heart failure and severe hypertension.
Ambulatory ECG
Ambulatory ECG recordings can be obtained using a portable digital 
recorder. These devices usually provide limb lead ECG recordings only, 
on a continuous basis for periods of between 1 and 7 days. The main 
indication for ambulatory ECG is in the investigation of patients with 
suspected arrhythmia, such as those with intermittent palpitation, diz-
ziness or syncope. In this situation, a standard ECG provides only a 
snapshot of the cardiac rhythm and is unlikely to detect an intermittent 
arrhythmia, so a longer period of recording is required (see Fig. 16.30). 
Ambulatory ECG can also be used to assess rate control in patients with 
atrial brillation, and to detect transient myocardial ischaemia using ST 
segment analysis. If symptoms are infrequent, special recorders can be 
issued that can be activated by the patient when a symptom episode 
occurs and placed on the chest wall to record the cardiac rhythm at 
that point in time. With some devices, the recording can be transmitted 
to hospital electronically. If the symptoms are very infrequent but poten-
tially serious, such as syncope, implantable ‘loop recorders’ resembling 
a leadless pacemaker can be used and implanted subcutaneously to 
record cardiac rhythm for prolonged periods of between 1 and 3 years 
(see Fig. 16.51).
Cardiac biomarkers
Several biomarkers are available that can be measured in peripheral 
blood to assess myocardial dysfunction and ischaemia.
Brain natriuretic peptide
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a peptide hormone of 32 amino acids 
with diuretic properties. It is secreted by the LV as a 108-amino acid 
prohormone, which is cleaved to produce active BNP, and an inactive 
76-amino acid N-terminal fragment (NT-proBNP). Serum concentra-
tions are elevated in conditions associated with LV systolic dysfunction. 
Generally, NT-proBNP is measured in preference to BNP since it is more 
stable. Measurements of NT-proBNP are indicated for the diagnosis 
of LV dysfunction and to assess prognosis and response to therapy in 
patients with heart failure.
Cardiac troponins
Troponin I and troponin T are structural cardiac muscle proteins (see 
Fig. 16.5) that are released during myocyte damage and necrosis, 
and represent the cornerstone of the diagnosis of acute myocardial 
infarction (MI, see Box 16.47). Modern assays are extremely sensitive 
and can detect minor degrees of myocardial damage, so that elevated 
plasma troponin concentrations may be observed in conditions other 
than acute MI, such as pulmonary embolus, septic shock and pulmo-
nary oedema.
Right
bundle
AV node
Left
bundle
Bundle of His
RV
LV
V1
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V6
1 3
2
1
1
2
3
3
2
A
B
Fig. 16.8 The sequence of activation of the ventricles.
septum occurs rst (red arrows), followed by spreading of the impulse through the 
Normal electrocardiographic complexes from leads V1 and V6. (AV = atrioventricular)
16.3  Exercise testing
Indications
 To conrm the diagnosis of angina
 To evaluate stable angina
 To assess prognosis following myocardial infarction
 To assess outcome after coronary revascularisation, e.g. coronary angioplasty
 To diagnose and evaluate the treatment of exercise-induced arrhythmias
High-risk ndings
 Low threshold for ischaemia (within stage 1 or 2 of the Bruce Protocol)
 Fall in blood pressure on exercise
 Widespread, marked or prolonged ischaemic ECG changes
 Exercise-induced arrhythmia

[[p438]]
394  CARDIOLOGY
Chest X-ray
This is useful for determining the size and shape of the heart, and 
the state of the pulmonary blood vessels and lung elds. Most infor-
mation is given by a postero-anterior (PA) projection taken in full 
inspiration. Anteroposterior (AP) projections can be performed when 
patient movement is restricted but result in magnication of the car-
diac silhouette.
An estimate of overall heart size can be made by comparing the 
maximum width of the cardiac outline with the maximum internal trans-
verse diameter of the thoracic cavity. The term cardiomegaly is used to 
describe an enlarged cardiac silhouette when the ratio of cardiac width 
to the width of the lung elds is greater than 0.5. Cardiomegaly can be 
caused by chamber dilatation, especially left ventricular dilatation, or 
by a pericardial effusion, but may also be due to a mediastinal mass 
or pectus excavatum. Cardiomegaly is not a sensitive indicator of left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction since the cardiothoracic ratio is normal 
in many patients with poor left ventricular function and is not specic, 
since many patients with cardiomegaly on chest X-ray have normal 
echocardiograms.
Dilatation of individual cardiac chambers can be recognised by the 
characteristic alterations to the cardiac silhouette (Fig. 16.9):
 Left atrial dilatation results in prominence of the left atrial append-
age, creating the appearance of a straight left heart border, a double 
cardiac shadow to the right of the sternum, and widening of the 
angle of the carina (bifurcation of the trachea) as the left main bron-
chus is pushed upwards.
 Right atrial enlargement projects from the right heart border towards 
the right lower lung eld.
 Left ventricular dilatation causes prominence of the left heart border 
and enlargement of the cardiac silhouette. Left ventricular hypertro-
phy produces rounding of the left heart border (Fig. 16.10).
 Right ventricular dilatation increases heart size, displaces the apex 
upwards and straightens the left heart border.
Lateral or oblique projections may be useful for detecting pericardial 
calcication in patients with constrictive pericarditis or a calcied thoracic 
aortic aneurysm, as these abnormalities may be obscured by the spine 
on the PA view.
The lung elds on the chest X-ray may show congestion and oedema 
in patients with heart failure (see Fig. 16.25), and an increase in pulmo-
nary blood ow (‘pulmonary plethora’) in those with left-to-right shunt. 
Pleural effusions may also occur in heart failure.
Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography, commonly referred to as ‘echo’, is 
obtained by placing an ultrasound transducer on the chest wall to image 
the heart structures as a real-time two-dimensional ‘slice’. This can be 
used for rapid evaluation of various aspects of cardiac structure and 
function (Box 16.4).
Doppler echocardiography
Doppler echocardiography provides information on blood ow within the 
heart and the great vessels. It is based on the Doppler principle that 
sound waves reected from moving objects, such as red blood cells, 
undergo a frequency shift. Doppler echocardiography can therefore 
detect the speed and direction of blood ow in the heart chambers and 
great vessels. The information can be presented either as a plot of blood 
velocity against time for a particular point in the heart (Fig. 16.11) or as a 
colour overlay on a two-dimensional real-time echo picture (colour-ow 
Doppler, Fig. 16.12). Doppler echocardiography is useful in the detection 
of valvular regurgitation, where the direction of blood ow is reversed and 
turbulence is seen, and is also used to detect pressure gradients across 
stenosed valves. For example, the normal resting systolic ow velocity 
across the aortic valve is approximately 1 m/sec; in the presence of aortic 
Splaying
of carina
Distended
pulmonary veins
Enlarged
left atrium
‘Double shadow’ of left
atrial enlargement
Enlarged
pulmonary
trunk
Fig. 16.9 Chest X-ray of a patient with mitral stenosis and regurgitation 
indicating enlargement of the LA and prominence of the pulmonary artery trunk.
16.4  Common indications for echocardiography
 Assessment of left ventricular function
 Diagnosis and quantication of severity of valve disease
 Identication of vegetations in endocarditis
 Identication of structural heart disease in atrial brillation, cardiomyopathies or 
congenital heart disease
 Detection of pericardial effusion
 Identication of structural heart disease or intracardiac thrombus in systemic 
embolism
Normal-sized
aortic arch
Large left ventricle
Dilated
ascending aorta
Fig. 16.10 Chest X-ray of a patient with aortic regurgitation, left ventricular 
enlargement and dilatation of the ascending aorta.

[[p439]]
Investigation of cardiovascular disease  395
16
images that can be obtained makes TOE particularly valuable for inves-
tigating patients with prosthetic (especially mitral) valve dysfunction, 
congenital abnormalities such as atrial septal defects, aortic dissection, 
infective endocarditis (vegetations that are too small to be detected by 
transthoracic echocardiography) and systemic embolism (intracardiac 
thrombus or masses).
Stress echocardiography
Stress echocardiography is used to investigate patients with suspected 
coronary artery disease who are unsuitable for exercise stress testing, 
such as those with mobility problems or pre-existing bundle branch 
block. A two-dimensional echo is performed before and during infu-
sion of a moderate to high dose of an inotrope, such as dobutamine. 
Myocardial segments with poor perfusion become ischaemic and con-
tract poorly under stress, manifesting as a wall motion abnormality on the 
scan. Stress echocardiography is sometimes used to examine myocar-
dial viability in patients with impaired left ventricular function. Low-dose 
dobutamine can induce contraction in ‘hibernating’ myocardium; such 
patients may benet from bypass surgery or percutaneous coronary 
intervention.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is useful for imaging the cardiac cham-
bers, great vessels, pericardium, and mediastinal structures and 
masses. Multidetector scanners can acquire up to 320 slices per rota-
tion, allowing very high-resolution imaging in a single heartbeat. CT is 
often performed using a timed injection of X-ray contrast to produce 
clear images of blood vessels and associated pathologies. Contrast 
scans are very useful for imaging the aorta in suspected aortic dis-
section (see Fig. 16.73), and the pulmonary arteries and branches in 
suspected pulmonary embolism.
Some centres use cardiac CT scans for quantication of coronary 
artery calcication, which may serve as an index of cardiovascular risk. 
However, modern multidetector scanning allows non-invasive coronary 
angiography (Fig. 16.13) with a spatial resolution approaching that of 
conventional coronary arteriography and at a lower radiation dose. CT 
coronary angiography is particularly useful in the initial assessment of 
patients with chest pain and a low or intermediate likelihood of disease, 
since it has a high negative predictive value in excluding coronary artery 
Tricuspid valve
Right ventricle
Left ventricle (dilated)
Mitral valve (regurgitant)
Right atrium
Left atrium
Fig. 16.12 Echocardiographic illustration of the principal cardiac structures in 
the ‘four-chamber’ view. Colour-ow Doppler has been used to demonstrate mitral 
regurgitation: a ame-shaped (yellow/blue) turbulent jet into the left atrium.
Transducer
Chest wall
LV
LA
Turbulent
flow
Stenosed
aortic
valve
A
B
Fig. 16.11 Doppler echocardiography in aortic stenosis.
is imaged and a Doppler beam passed directly through the left ventricular outow 
of the blood cells is recorded to determine the maximum velocity and hence the 
pressure gradient across the valve. In this example, the peak velocity is approximately 
450 cm/sec (4.5 m/sec), indicating severe aortic stenosis (peak gradient of 81 mmHg). 
(LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle)
stenosis, this is increased as blood accelerates through the narrow ori-
ce. In severe aortic stenosis, the peak aortic velocity may be increased 
to 5 m/sec (see Fig. 16.11). An estimate of the pressure gradient across 
a valve or lesion is given by the modied Bernoulli equation:
Pressure gradient mmHg
peak velocity m sec
(
)
(
( /
))
=
×
4
2
Advanced techniques include three-dimensional echocardiography, 
intravascular ultrasound (denes vessel wall abnormalities and guides 
coronary intervention), intracardiac ultrasound (provides high-resolution 
images), tissue Doppler imaging (quanties myocardial contractility and 
diastolic function) and speckle tracking (assesses myocardial motion and 
strain).
Transoesophageal echocardiography
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) involves passing an endo-
scope-like ultrasound probe into the oesophagus and upper stomach 
under light sedation and positioning it behind the LA. It is particularly 
useful for imaging structures such as the left atrial appendage, pulmo-
nary veins, thoracic aorta and interatrial septum, which may be poorly 
visualised by transthoracic echocardiography, especially if the patient 
is overweight or has obstructive airways disease. The high-resolution 

[[p440]]
396  CARDIOLOGY
disease. Modern volume scanners are also able to assess myocardial 
perfusion, often at the same sitting.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to generate cross-sec-
tional images of the heart, lungs and mediastinal structures. It provides 
better differentiation of soft tissue structures than CT but is poor at 
demonstrating calcication. MRI scans need to be ‘gated’ to the ECG, 
allowing the scanner to produce moving images of the heart and medi-
astinal structures throughout the cardiac cycle. MRI is very useful for 
imaging the aorta, including suspected dissection (see Fig. 16.72), and 
can dene the anatomy of the heart and great vessels in patients with 
congenital heart disease. It is also useful for detecting inltrative condi-
tions affecting the heart and for evaluation of the RV that is difcult to 
image by echocardiography.
Physiological data can be obtained from the signal returned from mov-
ing blood, which allows quantication of blood ow across regurgitant 
or stenotic valves. It is also possible to analyse regional wall motion in 
patients with suspected coronary disease or cardiomyopathy.
Myocardial perfusion and viability can also be readily assessed by 
MRI. When enhanced by gadolinium-based contrast media, areas of 
myocardial hypoperfusion can be identied with better spatial reso-
lution than nuclear medicine techniques. Later redistribution of this 
contrast, so-called delayed enhancement, can be used to identify 
myocardial scarring and brosis: this is a particular strength of cardiac 
MRI (Fig.16.14). This can help in selecting patients for revascularisation 
procedures, or in identifying those with myocardial inltration, such as 
that seen with sarcoid heart disease and arrhythmogenic right ventricu-
lar cardiomyopathy.
Cardiac catheterisation
This involves passing a specialised catheter through a peripheral vein or 
artery into the heart under X-ray guidance. Cardiac catheterisation allows 
BP and oxygen saturation to be measured in the cardiac chambers and 
great vessels, and is used to perform angiograms by injecting contrast 
media into a chamber or blood vessel.
Left heart catheterisation involves accessing the arterial circulation, 
usually through the radial artery, to allow catheterisation of the aorta, 
LV and coronary arteries. Coronary angiography is the most widely 
performed procedure, in which the left and right coronary arteries are 
selectively imaged, providing information about the extent and severity 
of coronary stenoses, thrombus and calcication (Fig. 16.15). Additional 
anatomical (intravascular ultrasound, optical coherence tomography) or 
functional (pressure wire) assessments are sometimes used to dene 
plaque characteristics and severity more precisely. This permits plan-
ning of percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery. Left ventriculography can be performed during the pro-
cedure to determine the size and function of the LV (Fig. 16.16) and to 
demonstrate mitral regurgitation. Aortography denes the size of the 
aortic root and thoracic aorta, and can help quantify aortic regurgitation. 
Left heart catheterisation is a day-case procedure and is relatively safe, 
with serious complications occurring in only approximately 1 in 1000 
cases.
Right heart catheterisation is used to assess right heart and pulmonary 
artery pressures, and to detect intracardiac shunts by measuring oxygen 
saturations in different chambers. For example, a step up in oxygen sat-
uration from 65% in the RA to 80% in the pulmonary artery is indicative of 
a large left-to-right shunt that might be due to a ventricular septal defect. 
Cardiac output can also be measured using thermodilution techniques. 
Left atrial pressure can be measured directly by puncturing the inter-
atrial septum from the RA with a special catheter. For most purposes, 
a satisfactory approximation to left atrial pressure can be obtained by 
‘wedging’ an end-hole or balloon catheter in a branch of the pulmonary 
artery. Swan–Ganz balloon catheters are often used to monitor pulmo-
nary ‘wedge’ pressure as a guide to left heart lling pressure in critically 
ill patients (see Fig. 9.25).
A
B
Fig. 16.13 Computed tomography coronary angiography, demonstrating normal 
coronary arteries (arrows).
A
B
Fig. 16.14 Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging.
infarction with large area of subendocardial delayed gadolinium enhancement (white area, arrows).

[[p441]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  397
16
Electrophysiology
Patients with known or suspected arrhythmia are investigated by percu-
taneous placement of electrode catheters into the heart via the femoral 
and neck veins. An electrophysiology study (EPS) is most commonly 
performed to evaluate patients for catheter ablation and is normally done 
at the same time as the ablation procedure. EPS is occasionally used 
for risk stratication of patients suspected of being at risk of ventricular 
arrhythmias.
Radionuclide imaging
Radionuclide imaging can be used to evaluate cardiac function but is 
declining in popularity due to the availability of alternative techniques, 
such as MRI and CT, that either do not involve exposure to radiation or 
provide superior quality data to radionuclide imaging.
Blood pool imaging
The patient is given an intravenous injection of radioisotope-labelled 
blood cells, and after 4–5 minutes, the distribution of isotope in the heart 
is evaluated by a gamma camera at different phases of the cardiac cycle, 
thereby permitting the calculation of ventricular ejection fractions. It can 
also assess the size and ‘shape’ of the cardiac chambers.
Myocardial perfusion scanning
The patient is given an intravenous injection of a radioactive isotope, 
such as 99technetium-tetrofosmin, and scintiscans of the myocardium 
are subsequently obtained by gamma camera at rest and during stress 
(see Fig. 16.57). Either exercise stress or pharmacological stress (using 
the inotrope dobutamine or the vasodilator dipyridamole) can be used. 
More sophisticated quantitative information can be obtained with posi-
tron emission tomography (PET), which can also be used to assess myo-
cardial metabolism, but this is available in only a few centres.
Presenting problems in cardiovascular 
disease
Cardiovascular disease gives rise to several symptoms, which may 
overlap those caused by pathologies of other systems. Making the cor-
rect diagnosis depends on careful analysis of the factors that provoke 
symptoms, the subtle differences in how they are described by the 
Diastole
Systole
Fig. 16.16 Left ventriculograms in diastole 
 and systole 
 in a patient with normal left ventricular contraction.
Diagnostic 
catheter
Left main
stem artery
Circumflex
artery
Left anterior
descending
artery
Stenosis
B
A
Fig. 16.15 The left anterior descending and circumex coronary arteries with a stenosis (arrow) in the left anterior descending vessel.

[[p442]]
398  CARDIOLOGY
patient, the clinical ndings and the results of investigations. A close 
relationship between symptoms and exertion is usually suggestive of 
heart disease. The New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional clas-
sication is used to grade the degree of disability caused by cardiac 
symptoms (Box 16.5).
Chest pain on exertion
There are many other non-cardiac causes of chest pain, as discussed in 
Chapter 9. This section will focus on exertional chest pain (or discomfort), 
which is a typical presenting symptom of coronary artery disease.
Clinical assessment
Detailed history taking is crucial in determining the likely cause of chest 
pain. Chest pain on exertion suggests angina pectoris (Fig. 16.17). The 
reproducibility, predictability and relationship to physical exertion (and 
occasionally emotion) of the chest pain are the most important fea-
tures. The duration of symptoms should be noted because patients 
with recent-onset angina are at greater risk than those with long-stand-
ing and unchanged symptoms. Physical examination is often normal 
but may reveal evidence of risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such 
as xanthoma or xanthelasma indicating hyperlipidaemia. Signs of anae-
mia or thyrotoxicosis may be identied, both of which can exacerbate 
angina. Cardiovascular examination may reveal evidence of left ven-
tricular dysfunction or cardiac murmurs in patients with aortic valve 
disease and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Other manifestations of 
arterial disease, such as bruits and loss of peripheral pulses, may also 
be observed.
Investigations
A full blood count, fasting blood glucose, lipids, thyroid function tests and 
a 12-lead ECG are the most important baseline investigations. Stress 
testing, including exercise ECG, stress echocardiography and magnetic 
resonance perfusion imaging, can be helpful in conrming anginal symp-
toms and identifying high-risk patients who require further investigation 
and treatment but cannot reliably exclude the presence of coronary 
artery disease. However, CT coronary angiography is the rst-line test of 
choice to diagnose angina due to coronary artery disease. If a murmur 
is found, echocardiography should be performed to check for valve dis-
ease or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Severe prolonged chest pain
Severe prolonged cardiac chest pain may be due to acute myocardial 
infarction or to unstable angina – known collectively as acute coronary 
syndrome.
Clinical assessment
Acute coronary syndrome is suggested by a previous history of stable 
angina but an episode of acute severe chest pain at rest can also be the 
rst presentation of coronary artery disease. Making the correct diagno-
sis depends on analysing the character of the pain and its associated 
features. Physical examination may reveal signs of risk factors for cor-
onary artery disease as described for exertional chest pain. There may 
also be pallor or sweating, which is indicative of autonomic disturbance 
and typical of acute coronary syndrome. Other features, such as arrhyth-
mia, hypotension and heart failure, may occur. Patients presenting with 
symptoms consistent with an acute coronary syndrome require hospital-
isation and urgent investigation, because there is a high risk of avoidable 
complications.
Investigations
A 12-lead ECG is mandatory and is the most useful method of initial 
triage, along with measurement of cardiac troponin I or T. The diagnosis 
of an acute coronary syndrome is supported by ST segment elevation 
or depression on ECG and an elevated level of troponin I or T, which 
demonstrates that there has been myocardial damage.
If the diagnosis remains unclear after initial investigation, repeat ECG 
recordings should be performed and are particularly useful if they can 
be obtained during an episode of pain. If the plasma troponin concen-
trations are normal at baseline, repeat measurements should be made 
6–12 hours after the onset of symptoms or admission to hospital. New 
ECG changes or an elevated plasma troponin concentration usually con-
rm the diagnosis of an acute coronary syndrome. If the pain settles and 
does not recur, there are no new ECG changes and troponin concen-
trations remain normal, the patient can be discharged from hospital but 
further investigations may be indicated to look for evidence of coronary 
artery disease, as discussed on page 424.
Management
The differential diagnosis and management of acute coronary syndrome 
are described in more detail later in this chapter.
Breathlessness
Cardiac causes of breathlessness include cardiac arrhythmias, acute 
and chronic heart failure, acute coronary syndrome, valvular disease, 
cardiomyopathy and constrictive pericarditis, all discussed later in this 
chapter. The differential diagnosis of breathlessness is wide, however, 
and has many other non-cardiac causes. These are discussed in more 
detail on pages 181 and 489.
Syncope
The term ‘syncope’ refers to loss of consciousness due to reduced cere-
bral perfusion. The differential diagnosis, investigation and management 
of syncope are discussed on page 184.
16.5 New York Heart Association (NYHA) 
functionalclassication
Class I
 No limitation during ordinary activity
Class II
 Slight limitation during ordinary activity
Class III
 Marked limitation of normal activities without symptoms at rest
Class IV
 Unable to undertake physical activity without symptoms; symptoms may be 
present at rest
Fig. 16.17 Typical ischaemic cardiac pain. Characteristic hand gestures used to 
describe cardiac pain. Typical radiation of pain is shown in the schematic.

[[p443]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  399
16
Palpitation
Palpitation is a common and sometimes frightening symptom that is 
usually due to a disorder of cardiac rhythm. Patients use the term to 
describe many sensations, including an unusually erratic, fast, slow or 
forceful heart beat, or even chest pain or breathlessness.
Clinical assessment
Initial evaluation should concentrate on determining the likely mechanism of 
palpitation and whether or not there is signicant underlying heart disease. 
A detailed description of the sensation is essential and patients should be 
asked to describe their symptoms clearly, or to demonstrate the sensation 
of rhythm by tapping with their hand. A provisional diagnosis can usually 
be made on the basis of the history (Box 16.6 and Fig.16.18). Recurrent 
but short-lived bouts of an irregular heart rhythm are usually due to atrial 
or ventricular extrasystoles (ectopic beats). Some patients will describe the 
experience as a ‘ip’ or a ‘jump’ in the chest, while others report dropped 
or missed beats. Extrasystoles are often more frequent during periods of 
stress or debility; they can be triggered by alcohol or nicotine.
Episodes of a pounding, forceful and relatively fast (90–120/min) heart 
beat are a common manifestation of anxiety. These may also reect a 
hyperdynamic circulation, such as anaemia, pregnancy and thyrotox-
icosis, and can occur in some forms of valve disease such as aortic 
regurgitation. Discrete bouts of more rapid (over 120/min) heart beats 
are more likely to be due to a paroxysmal supraventricular or ventricu-
lar tachycardia. In contrast, episodes of atrial brillation typically present 
with irregular and usually rapid palpitation.
Investigation
If initial assessment suggests that the palpitation is due to an arrhythmia, 
the diagnosis should be conrmed by an ECG recording during an episode 
using an ambulatory ECG monitor. Smartphones and smart watches with 
additional hardware and apps are extremely helpful in capturing the ECG 
during episodes. Additional investigations may be required depending on 
the nature of the arrhythmia, as discussed later in this chapter.
Management
Palpitation is usually benign and even if the patient’s symptoms are due 
to an arrhythmia, the outlook is good if there is no underlying structural 
heart disease. Most cases are due to an awareness of the normal heart 
beat, a sinus tachycardia or benign extrasystoles, in which case an 
explanation and reassurance may be all that is required. Palpitation asso-
ciated with pre-syncope or syncope (p. 184) may reect more serious 
structural or electrical disease and should be investigated without delay. 
Other arrhythmias may require treatment, such as drugs or ablation, and 
are discussed in more detail in the section on cardiac arrythmias
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrest describes the sudden and complete loss of cardiac out-
put due to asystole, ventricular tachycardia or ventricular brillation 
(Fig.16.19), or loss of mechanical cardiac contraction (pulseless electri-
cal activity). The causes of sudden arrhythmic death are summarised in 
Box 16.7. The clinical diagnosis is based on the victim being unconscious 
and pulseless; breathing may take some time to stop completely after 
cardiac arrest. Death is virtually inevitable, unless effective treatment is 
given promptly. Sudden cardiac death is usually caused by a catastrophic 
arrhythmia and accounts for 25%–30% of all deaths from cardiovascular 
disease, claiming an estimated 70 000 to 90 000 lives each year in the UK. 
Many of these deaths are potentially preventable. Management of cardiac 
arrest is further discussed in detail on page 202. 
Consider
Ectopic beats
Atrial fibrillation
Consider
Supraventricular
tachycardia
Ventricular
tachycardia
Consider
Sinus tachycardia
High stroke volume,
due to anaemia, anxiety,
valve disease
Is the heart
beat regular?
No
No
Yes
Yes
Are there
discrete attacks
of tachycardia?
(> 120/min)
Fig. 16.18 A simple approach to the diagnosis of palpitation.
Fig. 16.19 Ventricular brillation. A bizarre chaotic rhythm, initiated in this case 
by two ventricular ectopic beats in rapid succession.
16.6  How to evaluate palpitation
 Is the palpitation continuous or intermittent?
 Is the heart beat regular or irregular?
 What is the approximate heart rate?
 Do symptoms occur in discrete attacks?
Is the onset abrupt? How do attacks terminate?
 Are there any associated symptoms?
Chest pain, lightheadedness, polyuria (a feature of supraventricular tachycardia)
 Are there any precipitating factors, such as exercise or alcohol excess?
 Is there a history of structural heart disease, such as coronary artery disease or 
valvular heart disease?
16.7  Causes of sudden arrhythmic death
Coronary artery disease (85%)
 Myocardial ischaemia
 Acute myocardial infarction
 Prior myocardial infarction with myocardial scarring
Structural heart disease (10%)
 Aortic stenosis
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
 Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
 Congenital heart disease
No structural heart disease (5%)
 Long QT syndrome
 Brugada syndrome
 Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome
 Adverse drug reactions (torsades de pointes)
 Severe electrolyte abnormalities

[[p444]]
400  CARDIOLOGY
Abnormal heart sounds
The rst indication of heart disease may be the discovery of an abnormal 
sound on auscultation (Box 16.8). This may be incidental – for example, 
during a routine examination – or may be prompted by symptoms of 
heart disease.
Clinical assessment
The aims of clinical assessment are, rst, to determine if the abnormal 
sound is cardiac; second, to determine if it is pathological; and third, to 
try to determine its cause.
Is the sound cardiac?
Additional heart sounds and murmurs demonstrate a consistent relation-
ship to the cardiac cycle, whereas extracardiac sounds, such as a pleural 
rub or venous hum, do not. Pericardial friction produces a characteristic 
scratching noise termed a pericardial rub, which may have two compo-
nents corresponding to atrial and ventricular systole, and may vary with 
posture and respiration.
Is the sound pathological?
Pathological sounds and murmurs are the product of turbulent blood 
ow or rapid ventricular lling due to abnormal loading conditions. Some 
added sounds are physiological but may also occur in pathological con-
ditions; for example, a third sound is common in young people and in 
pregnancy but is also a feature of heart failure (see Box 16.8). Similarly, 
a systolic murmur due to turbulence across the right ventricular outow 
tract may occur in hyperdynamic states such as anaemia or pregnancy, 
but may also be due to pulmonary stenosis or an intracardiac shunt lead-
ing to volume overload of the RV, such as an atrial septal defect. Benign 
murmurs do not occur in diastole (Box 16.9), and systolic murmurs that 
radiate or are associated with a thrill are almost always pathological.
What is the origin of the sound?
Timing, intensity, location, radiation and quality are all useful clues to the 
origin and nature of an additional sound or murmur (Box 16.10). Radiation 
of a murmur is determined by the direction of turbulent blood ow and is 
detectable only when there is a high-velocity jet, such as in mitral regurgi-
tation (radiation from apex to axilla) or aortic stenosis (radiation from base 
to neck). Similarly, the pitch and quality of the sound can help to distin-
guish the murmur, such as the ‘blowing’ murmur of mitral regurgitation or 
the ‘rasping’ murmur of aortic stenosis. The position of a murmur in rela-
tion to the cardiac cycle is crucial and should be assessed by timing it with 
the heart sounds, carotid pulse and apex beat (Figs. 16.20 and 16.21).
Systolic murmurs
Ejection systolic murmurs are associated with ventricular outow tract 
obstruction and occur in mid-systole with a crescendo–decrescendo 
pattern, reecting the changing velocity of blood ow (Box 16.11). 
Pansystolic murmurs maintain a constant intensity and extend from the 
rst heart sound throughout systole to the second heart sound, some-
times obscuring it. They occur when blood leaks from a ventricle into a 
low-pressure chamber at an even or constant velocity. Mitral regurgi-
tation, tricuspid regurgitation and ventricular septal defect are the only 
causes of a pansystolic murmur. Late systolic murmurs are unusual but 
may occur in mitral valve prolapse, if the mitral regurgitation is conned 
to late systole, and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, if dynamic 
obstruction occurs late in systole.
16.8  Normal and abnormal heart sounds
Sound
Timing
Characteristics
Mechanisms
Variable features
First heart sound 
(S1)
Onset of systole
Usually single or 
narrowly split
Closure of mitral and tricuspid valves
Loud: hyperdynamic circulation (anaemia, 
pregnancy, thyrotoxicosis); mitral stenosis
Soft: heart failure; mitral regurgitation
Second heart 
sound (S2)
End of systole
Split on inspiration
Single on expiration
Closure of aortic and pulmonary 
valve
Fixed wide splitting with atrial septal defect
A2 rst
Wide but variable splitting with delayed right heart 
emptying (right bundle branch block)
P2 second
Reversed splitting due to delayed left heart 
emptying (left bundle branch block)
Third heart 
sound (S3)
Early in diastole, 
just after S2
Low pitch, often heard 
as ‘gallop’
From ventricular wall due to abrupt 
cessation of rapid lling
Physiological: young people, pregnancy
Pathological: heart failure, mitral regurgitation
Fourth heart 
sound (S4)
End of diastole, 
just before S1
Low pitch
Ventricular origin (stiff ventricle and 
augmented atrial contraction) related 
to atrial lling
Absent in atrial brillation
A feature of severe left ventricular hypertrophy
Systolic clicks
Early or mid-
systole
Brief, high-intensity 
sound
Valvular aortic stenosis
Click may be lost when stenotic valve becomes 
thickened or calcied
Valvular pulmonary stenosis
Floppy mitral valve
Prosthetic clicks lost when valve obstructed by 
thrombus or vegetations
Prosthetic heart sounds from opening 
and closing of normally functioning 
mechanical valves
Opening snap 
(OS)
Early in diastole
High pitch, brief 
duration
Opening of stenosed leaets of mitral 
valve
Moves closer to S2 as mitral stenosis becomes 
more severe. May be absent in calcic mitral 
stenosis
Prosthetic heart sounds
16.9  Features of a benign or innocent heart murmur
 Soft
 Mid-systolic
 Heard at left sternal border
 No radiation
 No other cardiac abnormalities

[[p445]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  401
16
Diastolic murmurs
These are due to accelerated or turbulent ow across the mitral or tri-
cuspid valves. They are low-pitched noises that are often difcult to hear 
and should be evaluated with the bell of the stethoscope. A mid-diastolic 
murmur may be due to mitral stenosis (located at the apex and axilla), tri-
cuspid stenosis (located at the left sternal border), increased ow across 
the mitral valve (for example, the to-and-fro murmur of severe mitral 
regurgitation) or increased ow across the tricuspid valve (for example, a 
left-to-right shunt through a large atrial septal defect). Early diastolic mur-
murs have a soft, blowing quality with a decrescendo pattern and should 
be evaluated with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. They are due to 
regurgitation across the aortic or pulmonary valves and are best heard at 
the left sternal border, with the patient sitting forwards in held expiration.
Continuous murmurs
These result from a combination of systolic and diastolic ow, such as 
occurs with a persistent ductus arteriosus, and must be distinguished 
from extracardiac noises such as bruits from arterial shunts, venous 
hums (high rates of venous ow in children) and pericardial friction rubs.
Investigations
If clinical evaluation suggests that the additional sound is cardiac and 
likely to be pathological, then echocardiography is indicated to determine 
the underlying cause.
Management
Management of patients with additional heart sounds or murmurs depends 
on the underlying cause. More details are provided in the sections on spe-
cic valve defects and congenital anomalies later in this chapter.
Heart failure
Heart failure describes the clinical syndrome that develops when the heart 
cannot maintain adequate output, or can do so only at the expense of ele-
vated ventricular lling pressure. In mild to moderate forms of heart failure, 
symptoms occur only when the metabolic demand increases during exer-
cise or some other form of stress. In severe heart failure, symptoms may be 
16.10  How to assess a heart murmur
When does it occur?
 Time the murmur using heart sounds, carotid pulse and the apex beat. Is it 
systolic or diastolic?
 Does the murmur extend throughout systole or diastole or is it conned to a 
shorter part of the cardiac cycle?
How loud is it?
 Grade 1: very soft (audible only in ideal conditions)
 Grade 2: soft
 Grade 3: moderate
 Grade 4: loud with associated thrill
 Grade 5: very loud
 Grade 6: heard without stethoscope
Note: Diastolic murmurs are very rarely above grade 4
Where is it heard best?
 Listen over the apex and base of the heart, including the aortic and pulmonary 
areas
Where does it radiate?
 Listen at the neck, axilla or back
What does it sound like?
 Pitch is determined by ow (high pitch indicates high-velocity ow)
 Is the intensity constant or variable?
Opening snap in
mitral stenosis
or mitral
prosthesis
Ejection click,
or opening
sound of aortic
prosthesis
Aortic
pressure
Left
ventricular
pressure
4th
sound
1st
sound
2nd
sound
3rd
sound
Left atrial pressure
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
DIASTOLE
Mid-systolic
click
Clicks
Sounds
ECG
Fig. 16.20 The relationship of the cardiac cycle to the ECG, the left ventricular 
pressure wave and the position of heart sounds.
Pansystolic murmur
(mitral regurgitation,
tricuspid regurgitation,
ventricular septal defect)
Late systolic murmur
(mitral valve prolapse)
S1
S2
Click
Opening
snap
Mid-diastolic murmur
(mitral stenosis, tricuspid
stenosis, mitral or
tricuspid flow murmurs)
Early diastolic murmur
(aortic or pulmonary
regurgitation)
Ejection systolic murmur
(aortic stenosis, pulmonary
stenosis, aortic or
pulmonary flow murmurs)
Fig. 16.21 The timing and pattern of cardiac murmurs.

[[p446]]
402  CARDIOLOGY
present at rest. In clinical practice, heart failure may be diagnosed when a 
patient with signicant heart disease develops the signs or symptoms of a 
low cardiac output, pulmonary congestion or systemic venous congestion 
at rest or on exercise. Three types of heart failure are recognised.
Left heart failure
This is characterised by a reduction in left ventricular output and an 
increase in left atrial and pulmonary venous pressure. If left heart failure 
occurs suddenly – for example, as the result of an acute MI – the rapid 
increase in left atrial pressure causes pulmonary oedema. If the rise in 
atrial pressure is more gradual, as occurs with mitral stenosis, there is 
reex pulmonary vasoconstriction, which protects the patient from pul-
monary oedema. However, the resulting increase in pulmonary vascular 
resistance causes pulmonary hypertension, which in turn impairs right 
ventricular function.
Right heart failure
This is characterised by a reduction in right ventricular output and an 
increase in right atrial and systemic venous pressure. The most common 
causes are chronic lung disease, pulmonary embolism and pulmonary 
valvular stenosis. The term ‘cor pulmonale’ is used to describe right heart 
failure that is secondary to chronic lung disease.
Biventricular heart failure
In biventricular failure, both sides of the heart are affected. This may 
occur because the disease process, such as dilated cardiomyopathy or 
coronary heart disease, affects both ventricles or because disease of the 
left heart leads to chronic elevation of the left atrial pressure, pulmonary 
hypertension and right heart failure.
Epidemiology
Heart failure predominantly affects older people; the prevalence is 1.6% 
in the UK adult population but affects more than 10% in those aged 
80–89 years. In the UK, most patients admitted to hospital with heart 
failure are more than 70 years old; they typically remain hospitalised for 
a week or more and may be left with chronic disability. Although the out-
look depends, to some extent, on the underlying cause of the problem, 
untreated heart failure generally carries a poor prognosis; approximately 
50% of patients with severe heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunc-
tion will die within 2 years because of either pump failure or malignant 
ventricular arrhythmias. The most common causes are coronary artery 
disease and myocardial infarction but almost all forms of heart disease 
can lead to heart failure, as summarised in Box 16.12. An accurate 
diagnosis is important because treatment of the underlying cause may 
reverse heart failure or prevent its progression.
Pathogenesis
Heart failure occurs when cardiac output fails to meet the demands of 
the circulation. Cardiac output is determined by preload (the volume and 
pressure of blood in the ventricles at the end of diastole), afterload (the 
volume and pressure of blood in the ventricles during systole) and myo-
cardial contractility, forming the basis of Starling’s Law (Fig. 16.22). The 
causes of heart failure are discussed below.
Ventricular dysfunction
Ventricular dysfunction is the most common cause of heart failure. This 
can occur because of impaired systolic contraction due to myocardial 
disease, or diastolic dysfunction where there is abnormal ventricular 
relaxation due to a stiff, non-compliant ventricle. This is most commonly 
found in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. Systolic dysfunction 
and diastolic dysfunction often coexist, particularly in patients with cor-
onary artery disease. Ventricular dysfunction reduces cardiac output, 
which, in turn, activates the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS). Under normal circum-
stances, activation of the SNS and RAAS supports cardiac function but, 
in the setting of impaired ventricular function, the consequences are neg-
ative and lead to an increase in both afterload and preload (Fig. 16.23). 
A vicious circle may then be established because any additional fall in 
cardiac output causes further activation of the SNS and RAAS, and an 
additional increase in peripheral vascular resistance.
Activation of the RAAS causes vasoconstriction and sodium and 
water retention. This is primarily mediated by angiotensin II, a potent 
constrictor of arterioles, in both the kidney and the systemic circulation 
(see Fig. 16.23). Activation of the SNS also occurs and can initially sus-
tain cardiac output through increased myocardial contractility and heart 
Cardiac output or
ventricular performance
Contractility
Afterload
A
B
C
D
Preload
Fig. 16.22 Starling’s Law. Normal (A), mild (B), moderate (C) and severe (D) heart 
failure. Ventricular performance is related to the degree of myocardial stretching. 
An increase in preload (end-diastolic volume, end-diastolic pressure, lling pressure 
or atrial pressure) will therefore enhance function; however, overstretching causes 
marked deterioration. In heart failure, the curve moves to the right and becomes 
atter. An increase in myocardial contractility or a reduction in afterload will shift the 
curve upwards and to the left (green arrow).
16.11  Features of some common systolic murmurs
Condition
Timing and duration
Quality
Location and radiation
Associated features
Aortic stenosis
Mid-systolic
Loud, rasping
Base and left sternal border, radiating 
to suprasternal notch and carotids
Single second heart sound
Ejection click (in young patients)
Slow-rising pulse
Left ventricular hypertrophy (pressure overload)
Mitral regurgitation
Pansystolic
Blowing
Apex, radiating to axilla
Soft rst heart sound
Third heart sound
Left ventricular hypertrophy (volume overload)
Ventricular septal 
defect
Pansystolic
Harsh
Lower left sternal border, radiating to 
whole precordium
Thrill
Biventricular hypertrophy
Benign
Mid-systolic
Soft
Left sternal border, no radiation
No other signs of heart disease

[[p447]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  403
16
rate. Prolonged sympathetic stimulation has negative effects, however, 
causing cardiac myocyte apoptosis, cardiac hypertrophy and focal myo-
cardial necrosis. Sympathetic stimulation also contributes to vasocon-
striction and predisposes to arrhythmias. Sodium and water retention is 
further enhanced by the release of aldosterone, endothelin-1 (a potent 
vasoconstrictor peptide with marked effects on the renal vasculature) 
and, in severe heart failure, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH). 
Natriuretic peptides are released from the atria in response to atrial dil-
atation and compensate to an extent for the sodium-conserving effect 
of aldosterone, but this mechanism is overwhelmed in heart failure. 
Pulmonary and peripheral oedema occur because of high left and right 
atrial pressures, and are compounded by sodium and water retention, 
caused by impairment of renal perfusion and by secondary hyperaldos-
teronism. If the underlying cause is a myocardial infarction, cardiac con-
tractility is impaired and SNS and RAAS activation causes hypertrophy 
of non-infarcted segments, with thinning, dilatation and expansion of the 
infarcted segment (see Fig.16.63). This leads to further deterioration in 
ventricular function and worsening heart failure.
High-output failure
Sometimes cardiac failure can occur in patients without heart disease 
due to a large arteriovenous shunt, or where there is an excessively high 
cardiac output due to beri-beri, severe anaemia or thyrotoxicosis.
Valvular disease
Heart failure can also be caused by valvular disease in which there is 
impaired lling of the ventricles due to mitral or tricuspid stenosis; where 
there is obstruction to ventricular outow, as occurs in aortic and pul-
monary stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; or as the result of 
ventricular overload secondary to valvular regurgitation.
16.12  Mechanisms of heart failure
Cause
Examples
Features
Reduced ventricular 
contractility
Myocardial infarction (segmental dysfunction)
In coronary artery disease, ‘akinetic’ or ‘dyskinetic’ segments contract 
poorly and may impede the function of normal segments by distorting 
their contraction and relaxation patterns
Myocarditis/cardiomyopathy (global dysfunction)
Progressive ventricular dilatation
Ventricular outow obstruction 
(pressure overload)
Hypertension, aortic stenosis (left heart failure)
Initially, concentric ventricular hypertrophy allows the ventricle to 
maintain a normal output by generating a high systolic pressure. Later, 
secondary changes in the myocardium and increasing obstruction lead 
to failure with ventricular dilatation and rapid clinical deterioration
Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary valve stenosis 
(right heart failure)
Ventricular inow obstruction
Mitral stenosis, tricuspid stenosis
Small, vigorous ventricle; dilated, hypertrophied atrium. Atrial brillation 
is common and often causes marked deterioration because ventricular 
lling depends heavily on atrial contraction
Ventricular volume overload
Left ventricular volume overload (mitral or aortic 
regurgitation)
Dilatation and hypertrophy allow the ventricle to generate a high 
stroke volume and help to maintain a normal cardiac output. However, 
secondary changes in the myocardium lead to impaired contractility and 
worsening heart failure
Ventricular septal defect
Right ventricular volume overload (atrial septal 
defect)
Increased metabolic demand (high output)
Arrhythmia
Atrial brillation
Tachycardia does not allow for adequate lling of the heart, resulting in 
reduced cardiac output and back pressure
Tachycardia
Prolonged tachycardia causes myocardial fatigue
Complete heart block
Bradycardia limits cardiac output, even if stroke volume is normal
Diastolic dysfunction
Constrictive pericarditis
Marked uid retention and peripheral oedema, ascites, pleural effusions 
and elevated jugular veins
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Bi-atrial enlargement (restrictive lling pattern and high atrial 
pressures). Atrial brillation may cause deterioration
Left ventricular hypertrophy and brosis
Good systolic function but poor diastolic lling
Cardiac tamponade
Hypotension, elevated jugular veins, pulsus paradoxus, poor urine output
Myocyte loss
Heart failure
Reduced
cardiac output
Myocardial
fibrosis
Neurohumoral
activation
Sympathetic
nervous system
Renin – angiotensin
system
Vasopressin system
Endothelin system
Increased
blood
pressure and
cardiac work
Increased
blood
pressure and
cardiac work
Increased
intravascular
volume
Sodium and
water retention
Increased
afterload
Vasoconstriction
Fig. 16.23 Neurohumoral activation and compensatory mechanisms in heart 
failure. There is a vicious circle in progressive heart failure.

[[p448]]
404  CARDIOLOGY
Clinical assessment
Heart failure may develop suddenly, as in MI, or gradually, as in valvu-
lar heart disease. When there is gradual impairment of cardiac function, 
several compensatory changes take place. The term compensated 
heart failure is sometimes used to describe the condition of those with 
impaired cardiac function, in whom adaptive changes have prevented 
the development of overt heart failure. However, a minor event, such as 
an intercurrent infection or development of atrial brillation, may precip-
itate acute heart failure in these circumstances (Box 16.13). Similarly, 
acute heart failure sometimes supervenes as the result of a decompen-
sating episode, on a background of chronic heart failure; this is called 
acute-on-chronic heart failure.
Acute left heart failure
Acute left heart failure presents with a sudden onset of dyspnoea at rest 
that rapidly progresses to acute respiratory distress, orthopnoea and ulti-
mately respiratory failure. Often there is a clear precipitating factor, such 
as an acute MI, which may be apparent from the history. The patient 
appears agitated, pale and clammy. The peripheries are cool to the touch 
and the pulse is rapid, but in some cases there may be an inappropriate 
bradycardia that aggravates the acute episode of heart failure. The BP is 
usually high because of SNS activation, but may be normal or low if the 
patient is in cardiogenic shock.
The jugular venous pressure (JVP) is usually elevated, particularly with 
associated uid overload or right heart failure. In acute heart failure, there 
has been no time for ventricular dilatation and the apex is not displaced. A 
‘gallop’ rhythm, with a third heart sound, is heard quite early in the devel-
opment of acute left-sided heart failure. A new systolic murmur may signify 
acute mitral regurgitation or ventricular septal rupture. Chest examination 
may reveal crepitations at the lung bases if there is pulmonary oedema, or 
crepitations throughout the lungs if this is severe. There may be expiratory 
wheeze. Patients with acute-on-chronic heart failure may have additional 
features of chronic heart failure (see below). Potential precipitants, such as 
an upper respiratory tract infection or inappropriate cessation of diuretic 
medication, may be identied on clinical examination or history-taking.
Chronic heart failure
Patients with chronic heart failure commonly follow a relapsing and remit-
ting course, with periods of stability and episodes of decompensation, 
leading to worsening symptoms that may necessitate hospitalisation. 
The clinical picture depends on the nature of the underlying heart dis-
ease, the type of heart failure that it has evoked, and the changes in the 
SNS and RAAS that have developed (see Box 16.12 and Fig. 16.24).
Low cardiac output causes fatigue and poor effort tolerance; the 
peripheries are cold and the BP is low. To maintain perfusion of vital 
organs, blood ow is diverted away from skeletal muscle and this may 
contribute to fatigue and weakness. Poor renal perfusion leads to oliguria 
and uraemia.
Pulmonary oedema due to left heart failure presents with dyspnoea 
and inspiratory crepitations over the lung bases. In contrast, right heart 
failure produces a high JVP with hepatic congestion and dependent 
peripheral oedema. In ambulant patients the oedema affects the lower 
legs, whereas in bed-bound patients it collects around the thighs and 
sacrum. Ascites or pleural effusion may occur (Fig. 16.24). Heart failure is 
not the only cause of oedema (see Box 16.14).
Chronic heart failure is sometimes associated with marked weight loss 
(cardiac cachexia), caused by a combination of anorexia and impaired 
absorption due to gastrointestinal congestion, poor tissue perfusion due 
to a low cardiac output, and skeletal muscle atrophy due to immobility.
Complications of heart failure
Several complications may occur in advanced heart failure, as described 
below.
 Renal failure is caused by poor renal perfusion due to low cardiac 
output and may be exacerbated by diuretic, ACE inhibitor and 
angio tensin receptor blocker (ARB) therapies.
 Hypokalaemia may be caused by potassium-losing diuretics, and 
also by hyperaldosteronism due to activation of the renin–angioten-
sin system and impairment of aldosterone metabolism from hepatic 
congestion. Most of the body’s potassium is intracellular and there 
may be substantial depletion of potassium stores, even when the 
plasma concentration is in the reference range.
 Hyperkalaemia may be due to the effects of drugs that promote 
renal resorption of potassium, in particular the combination of ACE 
inhibitors, ARBs and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. These 
effects are amplied if there is renal dysfunction due to low cardiac 
output or atherosclerotic renal vascular disease.
 Hyponatraemia is a feature of severe heart failure and is a poor 
prognostic sign. It may be caused by diuretic therapy, inappropriate 
water retention due to high vasopressin secretion, or failure of the 
cell membrane ion pump due to intracellular energy depletion.
Left
heart failure
Raised
JVP +/++
Pleural
effusions
Pulmonary
oedema
Cardiomegaly
Pitting
oedema +/++
Right
heart failure
Raised JVP +++
Hepatomegaly
Ascites
Peripheral
pitting
oedema +++
Fig. 16.24 Clinical features of left and right heart failure. (JVP = jugular venous 
pressure)
16.14  Differential diagnosis of peripheral oedema
 Cardiac failure: right or combined left and right heart failure, pericardial 
constriction, cardiomyopathy
 Chronic venous insufciency: varicose veins
 Hypoalbuminaemia: nephrotic syndrome, liver disease, protein-losing 
enteropathy; often widespread, can affect arms and face
 Drugs:
Sodium retention: udrocortisone, non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Increasing capillary permeability: nifedipine, amlodipine
 Idiopathic: women > men
 Chronic lymphatic obstruction
16.13 Factors that may precipitate or aggravate heart failure in 
pre-existing heart disease
 Myocardial ischaemia or infarction
 Intercurrent illness
 Arrhythmia
 Inappropriate reduction of therapy
 Administration of a drug with negative inotropic (β-blocker) or uid-retaining 
properties (non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs, glucocorticoids)
 Pulmonary embolism
 Conditions associated with increased metabolic demand (pregnancy, 
thyrotoxicosis, anaemia)
 Intravenous uid overload

[[p449]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  405
16
 Impaired liver function is caused by hepatic venous congestion and 
poor arterial perfusion, which frequently cause mild jaundice and 
abnormal liver function tests; reduced synthesis of clotting factors 
can make anticoagulant control difcult.
 Thromboembolism. Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism 
may occur due to the effects of low cardiac output and enforced 
immobility. Systemic embolism, including stroke, occurs in patients 
with atrial brillation or utter, or with intracardiac thrombus compli-
cating mitral stenosis, MI or left ventricular aneurysm.
 Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are very common and may be 
related to electrolyte changes such as hypokalaemia and hypo-
magnesaemia, myocardial brosis and the pro-arrhythmic effects 
of sympathetic activation. Atrial brillation occurs in approximately 
20% of patients with heart failure and causes further impairment of 
cardiac function. Ventricular ectopic beats and non-sustained ven-
tricular tachycardia are common ndings in patients with heart failure 
and are associated with an adverse prognosis.
 Sudden death occurs in up to 50% of patients with heart failure and 
is most often due to ventricular brillation.
Investigations
An erect chest X-ray should be performed in all cases. This may show 
abnormal distension of the upper lobe pulmonary veins (Fig. 16.25). 
Vascularity of the lung elds becomes more prominent and the pulmo-
nary arteries dilate. Subsequently, interstitial oedema causes thickened 
interlobular septa and dilated lymphatics. These are evident as hori-
zontal lines in the costophrenic angles (septal or ‘Kerley B’ lines). More 
advanced changes due to alveolar oedema cause a hazy opacication 
spreading from the hila, and pleural effusions. Echocardiography should 
be considered in all patients with heart failure in order to:
 determine the aetiology
 detect valvular heart disease, such as occult mitral or aortic steno-
sis, and other conditions that may be amenable to treatment
 identify patients who will benet from long-term drug therapy and 
cardiac device implantation.
Serum urea, creatinine and electrolytes, haemoglobin and thyroid 
function may help to establish the nature and severity of the underlying 
heart disease and detect any complications. BNP is elevated in heart 
failure and is a prognostic marker, as well as being useful in differentiating 
heart failure from other causes of breathlessness or peripheral oedema.
Management of acute heart failure
Acute heart failure with pulmonary oedema is a medical emergency that 
should be treated urgently. The patient should initially be kept rested 
upright, with continuous monitoring of cardiac rhythm, BP and pulse 
oximetry. Intravenous opiates can be of value in distressed patients but 
must be used sparingly, as they may cause respiratory depression and 
exacerbation of hypoxaemia and hypercapnia. The key elements of man-
agement are summarised in Box 16.15
If these measures prove ineffective, inotropic agents such as 
dobutamine (2.5–10 µg/kg/min) may be required to augment cardiac 
output, particularly in hypotensive patients. An intra-aortic balloon pump 
may be benecial in patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema 
and shock. Following management of the acute episode, additional 
measures must be used to control heart failure in the longer term, as 
discussed below.
Management of chronic heart failure
The aims of treatment in chronic heart failure are to improve 
cardiac function by increasing contractility and coordination of the 
myocardium, by optimising preload or decreasing afterload, and 
controlling cardiacrate and rhythm (see Fig. 16.23). This can be 
achieved by using drug treatments, implantable device therapy, 
coronary revascularisation, and in resistant cases, mechanical assist 
devices or cardiac transplantation.
Education
Education of patients and their relatives about the causes and treat-
ment of heart failure can improve adherence to a management plan 
(Box16.16). Some patients may need to weigh themselves daily, as a 
measure of uid load, and adjust their diuretic therapy accordingly.
A
B
Prominence
of upper lobe
blood vessels
Enlarged hilar
vessels
Septal or
‘Kerley B’ lines
Reticular shadowing
of alveolar oedema
Enlarged cardiac
silhouette; usually with
coexisting chronic
heart failure
Fig. 16.25 Radiological features of heart failure.
lines (arrow).
16.15 Management of acute pulmonary oedema
Action
Effect
Sit the patient up
Reduces preload
Give high-ow oxygen
Corrects hypoxia
Ensure continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) of 5–10 mmHg by tight-tting mask
Reduces preload and 
pulmonary capillary hydraulic 
gradient
Administer nitrates:*
Reduces preload and afterload
 IV glyceryl trinitrate (10–200 µg/min)
 Buccal glyceryl trinitrate 2–5 mg
Administer a loop diuretic:
Combats uid overload
 Furosemide (50–100 mg IV)
*The dose of nitrate should be titrated upwards every 10 minutes until there is an improvement 
or systolic blood pressure is < 110 mmHg.
(IV = intravenous)

[[p450]]
406  CARDIOLOGY
Drug treatment
Many drug treatments are now available for heart failure. Drugs that 
reduce preload are appropriate in patients with high end-diastolic lling 
pressures and evidence of pulmonary or systemic venous congestion, 
whereas those that reduce afterload or increase myocardial contractility 
are more useful in patients with signs and symptoms of a low cardiac 
output. Some considerations specic to management of older patients 
are given in Box 16.17
Diuretics Diuretics promote urinary sodium and water excretion, lead-
ing to a reduction in blood plasma volume, which in turn reduces 
preload and improves pulmonary and systemic venous congestion. 
They may also reduce afterload and ventricular volume, leading to a 
fall in ventricular wall tension and increased cardiac efciency. Although 
a fall in preload (ventricular lling pressure) normally reduces cardiac 
output, patients with heart failure are beyond the apex of the Starling 
curve, so there may be a substantial and benecial fall in lling pressure 
with either no change or an improvement in cardiac output (see Figs. 
16.22 and 16.26). Over-diuresis can cause excessive volume deple-
tion, resulting in a fall in cardiac output with hypotension, lethargy and 
renal failure. This is especially likely in patients with a marked diastolic 
component to their heart failure.
Oedema may persist, despite oral loop diuretic therapy, in some 
patients with severe chronic heart failure, particularly if there is renal 
impairment. Under these circumstances an intravenous infusion of a 
loop diuretic, such as furosemide (5–10 mg/hr), may initiate a diuresis. 
Combining this with a thiazide diuretic, such as bendroumethiazide 
(5 mg daily), may augment the diuresis but care must be taken to avoid 
an excessive uid loss, hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia.
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, such as spironolactone and 
eplerenone, are potassium-sparing diuretics that are of particular benet 
in patients with heart failure with severe left ventricular systolic dysfunc-
tion. They improve long-term clinical outcome in individuals with severe 
heart failure or heart failure following acute MI but may cause hyperkal-
aemia, particularly when used with an ACE inhibitor.
Originally developed as a treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus, sodi-
um-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors block the resorption of 
glucose in the nephron of the kidney to cause an osmotic diuresis. Their 
use is associated with reduced hospitalisations for heart failure and lower 
mortality in patients with heart failure irrespective of the presence of dia-
betes. However, they are associated with an increased risk of genito-
urinary tract infections and diabetic ketoacidosis.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors play a central role in the management of heart failure 
since they interrupt the vicious circle of neurohumoral activation that is 
characteristic of the disease by preventing the conversion of angiotensin 
I to angiotensin II. This, in turn, reduces peripheral vasoconstriction, acti-
vation of the sympathetic nervous system (Fig. 16.27), and salt and water 
retention due to aldosterone release, as well as preventing the activation 
of the renin–angiotensin system caused by diuretic therapy.
In moderate and severe heart failure, ACE inhibitors can produce a 
substantial improvement in effort tolerance and in mortality. They can 
also improve outcome and prevent the onset of overt heart failure in 
patients with poor residual left ventricular function following MI.
Adverse effects of ACE inhibitors include hypotension and renal 
impairment, especially in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis or 
those with pre-existing renal disease. An increase in serum potassium 
concentration may also occur, which can be benecial in offsetting the 
hypokalaemia associated with loop diuretic therapy. In stable patients 
without hypotension (systolic BP over 100 mmHg), ACE inhibitors can 
usually be safely started in the community. In other patients, however, it is 
usually advisable to withhold diuretics for 24 hours before starting treat-
ment with a small dose of a long-acting agent, preferably given at night 
(Box 16.18). Renal function and serum potassium must be monitored 
and should be checked 1–2 weeks after starting therapy.
Angiotensin receptor blockers Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) act 
by blocking the action of angiotensin II on the heart, peripheral vascula-
ture and kidneys. In heart failure they produce benecial haemodynamic 
changes similar to those of ACE inhibitors (see Fig. 16.27) but are gen-
erally better tolerated. They have comparable effects on mortality and 
are a useful alternative for patients who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors. 
They should be started at a low dose and titrated upwards, depend-
ing on response (see Box 16.18). Unfortunately, they share all the more 
16.17  Congestive cardiac failure in old age
 Incidence: rises with age and affects 5%–10% of those in their eighties.
 Common causes: coronary artery disease, hypertension and calcic 
degenerative valvular disease.
 Diastolic dysfunction: often prominent, particularly in those with a history of 
hypertension.
 ACE inhibitors and ARBs: improve symptoms and mortality but are more 
frequently associated with postural hypotension and renal impairment than in 
younger patients.
 Loop diuretics: usually required but may be poorly tolerated in those with 
urinary incontinence and men with prostate enlargement.
Normal
Heart
failure
C
A
B
Cardiac output
or ventricular
performance
Preload
Forward
failure
Fatigue
Backward failure
Dyspnoea/oedema
Fig. 16.26 The effect of treatment on ventricular performance curves in heart 
failure. Diuretics and venodilators (A), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
and mixed vasodilators (B), and positive inotropic agents (C).
16.16 General measures for the management of heart 
failure
Education
 Explanation of nature of disease, treatment and self-help strategies
Diet
 Good general nutrition and weight reduction for the obese
 Avoidance of high-salt foods and added salt, especially for patients with severe 
congestive heart failure
Alcohol
 Moderation or elimination of alcohol consumption; alcohol-induced 
cardiomyopathy requires abstinence
Smoking
 Cessation
Exercise
 Regular moderate aerobic exercise within limits of symptoms
Vaccination
 Consideration of inuenza and pneumococcal vaccination

[[p451]]
Presenting problems in cardiovascular disease  407
16
serious adverse effects of ACE inhibitors, including renal dysfunction and 
hyperkalaemia. While ARB are normally used as an alternative to ACE 
inhibitors, they can be combined in patients with resistant or recurrent 
heart failure.
Neprilysin inhibitors The only drug currently in this class is sacubitril, a 
small-molecule inhibitor of neutral endopeptidase, or neprilysin, which 
is responsible for the breakdown of the endogenous diuretics ANP and 
BNP as well as vasoactive peptides such as bradykinin and substance 
P (see Fig. 16.27). If used in combination with the ARB in an initial oral 
dose of 24 mg sacubitril and 26 mg valsartan daily, it produces additional 
symptomatic and mortality benet over ACE inhibition and is increasingly 
being used in preference to ACE inhibitors in patients with chronic heart 
failure.
Vasodilators These drugs are valuable in chronic heart failure, when ACE 
inhibitors or ARBs are contraindicated. Venodilators, such as nitrates, 
reduce preload. Arterial dilators, such as hydralazine, reduce afterload 
(see Fig. 16.26). Their use is limited by pharmacological tolerance and 
hypotension.
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) Beta-blockade helps to 
counteract the deleterious effects of enhanced sympathetic stimulation 
and reduces the risk of arrhythmias and sudden death. When initiated in 
standard doses β-blockers may precipitate acute-on-chronic heart fail-
ure, but when given in small incremental doses they can increase ejec-
tion fraction, improve symptoms, reduce the frequency of hospitalisation 
and reduce mortality in patients with chronic heart failure. A typical regi-
men is bisoprolol, starting at 1.25 mg daily and increased gradually over 
12 weeks to a target maintenance dose of 10 mg daily. Beta-blockers are 
more effective at reducing mortality than ACE inhibitors, with a relative 
risk reduction of 33% versus 20%, respectively.
Ivabradine Ivabradine acts on the If inward current in the SA node, result-
ing in reduction of heart rate. Typical dosages are 2.5–5 mg twice daily, 
increasing to 7.5 mg twice daily if necessary. It reduces hospital admis-
sion and mortality rates in patients with heart failure due to moderate or 
severe left ventricular systolic impairment. In trials, its effects were most 
marked in patients with a relatively high heart rate (over 77/min), so iva-
bradine is best suited to patients who cannot take β-blockers or whose 
heart rate remains high despite β-blockade. It is ineffective in patients 
with atrial brillation.
Digoxin Digoxin in maintenance doses of 0.0625–0.25 mg daily can be 
used to provide rate control in patients with heart failure and atrial brilla-
tion. In patients with severe heart failure (NYHA class III–IV, see Box 16.5), 
digoxin reduces the likelihood of hospitalisation for heart failure, although 
it has no effect on long-term survival.
Amiodarone This is a potent anti-arrhythmic drug that has little nega-
tive inotropic effect and may be valuable in patients with poor left ven-
tricular function. It is effective only in the treatment of symptomatic 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Vasoconstriction
Arrhythmogenesis
Renin (kidney)
Angiotensin-
converting
enzyme (ACE)
Non-ACE
pathways
Bradykinin
Substance P
Inactive peptides
Inactive peptides
Vasodilatation
Natriuretic
peptides
Salt and water
excretion
ACE inhibitors
Neutral
endopeptidase
Neprolysin inhibitor
Aldosterone
Enhanced
sympathetic
activity
Salt and water
retention
-blockers
Mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists
Diuretics
Angiotensin
receptor blockers
Fig. 16.27 Neurohumoral activation of the renin–angiotensin and sympathetic nervous systems have adverse (red) effects on the cardiovascular system which are 
counterbalanced by benecial effects of endogenous natriuretic and vasoactive peptide systems (yellow). Heart failure treatments are targeted at inhibiting the detrimental 
pathways and enhancing the benecial compensatory systems.
16.18 Dosages of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, 
β-blockers and neprilysin inhibitors in heart failure
Starting dose
Target dose
ACE inhibitors
Enalapril
2.5 mg twice daily
10 mg twice daily
Lisinopril
2.5 mg daily
20 mg daily
Ramipril
1.25 mg daily
10 mg daily
Angiotensin receptor blockers
Losartan
25 mg daily
100 mg daily
Candesartan
4 mg daily
32 mg daily
Valsartan
40 mg daily
160 mg daily
β-blockers
Bisoprolol
1.25 mg daily
10 mg daily
Metoprolol
25 mg twice daily
100 mg twice daily
Carvedilol
3.125 mg twice daily
25 mg twice daily
Neprilysin inhibitor-ARB
Sacubitril–valsartan
24/26 mg twice daily
97/103 mg twice daily

[[p452]]
408  CARDIOLOGY
arrhythmias and should not be used as a preventative agent in asympto-
matic patients. Amiodarone is used for prevention of symptomatic atrial 
arrhythmias and of ventricular arrhythmias when other pharmacological 
options have been exhausted.
Non-pharmacological treatments
Implantable cardiac debrillators These devices are indicated in patients 
with heart failure who have had, or who are at high risk of, life-threatening 
ventricular arrhythmias, since they reduce the risk of sudden death.
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy devices In patients with marked con-
duction system disease, especially left bundle branch block, there is 
uncoordinated left ventricular contraction which exacerbates heart fail-
ure. Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) uses pacemaker technol-
ogy to overcome dyssynchronous contraction by pacing the LV and RV 
simultaneously (Fig. 16.28). This improves cardiac output and is associ-
ated with improved symptoms and reduced mortality.
Coronary revascularisation Coronary artery bypass surgery or percutane-
ous coronary intervention may improve function in areas of the myocar-
dium that are ‘hibernating’ because of inadequate blood supply, and can 
be used to treat carefully selected patients with heart failure and coronary 
artery disease. If necessary, ‘hibernating’ myocardium can be identied 
by stress echocardiography and specialised nuclear or magnetic reso-
nance imaging.
Cardiac transplantation Cardiac transplantation is an established and 
successful treatment for patients with intractable heart failure. Coronary 
artery disease and dilated cardiomyopathy are the most common indi-
cations. The use of transplantation is limited by the efcacy of modern 
drug and device therapies, as well as the availability of donor hearts, so 
it is generally reserved for young patients with severe symptoms despite 
optimal therapy.
Conventional heart transplantation is contraindicated in patients with 
pulmonary vascular disease due to long-standing left heart failure, com-
plex congenital heart disease such as Eisenmenger syndrome, or pri-
mary pulmonary hypertension because the RV of the donor heart may fail 
in the face of high pulmonary vascular resistance. However, heart–lung 
transplantation can be successful in patients with Eisenmenger syn-
drome, and lung transplantation has been used for primary pulmonary 
hypertension.
Although cardiac transplantation usually produces a dramatic improve-
ment in the recipient’s quality of life, serious complications may occur:
 Rejection. In spite of routine therapy with ciclosporin A, azathio-
prine and corticosteroids, episodes of rejection are common and 
may present with heart failure, arrhythmias or subtle ECG changes. 
Cardiac biopsy is often used to conrm the diagnosis before starting 
treatment with high-dose corticosteroids.
 Accelerated atherosclerosis. Recurrent heart failure is often due to 
progressive atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries of the donor 
heart. This is not conned to patients who underwent transplan-
tation for coronary artery disease and is probably a manifestation 
of chronic rejection. Angina is rare because the heart has been 
denervated.
 Infection. Opportunistic infection with organisms such as cytomeg-
alovirus or Aspergillus remains a major cause of death in transplant 
recipients.
Ventricular assist devices Because of the limited supply of donor organs, 
ventricular assist devices (VAD) may be employed as a bridge to cardiac 
transplantation and as short-term restoration therapy following a poten-
tially reversible insult such as viral myocarditis. In some patients, VADs 
may be used as a long-term therapy if no other options exist.
These devices assist cardiac output by using a roller, centrifugal or 
pulsatile pump that, in some cases, is implantable and portable. They 
withdraw blood through cannulae inserted in the atria or ventricular apex 
and pump it into the pulmonary artery or aorta. They are designed not 
only to unload the ventricles but also to provide support to the pulmonary 
and systemic circulations. Their more widespread application is limited 
by high complication rates (haemorrhage, systemic embolism, infection, 
neurological and renal sequelae), although some improvements in sur-
vival and quality of life have been demonstrated in patients with severe 
heart failure.
Cardiac arrhythmias
A cardiac arrhythmia is dened as a disturbance of the electrical rhythm 
of the heart. Arrhythmias are often a manifestation of structural heart 
disease but may also occur because of abnormal conduction or depo-
larisation in an otherwise healthy heart. There are many types of cardiac 
arrhythmia, as discussed later in this section. By convention, however, a 
heart rate of more than 100/min is a tachycardia, and a heart rate of less 
than 60/min is a bradycardia.
Pathogenesis
Arrhythmias usually occur as the result of pathology affecting the con-
duction system of the heart. The cardiac cycle is normally initiated by 
spontaneous depolarisation in the SA node. The atria and ventricles 
then activate sequentially as the depolarisation wave passes through 
specialised conducting tissues (see Fig. 16.4). The SA node acts as a 
pacemaker and its intrinsic rate is regulated by the autonomic nervous 
system; parasympathetic (vagal) activity decreases the heart rate and 
sympathetic activity increases it via cardiac sympathetic nerves and 
 circulating catecholamines.
There are three main mechanisms of tachycardia:
 Increased automaticity. The tachycardia is produced by spontane-
ous depolarisation of an ectopic focus in the atria, atrioventricular 
junction or ventricles, often in response to catecholamines. Single 
depolarisations lead to atrial, junctional or ventricular premature 
(ectopic) beats. Repeated depolarisation leads to atrial, junctional or 
ventricular tachycardia.
 Re-entry. The tachycardia is initiated by an ectopic beat and sus-
tained by a re-entry circuit (Fig. 16.29). Most tachyarrhythmias are 
caused by re-entry.
 Triggered activity. This can cause ventricular arrhythmias in patients 
with coronary artery disease. It is a form of secondary depolarisation 
RA
RV
LV
Fig. 16.28 Chest X-ray of a biventricular pacemaker and debrillator (cardiac 
resynchronisation therapy). The right ventricular lead (RV) is in position in the 
ventricular apex and is used for both pacing and debrillation. The left ventricular 
lead (LV) is placed via the coronary sinus, and the right atrial lead (RA) is placed in 
the right atrial appendage; both are used for pacing only.

[[p453]]
Cardiac arrhythmias  409
16
arising from an incompletely repolarised cell membrane. Arrhythmias 
may be supraventricular (sinus, atrial or junctional) or ventricular in 
origin.
Supraventricular rhythms usually produce narrow QRS complexes 
because the ventricles are depolarised in their normal sequence via 
the AV node, the bundle of His, bundle branches and Purkinje bres. 
In contrast, ventricular arrhythmias often produce broad, bizarre QRS 
complexes because the ventricles are activated in sequence rather than 
in parallel, and activation occurs via myocardial cells rather than the 
rapidly conducting Purkinje bres. Occasionally, supraventricular tachy-
cardia can mimic ventricular tachycardia and present as a broad-com-
plex tachycardia due to coexisting bundle branch block or the presence 
of an additional atrioventricular connection (accessory pathway, see 
below).
Bradycardia is caused by either reduced automaticity of the SA node 
or impaired conduction through the AV node or His–Purkinje system. 
If the sinus rate becomes unduly slow, another, more distal part of the 
conducting system may assume the role of pacemaker. This is known as 
an escape rhythm and may arise in the AV node or His bundle (junctional 
rhythm) or in the ventricles (idioventricular rhythm).
Clinical features
Many arrhythmias are asymptomatic but sustained tachycardias typically 
present with rapid palpitation. Dizziness, chest discomfort or breathless-
ness may also occur. Extreme tachycardias can also cause syncope 
because the heart is unable to ll properly at extreme rates. Bradycardias 
tend to cause symptoms of low cardiac output, including fatigue, light-
headedness and syncope. Extreme bradycardias or tachycardias can 
precipitate sudden death or cardiac arrest.
Investigations
The rst-line investigation is a 12-lead ECG, which can be diagnostic in 
many cases. If arrhythmias are intermittent and the resting ECG is nor-
mal, an attempt should be made to capture the abnormal rhythm using 
an ambulatory ECG or a patient-activated ECG.
Management
Features of individual arrhythmias are discussed below. Management 
depends on the nature of the arrhythmia and the general principles of 
medical management are discussed later in this chapter.
Sinus arrhythmia
This is dened as a cyclical alteration of the heart rate during respiration, 
with an increase during inspiration and a decrease during expiration. Sinus 
arrhythmia is a normal phenomenon and can be quite pronounced in chil-
dren. Absence of heart rate variation with breathing or with changes in 
posture may be a feature of diabetic neuropathy autonomic neuropathy or 
increased sympathetic drive. Sinus arrhythmia does not require treatment.
Sinus bradycardia
This may occur in healthy people at rest and is a common nding in 
athletes. Some pathological causes are listed in Box 16.19. If sinus brad-
ycardia is asymptomatic, then no treatment is required. Symptomatic 
sinus bradycardia may occur acutely during an MI and can be treated 
with intravenous atropine (0.6–1.2 mg). Patients with recurrent or persis-
tent symptomatic sinus bradycardia should be considered for permanent 
pacemaker implantation.
Sinus tachycardia
Sinus tachycardia is usually due to an increase in sympathetic activity 
associated with exercise or emotion. Healthy young adults can produce 
a rapid sinus rate, up to 200/min, during intense exercise. Sinus tachy-
cardia usually does not require treatment but sometimes may reect an 
underlying disease, as summarised in Box 16.19
Sinoatrial disease
Sinoatrial disease or ’sick sinus syndrome’ can occur at any age but is 
most common in older people. It is caused by degenerative changes in 
the SA node and is characterised by a variety of arrhythmias (Box 16.20). 
The typical presentation is with palpitation, dizzy spells or syncope, due 
to intermittent tachycardia, bradycardia, or pauses in sinus rhythm with 
no atrial or ventricular activity (Fig. 16.30).
In sinoatrial disease, a permanent pacemaker improves symptoms but 
not prognosis so is not indicated in asymptomatic patients. It is used in 
A
A
B
B
1 Sinus rhythm
2 Premature impulse
3 Re-entry
4 Tachycardia 
Refractory
tissue
Fig. 16.29 The mechanism of re-entry. Re-entry can occur when there are two alternative pathways with different conducting properties, such as the atrioventricular node 
and an accessory pathway, or an area of normal and an area of ischaemic tissue. Here, pathway A conducts slowly and recovers quickly, while pathway B conducts rapidly 
and recovers slowly. (1) In sinus rhythm, each impulse passes down both pathways before entering a common distal pathway. (2) As the pathways recover at different rates, a 
premature impulse may nd pathway A open and B closed. (3) Pathway B may recover while the premature impulse is travelling selectively down pathway A. The impulse can 
then travel retrogradely up pathway B, setting up a closed loop or re-entry circuit. (4) This may initiate a tachycardia that continues until the circuit is interrupted by a change in 
conduction rates or electrical depolarisation.
16.19 Some pathological causes of sinus bradycardia and 
tachycardia
Sinus bradycardia
 Myocardial infarction
 Sinus node disease (sick sinus 
syndrome)
 Hypothermia
 Hypothyroidism
 Cholestatic jaundice
 Raised intracranial pressure
 Drugs (β-blockers, digoxin, 
verapamil)
Sinus tachycardia
 Anxiety
 Fever
 Anaemia
 Heart failure
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Phaeochromocytoma
 Drugs (β-agonists)

[[p454]]
410  CARDIOLOGY
patients with symptomatic bradycardia, including bradycardia induced 
by drugs required to prevent tachyarrhythmias. A dual-chamber pace-
maker is normally used (see p. 422). The right atrial lead is used to assist 
the SA node, and the right ventricular lead is a backup in case AV nodal 
block occurs later on.
Atrioventricular block
This usually occurs as the result of disease affecting the AV node. AV 
block can be intermittent, however, and may become evident only when 
the conducting tissue is stressed by a rapid atrial rate. Reecting this 
fact, atrial tachyarrhythmias are often associated with AV block (see Fig. 
16.36). Episodes of ventricular asystole may also complicate complete 
heart block or Mobitz type II second-degree AV block. Several types of 
AV block are recognised.
First-degree atrioventricular block
In this condition, AV conduction is delayed and so the PR interval is pro-
longed (> 0.20 sec; Fig. 16.31). It rarely causes symptoms and does not 
usually require treatment.
Second-degree atrioventricular block
Here dropped beats occur because some impulses from the atria fail to 
conduct to the ventricles. Two subtypes are recognised. In Mobitz type I 
second-degree AV block (Fig. 16.32), there is progressive lengthening of 
successive PR intervals, culminating in a dropped beat. The cycle then 
repeats itself. This is known as the Wenckebach phenomenon and is 
usually due to impaired conduction in the AV node itself. The phenom-
enon may be physiological and is sometimes observed at rest or during 
sleep in athletic young adults with high vagal tone.
In Mobitz type II second-degree AV block (Fig. 16.33), the PR interval 
of the conducted impulses remains constant but some P waves are not 
conducted. This is usually caused by disease of the His–Purkinje system 
and carries a risk of asystole.
In 2:1 AV block (Fig. 16.34), alternate P waves are not conducted, so 
it is impossible to distinguish between Mobitz type I and type II block.
Third-degree atrioventricular block
In third-degree AV block, conduction fails completely and the atria and 
ventricles beat independently. This is known as AV dissociation, as shown 
in Fig. 16.35. Ventricular activity is maintained by an escape rhythm aris-
ing in the AV node or bundle of His (narrow QRS complexes) or the distal 
Purkinje tissues (broad QRS complexes). Distal escape rhythms tend to 
be slower and less reliable. Complete AV block (Box 16.21) produces a 
slow (25–50/min), regular pulse that does not vary with exercise, except 
in the case of congenital complete AV block. There is usually a com-
pensatory increase in stroke volume, producing a large-volume pulse. 
Cannon waves may be visible in the neck and the intensity of the rst 
heart sound varies due to the loss of AV synchrony.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with recurrent syncope or ‘Stokes–Adams’ 
attacks. These episodes are characterised by sudden loss of conscious-
ness that occurs without warning and results in collapse. A brief anoxic 
seizure (due to cerebral ischaemia) may occur if there is prolonged asys-
tole. There is pallor and a death-like appearance during the attack, but 
when the heart starts beating again there is a characteristic ush. In dis-
tinction to epilepsy, recovery is rapid. Sinoatrial disease and neurocardio-
genic syncope (p. 184) may cause similar symptoms.
Management
This depends on the clinical circumstances. Inferior ST elevation MI is 
sometimes complicated by transient AV block because the right cor-
onary artery (RCA) supplies the AV node. There is usually a reliable 
16.20  Common features of sinoatrial disease
 Sinus bradycardia
 Sinoatrial block (sinus arrest)
 Paroxysmal atrial brillation
 Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
 Atrioventricular block
Sinus beat
Junctional beat
Sinus bradycardia
Sinus arrest
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial ectopic beat
Fig. 16.30 Sinoatrial disease (sick sinus syndrome). A continuous rhythm strip from a 24-hour ECG tape recording illustrating periods of sinus rhythm, atrial ectopics, 
junctional beats, sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest and paroxysmal atrial brillation.
Fig. 16.31 First-degree atrioventricular block. The PR interval is prolonged and 
measures 0.32 sec.

[[p455]]
Cardiac arrhythmias  411
16
escape rhythm and, if the patient remains well, no treatment is required. 
Symptomatic second- or third-degree AV block may respond to atropine 
(0.6 mg IV, repeated as necessary) or, if this fails, a temporary pacemaker. 
In most cases, the AV block will resolve within 7–10 days.
Second- or third-degree AV heart block complicating acute anterior MI 
indicates extensive ventricular damage involving both bundle branches 
and carries a poor prognosis. Asystole may ensue and a temporary 
pacemaker should be inserted promptly. If the patient presents with 
asystole, intravenous atropine (3 mg) or intravenous isoprenaline (2 mg in 
500 mL 5% dextrose, infused at 10–60 mL/hr) may help to maintain the 
circulation until a temporary pacing electrode can be inserted. Temporary 
pacing can provide effective rhythm support in the short term.
Patients with symptomatic bradyarrhythmias associated with AV block 
should be treated with a permanent pacemaker. Asymptomatic rst- 
degree or Mobitz type I second-degree AV block (Wenckebach phenom-
enon) does not require treatment but may be an indication of underlying 
heart disease. A permanent pacemaker is usually indicated in patients 
with asymptomatic Mobitz type II second-degree AV block or third-
degree AV heart block because of the risk of asystole and sudden death. 
Pacing improves prognosis.
Bundle branch block
Damage to the right or left bundle branch of the conducting system can 
occur as a result of many pathologies, including ischaemic heart disease, 
hypertensive heart disease and cardiomyopathy. However, right bundle 
branch block (RBBB) can occur as a normal variant in healthy individuals 
(Box 16.22). In left bundle branch block (LBBB) and RBBB, depolarisa-
tion proceeds through a slow myocardial route in the affected ventricle 
rather than through the rapidly conducting Purkinje tissues that consti-
tute the bundle branches. This causes delayed conduction into the LV or 
RV, broadens the QRS complex (≥ 0.12 sec) and produces characteristic 
alterations in QRS morphology (Figs. 16.36 and 16.37). Damage to the 
left bundle can also occur after it divides into anterior and posterior fas-
cicles, when it is called hemiblock. In this case, the QRS complex is not 
broad but the direction of ventricular depolarisation is changed, causing 
left axis deviation in left anterior hemiblock and right axis deviation in 
left posterior hemiblock (see Fig. 16.7). The combination of RBBB and 
left anterior or posterior hemiblock is known as bifascicular block. LBBB 
usually signies important underlying heart disease and also causes ven-
tricular incoordination, which may aggravate symptoms in patients with 
heart failure. This can be treated in selected patients by cardiac resyn-
chronisation therapy.
Atrial ectopic beats
Atrial ectopic beats usually cause no symptoms but can give the sensa-
tion of a missed beat or an abnormally strong beat. The ECG (Fig.16.39) 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 16.32 Second-degree atrioventricular block (Mobitz type I – the Wenckebach phenomenon). The PR interval progressively increases until a P wave is not 
conducted. The cycle then repeats itself. In this example, conduction is at a ratio of 4:3, leading to groupings of three ventricular complexes in a row.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 16.33 Second-degree atrioventricular block (Mobitz type II). The PR interval of conducted beats is normal but some P waves are not conducted. The constant PR 
interval distinguishes this from the Wenckebach phenomenon.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 16.34 Second-degree atrioventricular block with xed 2:1 block. Alternate 
P waves are not conducted. This may be due to Mobitz type I or II block.
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fig. 16.35 Complete (third-degree) atrioventricular block. There is complete 
dissociation of atrial and ventricular complexes. The atrial rate is 80/min and the 
ventricular rate is 38/min.
16.21  Causes of complete atrioventricular block
Congenital
Acquired
 Idiopathic brosis
 Myocardial infarction/ischaemia
 Inammation:
Infective endocarditis
Sarcoidosis
Chagas’ disease
 Trauma
 Drugs:
Digoxin
β-blockers
Calcium antagonists

[[p456]]
412  CARDIOLOGY
shows a premature but otherwise normal QRS complex; if visible, the 
preceding P wave has a different morphology because the atria acti-
vate from an abnormal site. In most cases these are of no consequence, 
although very frequent atrial ectopic beats may herald the onset of atrial 
brillation. Treatment is rarely necessary but β-blockers can be used if 
symptoms are intrusive.
Atrial tachycardia
Atrial tachycardia may be a manifestation of increased atrial automatic-
ity, sinoatrial disease or digoxin toxicity. It produces a narrow-complex 
tachycardia with abnormal P-wave morphology, sometimes associated 
with AV block if the atrial rate is rapid. It may respond to β-blockers, 
which reduce automaticity, or class I or III anti-arrhythmic drugs (see 
Box 16.30). The ventricular response in rapid atrial tachycardias may 
be controlled by AV node-blocking drugs. Catheter ablation (p. 423) 
can be used to target the ectopic site and should be offered as an 
alternative to anti-arrhythmic drugs in patients with recurrent atrial 
tachycardia.
Atrial utter
Atrial utter is characterised by a large (macro) re-entry circuit, usually 
within the right atrium encircling the tricuspid annulus. The atrial rate is 
approximately 300/min, and is usually associated with 2:1, 3:1 or 4:1 AV 
block (with corresponding heart rates of 150, 100 or 75/min). Rarely, in 
young patients, every utter wave is conducted, producing a rate of 300/
min and, potentially, haemodynamic compromise. The ECG shows saw-
tooth utter waves (Fig. 16.39). When there is regular 2:1 AV block, it may 
be difcult to identify utter waves that are buried in QRS complexes and 
T waves. Atrial utter should be suspected when there is a narrow-com-
plex tachycardia of 150/min. Carotid sinus pressure or intravenous aden-
osine may help to establish the diagnosis by temporarily increasing the 
degree of AV block and revealing utter waves (Fig. 16.40).
V1
aVR
aVL
aVF
V4
V2
V5
V3
V6
III
II
I
Fig. 16.36 Right bundle branch block. Note the wide QRS complexes with 
‘M’-shaped conguration in leads V1 and V2 and a wide S wave in lead I.
I
aVR
V1
V4
II
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
Fig. 16.37 Left bundle branch block. Note the wide QRS complexes with loss of 
the Q wave or septal vector in lead I and ‘M’-shaped QRS complexes in V5 and V6
Fig. 16.38 Atrial ectopic beats. The rst, second and fth complexes are normal 
sinus beats. The third, fourth and sixth complexes are atrial ectopic beats with 
identical QRS complexes and abnormal (sometimes barely visible) P waves.
II
III
I
Fig. 16.39 Atrial utter. Simultaneous recording showing atrial utter with 4:1 
atrioventricular block. Flutter waves are visible only in leads II and III.
16.22  Common causes of bundle branch block
Right bundle branch block
 Normal variant
 Right ventricular hypertrophy or 
strain, e.g. pulmonary embolism
 Congenital heart disease, e.g. atrial 
septal defect
 Coronary artery disease
Left bundle branch block
 Coronary artery disease
 Hypertension
 Aortic valve disease
 Cardiomyopathy

[[p457]]
Cardiac arrhythmias  413
16
Management
Atrial utter can be managed by either ‘rate control’ or ‘rhythm control’. 
Rate control uses AV node-blocking drugs, such as β-blockers, ver-
apamil or digoxin at the dosages shown in Box 16.30, to control the 
ventricular rate. In most cases rhythm control is preferable. This can be 
achieved by either direct current (DC) cardioversion, or catheter abla-
tion. DC cardioversion is associated with a high recurrence rate even 
when drugs, such as β-blockers or amiodarone, are used afterwards. 
Class Ic anti-arrhythmic drugs, such as ecainide, are contraindicated 
because they can produce a paradoxical extreme tachycardia and hae-
modynamic compromise. Catheter ablation offers a greater than 90% 
chance of permanent cure and is the treatment of choice for patients 
with persistent symptoms. Anticoagulant management in patients with 
atrial utter, including management around cardioversion, is identical to 
that of patients with atrial brillation.
Atrial brillation
Atrial brillation (AF) is the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia, 
with an overall prevalence of 0.5% in the adult population of the UK. 
The prevalence rises with age, affecting 1% of those aged 60–64 years, 
increasing to 9% of those aged over 80 years. It is associated with signif-
icant morbidity and a twofold increase in mortality. This is mainly because 
of its association with underlying heart disease but also because of its 
association with systemic embolism and stroke.
Pathogenesis
AF is a complex arrhythmia characterised by both abnormal automatic 
ring and the presence of multiple interacting re-entry circuits within the 
atria. Episodes of AF are initiated by rapid bursts of ectopic beats arising 
from conducting tissue in the pulmonary veins or from diseased atrial 
tissue. It becomes sustained because of re-entrant conduction within 
the atria or sometimes because of continuous ectopic ring (Fig. 16.41). 
Re-entry is more likely to occur in atria that are enlarged or in which 
conduction is slow, as is the case in many forms of heart disease. During 
episodes of AF, the atria beat rapidly but in an uncoordinated and ineffec-
tive manner. The ventricles are activated irregularly at a rate determined 
by conduction through the AV node. This produces the characteristic 
‘irregularly irregular’ pulse. The ECG (Fig. 16.42) shows normal but irreg-
ular QRS complexes; there are no P waves but the baseline may show 
irregular brillation waves. Commonly, AF is classied as paroxysmal 
(intermittent episodes that self-terminate within 7 days), persistent (pro-
longed episodes that can be terminated by electrical or pharmacological 
cardioversion) or permanent. It can be difcult to identify what type of AF 
patients have at rst presentation but this usually becomes clearer as time 
progresses. Unfortunately for many patients, paroxysmal AF becomes 
permanent as the underlying disease process progresses. This is partly 
because of electrophysiological changes that occur in the atria within a 
few hours of the onset of AF and which tend to maintain brillation: a 
process called electrical remodelling. When AF persists for a period of 
months, structural remodelling also occurs, leading to atrial brosis and 
dilatation that predispose to chronicity of the AF. Early treatment of AF 
can sometimes prevent the arrhythmia from becoming persistent.
Many forms of heart disease can present with AF (Box 16.23), par-
ticularly those that are associated with enlargement or dilatation of the 
atria. Alcohol excess, hyperthyroidism and chronic lung disease are 
also common causes of AF, although multiple predisposing factors may 
coexist, such as the combination of alcohol, hypertension and coronary 
artery disease. About 50% of all patients with paroxysmal AF and 20% of 
patients with persistent or permanent AF have structurally normal hearts; 
this is known as ‘lone atrial brillation’. Aspects of atrial brillation that 
pertain particularly to old age are listed in Box 16.24
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with palpitation, breathlessness and fatigue. In 
patients with poor ventricular function or valve disease, AF may precipitate 
or aggravate cardiac failure because of loss of atrial function and heart rate 
control. A fall in BP may cause lightheadedness, and chest pain may occur 
with underlying coronary artery disease, sometimes accompanied by ST 
segment and T-wave abnormalities on the ECG, and troponin elevation. 
In older patients, AF may not be associated with a rapid ventricular rate 
and may be asymptomatic, only to be discovered as a result of a routine 
examination or an ECG. Asymptomatic AF may also present with systemic 
embolism and is a major cause of stroke in older people.
Investigations
Assessment of patients with newly diagnosed AF should include a full 
history, physical examination, a 12-lead ECG, echocardiogram and thy-
roid function tests to exclude thyrotoxicosis. The echocardiogram is used 
to identify any structural heart disease, particularly mitral valve disease.
Carotid sinus pressure
Fig. 16.40 Carotid sinus pressure in atrial utter: continuous trace. The 
diagnosis of atrial utter with 2:1 block was established when carotid sinus pressure 
produced temporary atrioventricular block, revealing the utter waves.
2
2
1
Fig. 16.41 Mechanisms initiating atrial brillation. (1) Ectopic beats, often 
arising from the pulmonary veins, trigger atrial brillation. (2) Re-entry within the 
atria maintains atrial brillation, with multiple interacting re-entry circuits operating 
simultaneously.
A
B
Fig. 16.42 Two examples of atrial brillation. The QRS complexes are irregular 
rate may be much slower, due to the effects of medication and AV nodal fatigue.

[[p458]]
414  CARDIOLOGY
Management
Management depends on whether the AF is transient or persistent and 
whether there is a clear precipitating factor. When AF complicates an 
acute illness such as a chest infection or pulmonary embolism, treat-
ment of the underlying disorder will often restore sinus rhythm. Where AF 
does not resolve, the choice lies between rate control or rhythm control. 
Stroke risk stratication and prevention are the most important issues in 
managing atrial brillation. Management of paroxysmal and persistent AF 
is discussed below.
Paroxysmal atrial brillation
Occasional attacks of AF that are well tolerated do not require treat-
ment. Beta-blockers are normally used as rst-line therapy if symp-
toms are troublesome, since they reduce the ectopic ring that 
normally initiates the arrhythmia. They are particularly useful for treat-
ing patients with AF associated with coronary artery disease, hyper-
tension and cardiac failure. Class Ic drugs (see Box 16.30), such as 
propafenone or ecainide, are also effective at preventing episodes 
but should not be given to patients with coronary artery disease or 
left ventricular dysfunction. Flecainide is seldom used alone, since 
it can precipitate atrial utter, and is usually prescribed with a rate- 
limiting β-blocker. Class III drugs can also be used; amiodarone is the 
most effective agent for preventing AF but side-effects restrict its use 
to when other measures fail. Dronedarone is an effective alternative 
but is contraindicated in patients with heart failure or signicant left 
ventricular impairment. Calcium channel blockers, such as diltiazem 
(200-400 mg daily), are sometimes used to prevent atrial brillation but 
they are not as effective.
Catheter ablation can be considered as an alternative to anti-arrhyth-
mic drug therapy. Ablation targets the left atrial to pulmonary venous 
connections, preventing ectopic triggering of AF. In addition, lines of con-
duction block can be created within the atria to prevent re-entry. Ablation 
prevents AF in approximately 75% of patients, although a repeat proce-
dure is sometimes required before this is achieved. There is emerging 
evidence that ablation may improve prognosis in some patients with AF 
and heart failure. Ablation for AF is an attractive treatment but is not risk-
free, and may be complicated by cardiac tamponade, stroke, phrenic 
nerve injury and, rarely, pulmonary vein stenosis.
Persistent atrial brillation
There are two options for treating persistent AF – rate control or rhythm 
control. With both options prophylaxis against thromboembolism is 
required on either a short-term or long-term basis.
Rhythm control Restoration of sinus rhythm is appropriate if the arrhyth-
mia causes troublesome symptoms and if there is a treatable underlying 
cause. Electrical DC cardioversion or pharmacological cardioversion may 
be used. Cardioversion is initially successful in most patients but relapse 
is frequent (25%–50% at 1 month and 70%–90% at 1 year). Attempts 
to restore and maintain sinus rhythm are most successful if AF has been 
present for less than 3 months, the patient is young and there is no 
important structural heart disease.
Immediate cardioversion is appropriate if AF has been present for 
less than 48 hours. In stable patients with no history of structural heart 
disease, intravenous ecainide (2 mg/kg over 30 mins, maximum dose 
150 mg) can be used and will restore sinus rhythm in 75% of patients 
within 8 hours. In patients with structural or ischaemic heart disease, 
intravenous amiodarone can be given through a central venous cath-
eter. DC cardioversion may also be used but requires deep seda-
tion or general anaesthesia. If AF has been present for 48 hours or 
longer, or if there is doubt about its duration, DC cardioversion should 
be deferred until the patient has been established on effective oral 
anticoagulation for a minimum of 4 weeks and any underlying prob-
lems, such as hypertension or alcohol excess, have been corrected. 
Prophylactic treatment with amiodarone can reduce the risk of recur-
rence. Catheter ablation is sometimes used to restore and to maintain 
sinus rhythm in persistant AF but is a less effective treatment than for 
paroxysmal AF.
Rate control If sinus rhythm cannot be restored, treatment should be 
directed at controlling the heart rate. Beta-blockers, rate-limiting cal-
cium antagonists, such as verapamil or diltiazem (see Box 16.29 and 
Fig.16.49), and digoxin all reduce the ventricular rate by slowing AV 
conduction. This alone may produce a striking improvement in cardiac 
function, particularly in patients with mitral stenosis. Beta-blockers and 
rate-limiting calcium antagonists are more effective than digoxin at con-
trolling the heart rate during exercise and have additional benets in 
patients with hypertension or structural heart disease. Combination ther-
apy with digoxin and a β-blocker can help with rate control but calcium 
channel antagonists should not be used with β-blockers because of the 
risk of bradycardia.
In exceptional cases, poorly controlled and symptomatic AF can be 
treated by implanting a permanent pacemaker and then deliberately 
inducing complete AV nodal block with catheter ablation. This is known 
as the ‘pace and ablate’ strategy.
Prevention of thromboembolism and stroke Loss of atrial contraction and 
left atrial dilatation cause stasis of blood in the LA and may lead to throm-
bus formation in the left atrial appendage. This predisposes patients to 
stroke and systemic embolism. Patients undergoing cardioversion for AF 
of greater than 48 hours’ duration require temporary anticoagulation to 
reduce these risks. Direct oral anticoagulants or warfarin may be used. 
Anticoagulation should be started for at least 4 weeks before cardiover-
sion and should be maintained for at least 3 months following successful 
cardioversion.
In patients with AF, the annual risk of stroke is inuenced by many 
factors and a decision has to be made in which the risk of stroke is 
balanced against the risk of bleeding with anticoagulation. Patients with 
AF secondary to mitral valve disease should always be anticoagulated 
16.23  Common causes of atrial brillation
 Coronary artery disease (including 
acute MI)
 Valvular heart disease, especially 
rheumatic mitral valve disease
 Hypertension
 Sinoatrial disease
 Hyperthyroidism
 Alcohol
 Cardiomyopathy
 Congenital heart disease
 Chest infection
 Pulmonary embolism
 Pericardial disease
 Idiopathic (lone atrial brillation)
16.24  Atrial brillation in old age
 Prevalence: rises with age, reaching 9% in those over 80 years.
 Symptoms: sometimes asymptomatic but often accompanied by diastolic heart 
failure.
 Hyperthyroidism: atrial brillation may emerge as the dominant feature of 
otherwise silent or occult hyperthyroidism.
 Cardioversion: followed by high rates (~70% at 1 year) of recurrent atrial 
brillation.
 Stroke: atrial brillation is an important cause of cerebral embolism, found 
in 15% of all stroke patients and 2%–8% of those with transient ischaemic 
attacks (TIAs).
 Anticoagulation: although the risk of thromboembolism rises, the hazards of 
anticoagulation also become greater with age because of increased comorbidity, 
particularly cognitive impairment and falls.
 Direct oral anticoagulants: alternatives to warfarin. No blood monitoring is 
required, there are fewer drug interactions, and xed dosing may aid adherence. 
Renal impairment affects dosing, for example apixaban dose is reduced from 
5 mg twice daily to 2.5 mg twice daily if two or more of the following apply: serum 
creatinine more than 132 µmol/L, age 80 years or greater, weight 60 kg or less.
 Warfarin: in those over 75 years, care should be taken to maintain an INR 
(International Normalised Ratio) below 3.0 because of the increased risk of 
intracranial haemorrhage.

[[p459]]
Cardiac arrhythmias  415
16
because the risk is so high. In other patients, clinical scoring systems 
can be used to assess the risk of stroke and bleeding. The risk of stroke 
is usually assessed by the CHA2DS2-VASc score (Box 16.25), and the 
HAS-BLED score can be used to estimate the bleeding risk (Box 16.26). 
Patients with a HAS-BLED score of 3 or more points may require more 
careful monitoring if anticoagulated.
In patients with paroxysmal AF, stroke risk is similar to that in patients 
with persistent AF when adjusted for CHA2DS2-VASc score. The risk of 
embolism is only weakly related to the frequency and duration of AF epi-
sodes, so stroke prevention guidelines do not distinguish between those 
with paroxysmal, persistent and permanent AF.
Several agents can be used to reduce stroke risk in AF. The fac-
tor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban, apixaban and edoxaban, and the direct 
thrombin inhibitor dabigatran (collectively referred to as direct-acting 
oral anticoagulants, or DOACs) have largely replaced warfarin for stroke 
prevention in AF. These drugs are described in more detail in Chapter 
25. They are at least as effective at preventing thrombotic stroke and 
are generally associated with a lower risk of intracranial haemorrhage. 
Other advantages include the lack of requirement for monitoring and 
the fact that they have fewer drug and food interactions. They should 
be considered in patients with AF and CHA2DS2-VASc score of 1 or 
more (male), or 2 or more (female). Stroke risk is reduced by around 
two-thirds, with an annual major bleeding risk of around 1%. Risk 
factors for bleeding include active peptic ulcer disease, uncontrolled 
hypertension, alcohol misuse and frequent falls. Agents that reverse the 
effects of DOACs have been developed. These include idarucizumab, 
which binds to dabigatran, and andexanet alfa, which binds to apix-
aban and rivaroxaban.
Warfarin can be used, adjusted to a target INR (International 
Normalised Ratio) of 2.0–3.0. If bleeding does occur in warfarin-treated 
patients, anticoagulation can be reversed by administering vitamin K or 
clotting factors.
Aspirin should not be used since it has little or no effect on embolic 
stroke and is associated with signicant bleeding risk.
Supraventricular tachycardia
The term supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) describes a group of regular 
tachycardias that have a similar appearance on ECG. These are usu-
ally narrow-complex tachycardias and are characterised by a re-entry 
circuit or automatic focus involving the atria. The three principal types 
are atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT), atrioventricular 
re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT) and atrial tachycardia. The term SVT is not 
strictly accurate as, in many cases, the ventricles also form part of the 
re-entry circuit.
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is a type of SVT 
caused by re-entry in a circuit involving the AV node and its two right 
atrial input pathways: a superior ‘fast’ pathway and an inferior ‘slow’ 
pathway (see Fig. 16.44A). This produces a regular tachycardia with a 
rate of 120–240/min. It tends to occur in the absence of structural heart 
disease and episodes may last from a few seconds to many hours. The 
patient is usually aware of a rapid, very forceful, regular heart beat and 
may experience chest discomfort, lightheadedness or breathlessness. 
Polyuria, mainly due to the release of ANP, is sometimes a feature. The 
ECG (Fig. 16.43) usually shows a tachycardia with normal QRS com-
plexes but occasionally there may be rate-dependent bundle branch 
block.
Management
Treatment is not always necessary. However, an acute episode may 
be terminated by carotid sinus pressure or by the Valsalva manoeuvre. 
Adenosine (3–12 mg rapidly IV in incremental doses until tachycardia 
stops) or verapamil (5 mg IV over 1 min) will restore sinus rhythm in most 
cases. Intravenous β-blocker or ecainide can also be used. In rare 
cases, when there is severe haemodynamic compromise, the tachycar-
dia should be terminated by DC cardioversion.
In patients with recurrent SVT, catheter ablation is the most effective 
therapy and will permanently prevent SVT in more than 90% of cases. 
Alternatively, prophylaxis with oral β-blocker, verapamil or ecainide 
may be used but commits predominantly young patients to long-term 
drug therapy and can create difculty in female patients, as these drugs 
should be avoided during pregnancy where possible.
Atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia
In this condition there is an abnormal band of conducting tissue that 
connects the atria and ventricles. This so-called accessory pathway 
comprises rapidly conducting bres that resemble Purkinje tissue, 
16.25 CHA2DS2-VASc stroke risk scoring system for 
non-valvular atrial brillation
Parameter
Score
C
Congestive heart failure
1 point
H
Hypertension history
1 point
A2
Age ≥ 75 years
2 points
D
Diabetes mellitus
1 point
S2
Previous stroke or transient 
ischaemic attack (TIA)
2 points
V
Vascular disease
1 point
A
Age 65–74 years
1 point
Sc
Sex category female
1 point
Maximum total score
9 points
Annual stroke risk
0 points = 0% (no prophylaxis required)
1 point = 1.3% (oral anticoagulant recommended in males only)
2+ points = > 2.2% (oral anticoagulant recommended)
From European Society of Cardiology clinical practice guidelines: atrial brillation (management 
of) 2010 and focused update (2012). Eur Heart J 2012; 33:2719–2747.
16.26 HAS-BLED bleeding risk scoring system for patients 
receiving oral anticoagulation
Parameter
Score
H
Hypertension; current systolic blood pressure 
>  160 mmHg
1 point
A
Abnormal liver function (cirrhosis OR bilirubin 
> twice upper limit of reference range or 
transaminases > three times upper limit of 
reference range)
1 point
Abnormal renal function (creatinine > 200µmol/L 
(2.26 mg/dL))
1 point
S
Stroke history
1 point
B
Bleeding: prior major event
1 point
L
Labile INR on warfarin
1 point
E
Elderly: age ≥ 65 years
1 point
D
Drugs:
 Use of antiplatelet drug
1 point
 High alcohol consumption
1 point
 Maximum total score
9 points
HAS-BLED score of ≥3 points requires close patient monitoring

[[p460]]
416  CARDIOLOGY
in that they conduct very rapidly and are rich in sodium channels. 
In about 50% of cases, this pathway conducts only in the retro-
grade direction (from ventricles to atria) and thus does not alter the 
appearance of the ECG in sinus rhythm. This is known as a con-
cealed accessory pathway. In the rest, the pathway also conducts 
in an antegrade direction (from atria to ventricles), so AV conduction 
in sinus rhythm is mediated via both the AV node and the acces-
sory pathway, distorting the QRS complex. Premature ventricular 
activation via the pathway shortens the PR interval and produces a 
‘slurred’ initial deection of the QRS complex, called a delta wave 
(Fig. 16.44B). This is known as a manifest accessory pathway. As the 
AV node and accessory pathway have different conduction speeds 
and refractory periods, a re-entry circuit can develop, causing tachy-
cardia (Fig. 16.44C); when associated with symptoms, the condition 
is known as Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome. The ECG dur-
ing this tachycardia is almost indistinguishable from that of AVNRT 
(Fig. 16.44A).
Management
Carotid sinus pressure or intravenous adenosine can terminate the 
tachycardia. If AF occurs, it may produce a dangerously rapid ventricular 
rate because the accessory pathway lacks the rate-limiting properties of 
the AV node (Fig. 16.44D). This is known as pre-excited atrial brillation 
and may cause collapse, syncope and even death. It should be treated 
as an emergency, usually with DC cardioversion.
Catheter ablation is rst-line treatment in symptomatic patients and is 
nearly always curative. Alternatively, prophylactic anti-arrhythmic drugs, 
such as ecainide or propafenone (see Box 16.30) can be used to slow 
conduction in, and prolong the refractory period of, the accessory path-
way. Long-term drug therapy is not the preferred treatment for most 
patients and amiodarone should not be used, as its side-effect prole 
cannot be justied and ablation is safer and more effective. Digoxin and 
verapamil shorten the refractory period of the accessory pathway and 
should not be used.
Ventricular premature beats
Ventricular premature beats (VPBs) are frequently found in healthy peo-
ple and their prevalence increases with age. Ectopic beats in patients 
with otherwise normal hearts are more prominent at rest and disap-
pear with exercise. Sometimes VPBs are a manifestation of subclini-
cal coronary artery disease or cardiomyopathy but also may occur in 
patients with established heart disease following an MI. Most patients 
with VPBs are asymptomatic but some present with an irregular heart 
beat, missed beats or abnormally strong beats, due to increased car-
diac output of the post-ectopic sinus beat. On examination the pulse 
is irregular, with weak or missed beats as a result of the fact that the 
stroke volume is low because left ventricular contraction occurs before 
lling is complete (Fig. 16.45). The ECG shows broad and bizarre com-
plexes because the ventricles are activated sequentially rather than 
simultaneously. The complexes may be unifocal (identical beats aris-
ing from a single ectopic focus) or multifocal (varying morphology with 
multiple foci, see Fig. 16.46). ‘Couplet’ and ‘triplet’ are the terms used 
to describe two or three successive ectopic beats. A run of alternating 
Fig. 16.43 Supraventricular tachycardia. The rate is 180/min and the QRS 
complexes are normal.
AV nodal re-entrant
tachycardia
S
F
2
1
A
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: orthodromic
tachycardia
C
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: atrial
fibrillation
D
Wolff–Parkinson–White
syndrome: sinus rhythm
B
Fig. 16.44 Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) and Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome.
mechanism of AVNRT occurs via two right atrial AV nodal input pathways: the slow (S) and fast (F) pathways. Antegrade conduction occurs via the slow pathway; the wavefront 
enters the AV node and passes into the ventricles, at the same time re-entering the atria via the fast pathway. In WPW syndrome, there is a strip of accessory conducting tissue 
that allows electricity to bypass the AV node and spread from the atria to the ventricles rapidly and without delay. When the ventricles are depolarised through the AV node the 
rhythm. In sinus rhythm, the ventricles are depolarised through (1) the AV node and (2) the accessory pathway, producing an ECG with a short PR interval and broadened QRS 
complexes; the characteristic slurring of the upstroke of the QRS complex is known as a delta wave. The degree of pre-excitation (the proportion of activation passing down the 
tachycardia in WPW. The re-entry circuit passes antegradely through the AV node and retrogradely through the accessory pathway. The ventricles are therefore depolarised in the 
are largely depolarised through the accessory pathway, producing an irregular broad-complex tachycardia that is often more rapid than the example shown.

[[p461]]
Cardiac arrhythmias  417
16
sinus and ventricular ectopic beats is known as ventricular ‘bigeminy’. 
The signicance depends on the presence or absence of underlying 
heart disease.
Management
Treatment may not be necessary, unless the patient is highly sympto-
matic, in which case β-blockers or, in some situations, catheter ablation 
can be used. There is no evidence that anti-arrhythmic therapy improves 
prognosis but the discovery of very frequent VPBs in a patient not known 
to have heart disease should prompt further investigations with echocar-
diography and an exercise ECG to screen for structural heart disease 
and ischaemic heart disease. It is common for VPBs to occur during the 
course of an acute MI. Persistent, frequent VPBs (over 10/hr) in patients 
who have survived the acute phase of MI indicate a poorer long-term 
outcome. In this situation, anti-arrhythmic drugs do not improve and may 
even worsen prognosis. The exception is β-blockers, which should be 
prescribed for other reasons following MI. Similarly, heart failure of any 
cause is associated with VPBs. While they indicate an adverse progno-
sis, this is not improved by anti-arrhythmic drugs. Effective treatment of 
the heart failure may suppress the ectopic beats.
Ventricular tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) occurs most commonly in the settings of acute 
MI, chronic coronary artery disease and cardiomyopathy. It is associated 
with extensive ventricular disease, impaired left ventricular function and 
ventricular aneurysm. In these settings, VT may cause haemodynamic 
compromise or degenerate into ventricular brillation (see Fig. 16.19). VT 
is most often caused by re-entry within scarred ventricular tissue, and less 
often by abnormal automaticity or triggered activity in ischaemic tissue. 
Patients may experience palpitation, dyspnoea, lightheadedness and syn-
cope. The ECG shows tachycardia and broad, abnormal QRS complexes 
with a rate of more than 120/min (Fig. 16.46). It may be difcult to dis-
tinguish VT from SVT with bundle branch block or pre-excitation (WPW 
syndrome) on ECG but features in favour of VT are listed in Box 16.27. A 
12-lead ECG (Fig. 16.47) or electrophysiology study may help establish the 
diagnosis. When there is doubt, it is safer to manage the problem as VT.
Patients recovering from MI sometimes have periods of idioventricu-
lar rhythm (‘slow’ VT) at a rate only slightly above the preceding sinus 
rate and below 120/min. These episodes often reect reperfusion of the 
infarct territory and may be a good sign. They are usually self-limiting and 
asymptomatic, and do not require treatment. Other forms of sustained 
VT require treatment, often as an emergency.
Occasionally, VT occurs in patients with otherwise healthy hearts 
(‘normal heart VT’), usually because of abnormal automaticity in the right 
ventricular outow tract or one of the fascicles of the left bundle branch.
Management
Prompt action to restore sinus rhythm is required and should usually be 
followed by prophylactic therapy. Synchronised DC cardioversion is the 
treatment of choice if systolic BP is less than 90 mmHg. If the arrhyth-
mia is well tolerated, intravenous amiodarone may be given as a bolus, 
followed by a continuous infusion (see Box 16.30). Intravenous lidocaine 
can also be used but may depress left ventricular function, causing hypo-
tension or acute heart failure. Hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, acido-
sis and hypoxia should be corrected if present.
Beta-blockers are effective at preventing VT by reducing ventricular 
automaticity. Amiodarone can be added if additional control is needed. 
Class Ic anti-arrhythmic drugs should not be used for prevention of VT 
in patients with coronary artery disease or heart failure because they 
depress myocardial function and can increase the likelihood of a danger-
ous arrhythmia. In patients with poor left ventricular function or where VT 
is associated with haemodynamic compromise, the use of an implant-
able cardiac debrillator is recommended. In resistant cases of focal or 
infarct scar-mediated VT, catheter ablation can be used to interrupt the 
A
B
Fig. 16.45 Ventricular ectopic beats.
a‘dropped beat’.
Fig. 16.46 Ventricular tachycardia: fusion beat. In ventricular tachycardia, there 
is independent atrial and ventricular activity. Occasionally, a P wave is conducted to 
the ventricles through the AV node, producing a normal sinus beat in the middle of 
the tachycardia (a capture beat); more commonly, however, the conducted impulse 
fuses with an impulse from the tachycardia (a fusion beat, arrow). This can occur only 
when there is atrioventricular dissociation and is therefore diagnostic of ventricular 
tachycardia.
16.27  Features more in keeping with ventricular tachycardia
 History of myocardial infarction
 Atrioventricular dissociation (pathognomonic)
 Capture/fusion beats (pathognomonic; see Fig. 16.40)
 Extreme left axis deviation
 Very broad QRS complexes (> 140msecs)
 No response to carotid sinus massage or intravenous adenosine

[[p462]]
418  CARDIOLOGY
arrhythmia focus or circuit. The treatment of choice for VT occurring in a 
normal heart is catheter ablation, which often can be curative.
Torsades de pointes
This form of polymorphic VT is a complication of prolonged ventricular 
repolarisation (prolonged QT interval). The ECG shows rapid irregular 
complexes that seem to twist around the baseline as the mean QRS 
axis changes (Fig. 16.48). The arrhythmia is usually non-sustained and 
repetitive, but may degenerate into ventricular brillation. During peri-
ods of sinus rhythm, the ECG will usually show a prolonged QT interval 
(> 0.44 sec in men, > 0.46 sec in women when corrected to a heart rate 
of 60/min).
Some of the common causes are listed in Box 16.28. The arrhythmia 
is more common in women and is often triggered by a combination of 
factors, such as administration of QT-prolonging medications and hypo-
kalaemia. The congenital long QT syndromes are a family of genetic 
disorders that are characterised by mutations in genes that code for 
cardiac potassium or sodium channels. Long QT syndrome subtypes 
have different triggers, which are important when counselling patients. 
Adrenergic stimulation through vigorous exercise is a common trigger in 
long QT type 1, and a sudden noise may trigger arrhythmias in long QT 
type 2. Arrhythmias are more common during sleep in type 3.
Management
Intravenous magnesium (8 mmol over 15 mins, then 72 mmol over 
24hrs) should be given in all cases. If this is ineffective, atrial pacing 
should be tried, since it can suppress the arrhythmia through rate-de-
pendent shortening of the QT interval. Intravenous isoprenaline is a rea-
sonable alternative to pacing but should be avoided in patients with the 
congenital long QT syndromes. Once initial control has been achieved, 
efforts should be made to identify and treat the underlying cause or 
stop medications that predispose to the arrhythmia. If the underlying 
cause cannot be corrected or the arrhythmia is the result of an inher-
ited syndrome, then long-term pharmacological therapy may be nec-
essary. Beta-blockers are effective at preventing syncope in patients 
with congenital long QT syndrome. Some patients, particularly those 
with extreme QT interval prolongation (> 500msecs) or certain high-
risk genotypes, should be considered for an implantable debrillator. 
Left stellate ganglion block may be of value in patients with resistant 
arrhythmias.
Brugada syndrome is a related genetic disorder that may present with 
polymorphic VT or sudden death. It is most commonly caused by muta-
tions in the SCN5A gene which encodes a sodium channel expressed in 
cardiac myocytes. It is characterised by an abnormal ECG (right bundle 
branch block and ST elevation in V1 and V2 but not usually prolongation 
of the QT interval). The only known effective treatment is an implantable 
debrillator.
I
aVR
V1
II
aVL
III
aVF
Rhythm strip
V4
V2
V5
V3
V6
Fig. 16.47 Ventricular tachycardia: 12-lead ECG. There are typically very broad QRS 
complexes and marked left axis deviation. There is also atrioventricular dissociation; 
some P waves are visible and others are buried in the QRS complexes (arrows).
Fig. 16.48 Torsades de pointes. A bradycardia with a long QT interval is followed by polymorphic ventricular tachycardia that is triggered by an R on T ectopic.
16.28  Causes of long QT interval and torsades de pointes
Bradycardia
 Bradycardia potentiates other factors that cause torsades de pointes
Electrolyte disturbance
 Hypokalaemia
 Hypomagnesaemia
 Hypocalcaemia
Drugs*
 Disopyramide, ecainide and other class Ia, Ic anti-arrhythmic drugs (Box 16.29
and Fig. 16.49)
 Sotalol, amiodarone and other class III anti-arrhythmic drugs
 Amitriptyline and other tricyclic antidepressants
 Chlorpromazine and other phenothiazines
 Erythromycin and other macrolides
 Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine
Congenital syndromes
 Long QT1: gene affected KCNQ1: K+ channel, 30%–35%
 Long QT2: gene affected HERG: K+ channel, 25%–30%
 Long QT3: gene affected SCN5A: Na+ channel, 5%–10%
 Long QT4–12: rare; various genes implicated
*Many other drugs that are not shown can be associated with prolongation of the 
QT interval. See www.crediblemeds.org for a complete list.

[[p463]]
Principles of management of cardiac arrhythmias  419
16
Principles of management of cardiac 
arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias can be managed with anti-arrhythmic drug therapy, 
cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs), or catheter ablation.
Anti-arrhythmic drugs
Traditionally, the Vaughan Williams system has been used to cat-
egorise anti-arrhythmic drugs based on their effects on the action 
potential. Increased understanding of the mechanisms of action has 
allowed further subclassication, based on the cardiac ion channels 
and receptors on which they act see (Box 16.29 and Fig. 16.49). The 
individual agents, dosages and most common side-effects are sum-
marised in Box 16.30 and the general principles of use are summa-
rised in Box 16.31
Class I drugs
Class I drugs act principally by suppressing excitability and slowing 
conduction in atrial or ventricular muscle. They block sodium chan-
nels, of which there are several types in cardiac tissue. These drugs 
should generally be avoided in patients with heart failure because 
they depress myocardial function, and class Ia and Ic drugs are often 
pro-arrhythmic.
Class Ia drugs
These prolong cardiac action potential duration and increase the tissue 
refractory period. They are used to prevent both atrial and ventricular 
arrhythmias.
Disopyramide
This is an effective drug but causes anticholinergic side-effects, such as 
urinary retention, and can precipitate glaucoma. It can depress myocar-
dial function and should be avoided in cardiac failure.
Quinidine
This drug is effective at preventing AF and is occasionally used in 
Brugada syndrome. It is strongly pro-arrhythmic and can cause gastro-
intestinal upset.
Class Ib drugs
These shorten the action potential and tissue refractory period. They act 
on channels found predominantly in ventricular myocardium and so are 
used to treat or prevent VT and VF.
Lidocaine
This must be given intravenously and has a very short plasma half-life.
Mexiletine
This can be given intravenously or orally but has many side-effects.
Class Ic drugs
These affect the slope of the action potential without altering its duration 
or refractory period. They are used mainly for prophylaxis of AF but are 
effective in prophylaxis and treatment of supraventricular or ventricular 
arrhythmias. They are useful for WPW syndrome because they block 
conduction in accessory pathways. They should not be used in patients 
with previous MI because they increase the risk of arrhythmia in this 
setting.
Flecainide
This is effective for prevention of AF, and an intravenous infusion 
may be used for pharmacological cardioversion of AF of less than 
24 hours’ duration. Since ecainide can cause slow atrial utter with 
a paradoxically rapid ventricular rate, it should be prescribed along 
with an AV node-blocking drug such as a β-blocker to control the 
ventricular rate.
Propafenone
This also has some β-blocker (class II) properties. Important interactions 
with digoxin, warfarin and cimetidine have been described.
Class II drugs
This group comprises the β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers). 
These agents reduce the rate of SA node depolarisation and cause rel-
ative block in the AV node, making them useful for rate control in atrial 
utter and AF. They can be used to prevent VT and SVT. They reduce 
myocardial excitability and the risk of arrhythmic death in patients with 
coronary artery disease and heart failure.
Atria, ventricles
and accessory
conducting tissues
  Disopyramide
  Flecainide
  Propafenone
  Amiodarone
Sinoatrial node
-blockers
  Atropine
  Verapamil
  Diltiazem
Ventricles
  Lidocaine
  Mexiletine
-blockers
AV node
Adenosine
-blockers
  Digoxin
  Verapamil
  Diltiazem
Fig. 16.49 Classication of anti-arrhythmic drugs by site of action. 
(AV = atrioventricular)
16.29 Classication of anti-arrhythmic drugs by effect on the 
intracellular action potential*
Class I: membrane-stabilising agents (sodium channel blockers)
(a) Block Na+ channel and prolong action potential
 Quinidine, disopyramide
(b) Block Na+ channel and shorten action potential
 Lidocaine, mexiletine
(c) Block Na+ channel with no effect on action potential
 Flecainide, propafenone
Class II: β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers)
 Atenolol, bisoprolol, metoprolol
Class III: drugs whose main effect is to prolong the action potential
 Amiodarone, dronedarone, sotalol
Class IV: slow calcium channel blockers
 Verapamil, diltiazem
*Some drugs such as digoxin, ivabradine and adenosine have no place in this 
classication, while others such as amiodarone have properties in more than  
oneclass.

[[p464]]
420  CARDIOLOGY
Non-selective β-blockers
These act on both β1 and β2 receptors. Beta2-blockade causes side-
effects, such as bronchospasm and peripheral vasoconstric-
tion. Propranolol is non-selective and is subject to extensive 
rst-pass metabolism in the liver. The effective oral dose is there-
fore unpredictable and must be titrated after treatment is started 
with a small dose. Other non-selective drugs include nadolol and 
carvedilol.
Cardioselective β-blockers
These act mainly on myocardial β1 receptors and are relatively well toler-
ated. Bisoprolol and metoprolol are examples of cardioselective β-blockers.
Sotalol
This is a racemic mixture of two isomers with non-selective β-blocker 
(mainly l-sotalol) and class III (mainly d-sotalol) activity. It may cause tor-
sades de pointes.
16.30  Uses, dosage and side-effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs
Drug
Main uses
Route
Dosage (adult)
Important side-effects
Class I
Disopyramide
Prevention and treatment of atrial 
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias
IV
2 mg/kg at 30 mg/min, then 0.4 mg/kg/hr (max 
800 mg/day)
Myocardial depression, hypotension, 
dry mouth, urinary retention
Lidocaine
Treatment and short-term 
prevention of VT and VF
Oral
300–800 mg daily in divided dosage
Myocardial depression, delirium, 
convulsions
IV
Bolus 50–100 mg, 4 mg/min for 30 mins, then 
2 mg/min for 2 hrs, then 1 mg/min for 24 hrs
Mexiletine
Prevention and treatment of 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias
IV
Loading dose: 100–250 mg at 25 mg/min, then 
250 mg in 1 hr, then 250 mg in 2 hrs
Myocardial depression, 
gastrointestinal irritation, delirium, 
dizziness, tremor, nystagmus, ataxia
Maintenance therapy: 0.5 mg/min
Oral
167–500 mg daily
Flecainide
Prevention and treatment of atrial 
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias
IV
2 mg/kg over 10 mins, then if required 1.5  mg/
kg/hr for 1 hr, then 0.1 mg/kg/hr
Myocardial depression, dizziness
Oral
50–150 mg twice daily
Propafenone
Prevention and treatment of atrial 
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias
Oral
150  mg 3 times daily for 1 week, then 300  mg 
twice daily
Myocardial depression, dizziness
Class II
Atenolol
Treatment and prevention of SVT 
and AF, prevention of VEs and 
exercise-induced VF
IV
2.5 mg at 1 mg/min, repeated at 5-min intervals 
(max 10 mg)
Myocardial depression, bradycardia, 
bronchospasm, fatigue, depression, 
nightmares, cold peripheries
Oral
25–100 mg daily
Bisoprolol
Metoprolol
Oral
2.5–10 mg daily
IV
5 mg over 2 mins to a maximum of 15 mg
Class III
Amiodarone
Serious or resistant atrial and 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias
IV
5 mg/kg over 20–120 mins, then up to 15 mg/
kg/24 hrs
Photosentivity skin discoloration, 
corneal deposits, thyroid dysfunction, 
alveolitis, nausea and vomiting, 
hepatotoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, 
torsades de pointes; potentiates 
digoxin and warfarin
Oral
Initially 600–1200 mg/day, then 100–400 mg 
daily
Dronedarone
Paroxysmal atrial brillation
Oral
400 mg twice daily
Renal and hepatic dysfunction 
requiring regular blood monitoring
Sotatol*
AF, rarely ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias
IV
10–20  mg slowly
Can cause torsade de pointes
Oral
40–160  mg twice daily
Class IV
Verapamil
Treatment of SVT, control of AF
IV
5–10 mg over 30 secs
Myocardial depression, hypotension,
Oral
40–120 mg 3 times daily or 240 mg SR daily
bradycardia, constipation
Other
Atropine
Treatment of bradycardia and/
or hypotension due to vagal over-
activity (see Box 16.32)
IV
0.6–3 mg
Dry mouth, thirst, blurred vision, 
atrial and ventricular extrasystoles
Adenosine
Digoxin
Treatment of SVT, aid to diagnosis 
in unidentied tachycardia
IV
3 mg over 2 secs, followed if necessary by 6 mg, 
then 12 mg at intervals of 1–2 mins
Flushing, dyspnoea, chest pain
Avoid in asthma
Rate control of AF
IV
Loading dose: 0.5–1 mg (total), 0.5 mg over 
30 mins, then 0.25–0.5 mg after 4–6 hrs  
0.5 mg repeated after 6 hrs, then  
0.0625–0.25 mg daily
Gastrointestinal disturbance, 
xanthopasia, arrhythmias
Oral
*Sotalol also has class II activity as a β-blocker.
(AF = atrial brillation; IV = intravenous; SR = sustained-release formulation; SVT = supraventricular tachycardia; VE = ventricular ectopic; VF = ventricular brillation; VT = ventricular tachycardia)

[[p465]]
Principles of management of cardiac arrhythmias  421
16
Class III drugs
Class III drugs act by prolonging the plateau phase of the action poten-
tial, thus lengthening the refractory period. These drugs are very effec-
tive at preventing atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. They cause QT 
interval prolongation and can predispose to torsades de pointes and 
VT, especially in patients with other predisposing risk factors (see Box 
16.28). Disopyramide and sotalol have some class III activity but the main 
drug in this class is amiodarone, as discussed below.
Amiodarone
While amiodarone is primarily considered a class III drug, it also has class 
I, II and IV activity. It is probably the most effective drug currently availa-
ble for controlling paroxysmal AF. It is also used to prevent episodes of 
recurrent VT, particularly in patients with poor left ventricular function or 
those with implantable debrillators (to prevent unnecessary DC shocks). 
Amiodarone has a very long tissue half-life (25–110 days). An intrave-
nous or oral loading regime is often used to achieve therapeutic tissue 
concentrations. The drug’s effects may last for weeks or months after 
treatment has been stopped. Side-effects are common (up to one-third 
of patients), numerous and potentially serious. Drug interactions are also 
common (see Box 16.30).
Dronedarone
Dronedarone is related to amiodarone but has a short tissue half-life and 
fewer side-effects. It has recently been shown to be effective at prevent-
ing episodes of atrial utter and AF. It is contraindicated in patients with 
permanent AF, or if there is heart failure or left ventricular impairment, 
because it increases mortality. Regular liver and renal function test mon-
itoring is required.
Class IV drugs
These block the ‘slow calcium channel’, which is important for impulse 
generation and conduction in atrial and nodal tissue, although it is 
also present in ventricular muscle. Their main indications are pre-
vention of SVT (by blocking the AV node) and rate control in patients 
with AF.
Verapamil
This is the most widely used drug in this class. Intravenous verapamil 
may cause profound bradycardia or hypotension, and should not be 
used in conjunction with β-blockers.
Diltiazem
This has similar properties to verapamil.
Other anti-arrhythmic drugs
Atropine sulphate
Atropine is a muscarinic receptor antagonist that increases the sinus rate 
and SA and AV conduction. It is the treatment of choice for severe brad-
ycardia or hypotension due to vagal over-activity. It is used for initial man-
agement of symptomatic bradyarrhythmias complicating inferior MI, and 
in cardiac arrest due to asystole. The usual dose is 0.6 mg IV, repeated 
if necessary to a maximum of 3 mg. Repeat dosing may be necessary 
because the drug disappears rapidly from the circulation after parenteral 
administration. Side-effects are listed in Box 16.30
Adenosine
This works by binding to A1 receptors in conducting tissue, producing a 
transient AV block lasting a few seconds. It is used to terminate SVTs when 
the AV node is part of the re-entry circuit, or to help establish the diagnosis 
in difcult arrhythmias, such as atrial utter with 2:1 AV block (see Fig. 16.40) 
or broad-complex tachycardia (see Boxes16.30 and 16.32). Adenosine 
is given as an intravenous bolus, initially 3 mg over 2seconds (see Box 
16.30). If there is no response after 1–2 minutes, 6 mg should be given; 
if necessary, after another 1–2minutes the maximum dose of 12 mg may 
be given. Patients should be warned to expect short-lived and sometimes 
distressing ushing, breathlessness and chest pain. Adenosine can cause 
broncho spasm and should be avoided in patients with asthma; its effects 
are greatly potentiated by dipyridamole and inhibited by theophylline and 
other xanthines.
Digoxin
Digoxin is a glycoside puried from the European foxglove, Digitalis lanata, 
which slows conduction and prolongs the refractory period in the AV node. 
This effect helps to control the ventricular rate in AF. Digoxin also shortens 
refractory periods and enhances excitability and conduction in other parts 
of the heart, including accessory pathways. It may therefore increase atrial 
and ventricular ectopic activity and can lead to more complex atrial and 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Digoxin is largely excreted by the kidneys, 
and the maintenance dose (see Box 16.30) should be reduced in children, 
older people and those with renal impairment. It is widely distributed and 
has a long tissue half-life (36 hours), so that effects may persist for several 
days. Measurement of plasma digoxin concentration helps identify digoxin 
toxicity or under-treatment (Box 16.33).
Non-pharmacological treatments
Electrical cardioversion
Electrical cardioversion, also known as direct current (DC) cardioversion, 
is useful for terminating an organised rhythm, such as AF or VT. The 
shock depolarises the myocardium, interrupts the arrhythmia and pro-
duces a brief period of asystole, followed by the resumption of sinus 
rhythm. Cardioversion is usually carried out as an elective procedure 
under general anaesthesia. The shock is delivered immediately after the 
R wave because, if it is applied during ventricular repolarisation (on the 
T wave), it may provoke VF. A 100–150 Joule shock is normally used.
16.31  Anti-arrhythmic drugs: principles of use
Anti-arrhythmic drugs are potentially toxic and should be used carefully according 
to the following principles:
 Many arrhythmias are benign and do not require specic treatment
 Precipitating or causal factors should be corrected if possible:
Alcohol excess
Myocardial ischaemia
Hyperthyroidism
Acidosis
Hypokalaemia
Hypomagnesaemia
 If drug therapy is required, it is best to use as few drugs as possible
 In difcult cases, programmed electrical stimulation (electrophysiological study) 
may help to identify the optimum therapy
 When managing life-threatening arrhythmias, it is essential to ensure that 
prophylactic treatment is effective. Ambulatory monitoring and exercise testing 
may be of value
 Patients on long-term anti-arrhythmic drugs should be reviewed regularly 
and attempts made to withdraw therapy if the factors that precipitated the 
arrhythmias are no longer operative
 For patients with recurrent supraventricular tachycardia or atrial utter, 
radiofrequency ablation is the treatment of choice
16.32  Response to intravenous adenosine
Arrhythmia
Response
Supraventricular tachycardia
Termination
Atrial brillation, atrial utter, 
atrialtachycardia
Transient atrioventricular block
Ventricular tachycardia
No effect

[[p466]]
422  CARDIOLOGY
Debrillation
Debrillators deliver a DC, high-energy, short-duration shock via two 
large electrodes or paddles coated with conducting jelly or a gel pad, 
positioned over the upper right sternal border and the apex. Debrillators 
are primarily used in the management of cardiac arrest due to VF and 
deliver an unsynchronised shock, since the precise timing of the dis-
charge is not important in this situation. A biphasic shock is used during 
which the shock polarity is reversed mid-shock. This reduces the total 
shock energy required to depolarise the heart. In VF and other emergen-
cies, the energy of the rst and second shocks should be 150Joules and 
thereafter up to 200Joules; there is no need for an anaesthetic, as the 
patient is unconscious.
Temporary pacemakers
Temporary pacing involves delivery of an electrical impulse into the heart 
to initiate tissue depolarisation and to trigger cardiac contraction. This 
is achieved by inserting a bipolar pacing electrode through the internal 
jugular, subclavian or femoral vein and positioning it at the apex of the 
RV, using uoroscopic imaging. The electrode is connected to an exter-
nal pacemaker with an adjustable energy output and pacing rate. The 
ECG of right ventricular pacing is characterised by regular broad QRS 
complexes with a left bundle branch block pattern. Each complex is 
immediately preceded by a ‘pacing spike’ (Fig. 16.50). The pacemaker 
will operate only if the heart rate falls below a preset level. Occasionally, 
temporary atrial or dual-chamber pacing (see below) is used.
Temporary pacing is indicated for transient AV block and other arrhyth-
mias complicating acute MI or cardiac surgery, to maintain the rhythm in 
other situations of reversible bradycardia (such as metabolic disturbance 
or drug overdose), or as a bridge to permanent pacing. Complications 
include pneumothorax, brachial plexus or subclavian artery injury, local 
infection or sepsis (usually with Staphylococcus aureus), and pericar-
ditis. Failure of the system may be due to lead displacement or a pro-
gressive increase in the threshold (exit block) caused by tissue oedema. 
Complication rates increase with time and so a temporary pacing system 
should ideally not be used for more than 7 days.
Transcutaneous pacing is administered by delivering an electrical stim-
ulus through two large adhesive gel pad electrodes placed over the apex 
and upper right sternal border, or over the anterior and posterior chest. 
It is easy and quick to set up, but causes discomfort because it induces 
forceful pectoral and intercostal muscle contraction. Modern external 
debrillators often incorporate a transcutaneous pacing system that can 
be used until transvenous pacing is established.
Permanent pacemakers
Permanent pacemakers are small, at, metal devices that are implanted 
under the skin, usually in the pectoral area (Fig. 16.51). They contain 
a battery, a pulse generator, and programmable electronics that allow 
adjustment of pacing and memory functions. Pacing electrodes (leads) 
can be placed via the subclavian or cephalic veins into the RV (usually 
at the apex), the right atrial appendage or, to maintain AV synchrony, 
both.
Permanent pacemakers are controlled using an external programmer 
through a wireless telemetry system, allowing rate, output, timing and 
other parameters to be adjusted. This allows the device settings to be 
tailored to the patient’s needs. Aside from their therapeutic role, pace-
makers store useful diagnostic data about the patient’s heart rate trends 
and the occurrence of tachyarrhythmias, such as VT.
Single-chamber atrial pacing is indicated in patients with SA disease 
without AV block and ventricular pacing in patients with continuous AF 
and bradycardia. Here the pacemaker acts as an external sinus node. 
Dual-chamber pacing is most often used in patients with second- or 
third-degree AV block. Here, the atrial electrode is used to detect spon-
taneous atrial activity and trigger ventricular pacing (see Fig. 16.50), 
thereby preserving AV synchrony and allowing the ventricular rate to 
increase, together with the sinus node rate, during exercise and other 
forms of stress. Dual-chamber pacing has many advantages over sin-
gle-chamber ventricular pacing, including superior haemodynamics 
and better effort tolerance; a lower prevalence of atrial arrhythmias in 
patients with SA disease; and avoidance of ‘pacemaker syndrome’, 
in which a fall in BP and dizziness occur due to loss of AV synchrony.
A code is used to signify the pacing mode (Box 16.34). For example, 
a system that paces the atrium, senses the atrium and is inhibited if 
it senses spontaneous activity is designated AAI. Most dual-chamber 
pacemakers are programmed to a mode termed DDD; in this case, ven-
tricular pacing is triggered by a sensed sinus P wave and inhibited by 
a sensed spontaneous QRS complex. A fourth letter, ‘R’, is added if 
the pacemaker has a rate response function. For example, the letters 
16.33  Digoxin toxicity
Extracardiac manifestations
 Anorexia, nausea, vomiting
 Diarrhoea
 Altered colour vision (xanthopsia)
Cardiac manifestations
 Bradycardia
 Multiple ventricular ectopics
 Ventricular bigeminy (alternate 
ventricular ectopics)
 Atrial tachycardia (with variable block)
 Ventricular tachycardia
 Ventricular brillation
Fig. 16.50 Dual-chamber pacing. The rst three beats show atrial and ventricular 
pacing with narrow pacing spikes in front of each P wave and QRS complex. The last 
four beats show spontaneous P waves with a different morphology and no pacing 
spike; the pacemaker senses or tracks these P waves and maintains atrioventricular 
synchrony by pacing the ventricle after an appropriate interval.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 16.51 Cardiac implantable electronic devices.

[[p467]]
Principles of management of cardiac arrhythmias  423
16
AAIR indicate an atrial demand pacemaker with a rate response func-
tion. Rate-responsive pacemakers are used in patients with chronotropic 
incompetence, who are unable to increase their heart rate during exer-
cise. These devices have a sensor that triggers an increase in heart rate 
in response to movement or increased respiratory rate. The sensitivity of 
the sensor is programmable, as is the maximum paced heart rate.
Early complications of permanent pacing include pneumothorax, car-
diac tamponade, infection and lead displacement. Late complications 
include infection (which usually necessitates removing the pacing sys-
tem), erosion of the generator or lead, chronic pain related to the implant 
site, and lead fracture due to mechanical fatigue.
Implantable cardiac debrillators
In addition to the functions of a permanent pacemaker, implantable 
cardiac debrillators (ICDs) can also detect and terminate life-threat-
ening ventricular tachyarrhythmias. ICDs are larger than pacemakers 
mainly because of the need for a large battery and capacitor to enable 
cardio version or debrillation. ICD leads are similar to pacing leads but 
have one or two shock coils along the length of the lead, used for deliver-
ing debrillation. ICDs treat ventricular tachyarrhythmias using overdrive 
pacing, cardioversion or debrillation. They are implanted in a simi-
lar manner to pacemakers and carry a similar risk of complications. In 
addition, patients can be prone to psychological problems and anxiety, 
particularly if they have experienced repeated shocks from their device.
The evidence-based indications for ICD implantation are shown in 
Box16.35. These can be divided into secondary prevention indications, 
when patients have already had a potentially life-threatening ventricular 
arrhythmia, and primary prevention indications, when patients are con-
sidered to be at signicant future risk of arrhythmic death. A common 
primary prevention indication is in patients with inherited conditions 
associated with a high risk of sudden cardiac death, such as long QT 
syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ven-
tricular cardiomyopathy. Treatment with ICDs is expensive and so the 
indications for which the devices are routinely implanted depend on the 
health-care resources available.
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) is a useful treatment for 
selected patients with heart failure, in whom cardiac function is 
impaired by the presence of left bundle branch block. This conduc-
tion defect is associated with poorly coordinated left ventricular con-
traction that can aggravate heart failure in susceptible patients. The 
systems used to deliver CRT comprise a right atrial lead, a right ven-
tricular lead and a third lead that is placed via the coronary sinus into 
one of the veins on the epicardial surface of the LV (see Fig. 16.28). 
Simultaneous septal and left ventricular epicardial pacing resynchro-
nises left ventricular contraction.
CRT improves symptoms and quality of life, and reduces mortality in 
patients with moderate to severe (NYHA class III–IV) heart failure who are 
in sinus rhythm, with left bundle branch block and left ventricular ejection 
fraction of 35% or less. CRT also prevents heart failure progression in similar 
patients with mild (NYHA class I–II) heart failure symptoms. These devices 
are more effective in patients in sinus rhythm than in those with AF. Most 
devices are also debrillators (CRT-D) because many patients with heart fail-
ure are predisposed to ventricular arrhythmias. CRT pacemakers (CRT-P) 
are used when the focus is palliation of symptoms rather than prolonging life.
Catheter ablation therapy
Catheter ablation therapy is the treatment of choice for patients with SVT 
or atrial utter, and is a useful treatment for some patients with AF or ven-
tricular arrhythmias (Fig. 16.52). It involves inserting a series of catheter 
16.34  International generic pacemaker code
Chamber paced
Chamber sensed
Response to sensing
O = none
O = none
O = none
A = atrium
A = atrium
T = triggered
V = ventricle
V = ventricle
I = inhibited
D = both
D = both
D = both
16.35  Key indications for implantable cardiac debrillator 
therapy
Primary prevention
 After myocardial infarction, if the left ventricular ejection fraction is < 30%
 Mild to moderate symptomatic heart failure on optimal drug therapy, with left 
ventricular ejection fraction < 35%
 Some patients with inherited cardiac conditions (long QT syndrome, 
cardiomyopathy)
Secondary prevention
 Survivors of ventricular brillation or ventricular tachycardia cardiac arrest not 
having a transient or reversible cause
 Ventricular tachycardia with haemodynamic compromise or signicant left 
ventricular impairment (left ventricular ejection fraction < 35%)
A
Trans-septal
puncture
Sinus node
AV node
Accessory
pathway
ablation via
catheter
B
Fig. 16.52 Radiofrequency ablation.
 = atrioventricular)

[[p468]]
424  CARDIOLOGY
electrodes into the heart through the venous system. These are used 
to record the activation sequence of the heart in sinus rhythm, during 
tachycardia and after pacing manoeuvres. Once the arrhythmia focus 
or circuit, such as an accessory pathway in WPW syndrome, has been 
identied, a catheter is used to ablate the culprit tissue. This can be 
done either by using heat, which is termed radiofrequency ablation, or 
by freezing, which is termed cryoablation. The procedure takes approx-
imately 1–4 hours and does not require a general anaesthetic, although 
the patient may experience some discomfort during the ablation proce-
dure. Serious complications are rare (< 1%) but include complete heart 
block requiring pacemaker implantation, and cardiac tamponade. For 
many arrhythmias, radiofrequency ablation is very attractive because it 
offers the prospect of a lifetime cure, thereby eliminating the need for 
long-term drug therapy.
The technique has revolutionised the management of many arrhythmias 
and is now the treatment of choice for AVNRT and AV re-entrant (acces-
sory pathway) tachycardias, when it is curative in over 90% of cases. Focal 
atrial tachycardias and atrial utter can also be treated by radiofrequency 
ablation, although some patients subsequently experience episodes of AF. 
Ablation is highly effective in patients with VT occurring in a structurally 
normal heart, and can be life-saving in patients with refractory VT due to 
ventricular scar or structural disease. Catheter ablation techniques are also 
employed to prevent AF. This involves ablation at two sites: the ostia of 
the pulmonary veins, from which ectopic beats may trigger paroxysms of 
arrhythmia, and in the LA itself, where re-entry circuits maintain AF, once 
established. This is effective at reducing episodes of AF in around 70%–
80% of younger patients with structurally normal hearts.
In patients with permanent AF and poor rate control, in whom drugs 
are ineffective or are not tolerated, rate control can be achieved by 
implantation of a permanent pacemaker, followed by ablation of the AV 
node to induce complete AV block and bradycardia, thus allowing the 
pacemaker to assume control of the heart rate.
Coronary artery disease
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the commonest cause of angina and 
acute coronary syndrome and the leading cause of death worldwide. It 
also has a devastating effect on quality of life. Disability-adjusted life years, 
a measure of healthy years of life lost, can be used to indicate the burden 
of disease rather than the resulting deaths. It has been estimated that 
CAD is responsible for 10% of disability-adjusted life years in low-income 
countries and 18% in high-income ones. In the UK, 1 in 3 men and 1 in 
4 women die from CAD, an estimated 188 000 people have a myocardial 
infarct each year, and approximately 2.3 million people are living with CAD. 
The death rates from CAD in the UK are among the highest in Western 
Europe (more than 70 000 people) but are falling, particularly in younger 
age groups; over the last 50 years, CAD mortality has more than halved. 
In Eastern Europe and much of Asia, the rates of CAD are rapidly rising. 
Occult CAD is common in those who present with other forms of athero-
sclerotic vascular disease, such as intermittent claudication or stroke, and 
is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in these patients.
Pathogenesis
In the vast majority of patients, CAD is caused by atherosclerosis 
(Box16.36) but rarely it can occur as the result of aortitis, vasculitis and 
autoimmune connective tissue diseases. Atherosclerosis is a progres-
sive inammatory disorder of the arterial wall that is characterised by 
focal lipid-rich deposits of atheroma that remain clinically silent until they 
become large enough to impair tissue perfusion, or until ulceration and 
disruption of the lesion occurs resulting in thrombotic occlusion or dis-
tal embolisation of the vessel. Atherosclerosis begins early in life with 
deposits of lipids in the vessel wall, which tend to occur at sites of altered 
arterial shear stress, such as bifurcations, and are associated with abnor-
malities of endothelial function at that site. Abnormalities of arterial func-
tion have been detected among high-risk children and adolescents, 
such as cigarette smokers and those with familial hyperlipidaemia or 
hypertension. Early lesions have been found in the arteries of victims 
of accidental death in the second and third decades of life but clinical 
manifestations often do not appear until the sixth, seventh or eighth 
decade. During evolution of an atherosclerotic plaque, monocytes and 
other inammatory cells bind to receptors expressed by endothelial 
cells. Subsequently, they migrate into the intima, and take up oxidised 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles by phagocytosis to become lipid-
laden macrophages or foam cells. Extracellular lipid pools appear in the 
intimal space when foam cells die and release their contents (Fig. 16.53). 
In response to cytokines and growth factors produced by activated mac-
rophages, smooth muscle cells migrate from the media of the arterial wall 
into the intima, and change from a contractile to a broblastic phenotype, 
which can stabilise the atherosclerotic lesion. If this is successful, the 
lipid core will be covered by smooth muscle cells and matrix, produc-
ing a stable atherosclerotic plaque that will remain asymptomatic until it 
becomes large enough to obstruct arterial ow.
In an established atherosclerotic plaque, macrophages mediate inam-
mation and smooth muscle cells promote repair. If inammation predom-
inates, the plaque becomes active or unstable and may be complicated 
by ulceration and thrombosis. Cytokines, such as interleukin-1, tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha, interferon-gamma, platelet-derived growth factors 
and matrix metalloproteinases, are released by activated macrophages. 
They cause the intimal smooth muscle cells overlying the plaque to become 
senescent and the collagen cross-links within the plaque to degrade. This 
results in thinning of the protective brous cap, making the lesion vulnera-
ble to mechanical stress that ultimately causes erosion, ssuring or rupture 
of the plaque surface (see Fig. 16.53). Any breach in the integrity of the 
plaque will expose its contents to blood and will trigger platelet aggrega-
tion and thrombosis that extend into the atheromatous plaque and the 
arterial lumen. This may cause partial or complete obstruction at the site 
of the lesion or distal embolisation, resulting in infarction or ischaemia of 
the affected organ. This common mechanism underlies acute coronary 
syndromes, as well as other manifestations of atherosclerotic disease such 
as lower limb ischaemia and stroke (Ch. 29).
The number and complexity of arterial plaques increase with age 
and risk factors (see below) but the rate of progression of individual 
plaques is variable. There is a complex and dynamic interaction between 
mechanical wall stress and atherosclerotic lesions. Vulnerable plaques 
are characterised by a lipid-rich core, a thin brocellular cap, speckled 
calcication and an increase in inammatory cells that release specic 
enzymes to degrade matrix proteins. In contrast, stable plaques are typ-
ied by a small lipid pool, a thick brous cap, heavy calcication and 
16.36  Coronary artery disease: clinical manifestations 
andpathology
Clinical problem
Pathology
Stable angina
Ischaemia due to xed atheromatous stenosis of 
one or more coronary arteries
Unstable angina
Ischaemia caused by dynamic complete or partial 
obstruction of a coronary artery due to plaque 
rupture or erosion with superimposed thrombosis
Myocardial infarction 
(type 1)
Myocardial necrosis caused by acute occlusion of 
a coronary artery due to plaque rupture or erosion 
with superimposed thrombosis
Myocardial infarction 
(type 2)
Supply demand imbalance where blood ow 
cannot meet the needs of the myocardium. This 
may be caused by xed atheromatous obstruction 
with high myocardial demand for blood
Heart failure
Myocardial dysfunction due to infarction or 
ischaemia
Arrhythmia
Altered conduction due to ischaemia or infarction
Sudden death
Ventricular arrhythmia, asystole or massive 
myocardial infarction

[[p469]]
Coronary artery disease  425
16
plentiful collagenous cross-links. Fissuring or rupture tends to occur 
at sites of maximal mechanical stress, particularly the margins of an 
eccentric plaque, and may be triggered by a surge in BP, such as dur-
ing exercise or emotional stress. Surprisingly, most plaque events are 
subclinical and heal spontaneously, although this may allow thrombus 
to be incorporated into the lesion, producing plaque growth and further 
obstruction to ow.
Atherosclerosis may induce complex changes in the media that lead to 
arterial remodelling. Some arterial segments may slowly constrict (nega-
tive remodelling), while others may gradually enlarge (positive remodelling). 
These changes are important because they may amplify or minimise the 
degree to which atheroma encroaches into the arterial lumen.
Many risk factors have been identied for atherosclerosis but the 
causes are incompletely understood, since unknown factors account for 
up to 40% of the variation in risk from one person to the next.
Age and sex
Age is the most powerful independent risk factor for atherosclerosis 
and sex also plays a role. Pre-menopausal women have lower rates 
of disease than men, although the sex difference disappears after the 
menopause. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is not effective in the 
prevention of CAD, and HRT in post-menopausal women is associated 
with an increased risk of cardiovascular events.
Genetics
Atherosclerotic CAD often runs in families and a positive family history is 
common in patients with early-onset disease (age < 50 in men and < 55 in 
women). Twin studies have shown that a monozygotic twin of an affected 
individual has an eightfold increased risk and a dizygotic twin a fourfold 
increased risk of dying from CAD, compared to the general population due 
to a combination of shared genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors. 
The most common risk factors, such as hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and 
diabetes mellitus, are inherited in a polygenic manner.
Smoking
There is a strong relationship between cigarette smoking and CAD, 
especially in younger (< 70 years) individuals, and this is the most impor-
tant modiable risk factor.
Hypertension
The incidence of atherosclerosis increases as BP rises, and this is related 
to systolic and diastolic BP, as well as pulse pressure. Antihypertensive 
therapy reduces cardiovascular mortality, stroke and heart failure.
Hypercholesterolaemia
The risk of atherosclerosis rises with serum cholesterol concentrations 
and lowering serum total and LDL cholesterol concentrations reduces 
the risk of cardiovascular events.
Diabetes mellitus
This is a potent risk factor for all forms of atherosclerosis, especially type 
2 diabetes mellitus. It is often associated with diffuse disease that is dif-
cult to treat. Insulin resistance (normal glucose homeostasis with high 
levels of insulin) is associated with obesity and physical inactivity, and is 
also a risk factor for CAD. Glucose intolerance makes a major contribu-
tion to the high incidence of CAD in people from South Asia and some 
other ethnic groups.
Haemostatic factors
Platelet activation and high plasma brinogen concentrations are asso-
ciated with an increased risk of coronary thrombosis, whereas antiphos-
pholipid antibodies are associated with recurrent arterial thromboses.
Physical activity
Regular exercise (brisk walking, cycling or swimming for 20 minutes two 
or three times a week) has a protective effect, whereas inactivity roughly 
doubles the risk of CAD and is a major risk factor for stroke.
Sequences in
progression
I
II
IV
V
VI
Nomenclature and
main histology
Type I (initial) lesion
Isolated macrophage
foam cells
Main 
growth
mechanism
Earliest
onset
Clinical
correlation
Type II (fatty streak) lesion
Mainly intracellular
lipid accumulation
Type III (intermediate) lesion
Type II changes and small
extracellular lipid pools
Type IV (atheroma) lesion
Type II changes and core
of extracellular lipid
Type V (fibroatheroma) lesion
Lipid core and fibrotic layer,
or multiple lipid cores and
fibrotic layers, or mainly
calcific, or mainly fibrotic
Type VI (complicated) lesion
Surface defect,
haematoma-haemorrhage,
thrombus
Thrombosis,
haematoma
Accelerated
smooth muscle
and collagen
increase
Growth mainly
by lipid
accumulation
From
fourth
decade
Clinically
silent
or overt
Clinically
silent
From
third
decade
From
first
decade
III
Fig. 16.53 The six stages of atherosclerosis: American Heart Association classication. From Stary HC, Chandler B, Dinsmore RE, et al. A denition of advanced types 
of atherosclerotic lesions and a histological classication of atherosclerosis. Circulation 1995; 92:1355–1374. © 1995 American Heart Association.

[[p470]]
426  CARDIOLOGY
Obesity
Obesity, particularly if central or truncal, is an independent risk factor, 
although it is often associated with other adverse factors such as hyper-
tension, diabetes mellitus and physical inactivity.
Alcohol
Excess alcohol consumption is associated with hypertension and cere-
brovascular disease.
Diet
Diets decient in fresh fruit, vegetables and polyunsaturated fatty acids 
are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. The 
introduction of a Mediterranean-style diet reduces cardiovascular events. 
However, dietary supplements, such as vitamins C and E, beta-carotene, 
folate and sh oils, do not reduce cardiovascular events and, in some 
cases, have been associated with harm.
Personality
While certain personality traits are associated with an increased risk, 
there is no evidence to support the popular belief that stress is a major 
cause of CAD.
Social deprivation
Social deprivation is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease. 
This may be partly due to associations with lifestyle risk factors, such 
as smoking and alcohol excess, which are more common in socially 
deprived individuals. Current guidelines recommend that treatment 
thresholds should be lowered for patients from socially deprived areas.
The effect of risk factors can be multiplicative rather than additive. 
People with a combination of risk factors are at greatest risk and so 
assessment should take account of all identiable risk factors. It is impor-
tant to distinguish between relative risk (the proportional increase in risk) 
and absolute risk (the actual chance of an event). For example, a man of 
35 years with a plasma cholesterol of 7 mmol/L (approximately 170 mg/
dL), who smokes 40 cigarettes a day, is much more likely to die from 
CAD within the next decade than a non-smoking man of the same age 
with a normal cholesterol, but the absolute likelihood of his dying during 
this time is small (high relative risk, low absolute risk).
Management
Two approaches can be employed. Primary prevention aims to introduce 
lifestyle changes or therapeutic interventions to prevent CAD and other 
forms of atherosclerosis in the whole population or in healthy individuals 
with an elevated risk of disease. Secondary prevention involves initiating 
treatment in patients who already have had an event, with the aim of 
reducing the risk of subsequent events. The distinction between primary 
and secondary prevention is increasingly seen as arbitrary since many 
people will have CAD despite having no symptoms or experienced any 
clinical events.
Primary prevention
The population-based strategy aims to modify the risk factors of the 
whole population through diet and lifestyle advice, on the basis that even 
a small reduction in smoking or average cholesterol, or modication of 
exercise and diet, will produce worthwhile benets (Box 16.37). Some 
risk factors, such as obesity and smoking, are also associated with a 
higher risk of other diseases and should be actively discouraged through 
public health measures. The effectiveness of this approach has been 
demonstrated by introduction of legislation to restrict smoking in public 
places, which has been associated with reductions in rates of MI.
The targeted strategy aims to identify and to treat high-risk individuals 
who have a combination of risk factors that can be quantied by com-
posite scoring systems. It is important to consider the absolute risk of 
atheromatous cardiovascular disease that an individual is facing before 
initiating treatment since this will help to determine whether the potential 
benets of intervention are likely to outweigh the expense, inconvenience 
and possible side-effects of treatment. For example, a 65-year-old man 
with an average BP of 150/90 mmHg, who smokes and has diabetes 
mellitus with a total:high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ratio of 8, 
has a 10-year risk of MI or stroke of 56%. Conversely, a 55-year-old 
woman who has an identical BP, is a non-smoker, does not have diabe-
tes mellitus, and has a total:HDL cholesterol ratio of 6 has a much better 
outlook, with a 10-year coronary MI or stroke risk of 5.7%. Lowering 
cholesterol will reduce the risk in both of these individuals by 30% and 
lowering BP will produce a further 20% reduction. In combination, both 
strategies would reduce the risk of an event from 56% to 25% in the male 
patient (treat 4 patients to prevent one event) and from 5.7% to 2.5% in 
the female patient (treat 40 patients to prevent one event). Thresholds 
for treatment vary in different countries. In the UK and North America, 
current guidelines recommend initiation of cholesterol and BP-lowering 
therapies in individuals with a 10-year cardiovascular risk of 7.5%–10%.
Secondary prevention
This involves targeting interventions at individuals who have had cardiovas-
cular disease. Patients who recover from a clinical event such as an MI are 
usually keen to help themselves and are particularly receptive to lifestyle 
advice, such as dietary modication and smoking cessation. Additional 
interventions that should be introduced in patients with angina pectoris or 
an acute coronary syndrome are discussed in more detail below.
Angina pectoris
Angina pectoris is a symptom complex caused by transient myocardial 
ischaemia, which occurs whenever there is an imbalance between myo-
cardial oxygen supply and demand (Box 16.38).
Pathogenesis
Coronary atherosclerosis is by far the most common cause of angina 
pectoris. Angina may also occur in aortic valve disease and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and when the coronary arteries are involved with vas-
culitis or aortitis. The underlying mechanisms and risk factors for athero-
sclerosis have already been discussed. Approximately 10% of patients 
who report stable angina on effort have normal coronary arteries on angi-
ography. The main causes are discussed in more detail below.
Coronary artery spasm
Angina may result from vasospasm of the coronary arteries. This may 
coexist with atherosclerosis, especially in unstable angina (see below), 
16.37  Population-based strategies to prevent coronary 
disease
 Do not smoke
 Take regular exercise (minimum of 20 mins, three times per week)
 Maintain an ‘ideal’ body weight
 Eat a mixed diet rich in fresh fruit and vegetables
 Aim to get no more than 10% of energy intake from saturated fat
16.38  Factors inuencing myocardial oxygen supply and 
demand
Oxygen demand: cardiac work
 Heart rate
 Blood pressure
 Myocardial contractility
 Left ventricular hypertrophy
 Valve disease
Oxygen supply: coronary blood ow*
 Duration of diastole
 Coronary perfusion pressure (aortic 
diastolic minus coronary sinus or right atrial 
diastolic pressure)
 Coronary vasomotor tone
 Oxygenation:
Haemoglobin
Oxygen saturation
*Coronary blood ow occurs mainly in diastole.

[[p471]]
Coronary artery disease  427
16
but may rarely occur as an isolated phenomenon in patients with normal 
coronary arteries on angiography. This is sometimes known as variant 
angina; when it is accompanied by transient ST elevation on the ECG, it 
is termed Prinzmetal’s angina.
Syndrome X and microvascular angina
The constellation of typical angina on effort and normal coronary arter-
ies on angiography with objective evidence of myocardial ischaemia 
on stress testing is sometimes known as Syndrome X. Many of these 
patients are women and the mechanisms of their symptoms are unclear. 
In a subset of patients, there is evidence of impaired myocardial vasodila-
tory reserve giving rise to the term microvascular angina. These disorders 
are poorly understood but carry a good prognosis and respond variably 
to anti-anginal therapy.
Other causes
Angina can occur in association with aortic stenosis, hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy and aortitis, all of which are discussed in 
more detail later in this chapter. It may also rarely be found in association 
with some types of systemic vasculitis (Ch. 26).
Clinical features
The history is the most important factor in making the diagnosis. Stable 
angina is categorised as typical angina, atypical angina or non-anginal 
chest pain (Box 16.39; see also Fig. 9.1). Some patients nd the dis-
comfort comes when they start walking and that later it does not return 
despite greater effort (‘warm-up angina’). The Canadian Cardiovascular 
Society (CCS) scoring system is commonly used to grade the severity of 
angina (Box 16.40). This is of clinical value, not only in documenting the 
severity of angina but also in assessing prognosis.
Physical examination is frequently unremarkable but should include a 
careful search for an ejection systolic murmur (particularly aortic steno-
sis and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy), important risk factors 
(hypertension, diabetes mellitus), left ventricular dysfunction (cardiomeg-
aly, gallop rhythm), other manifestations of arterial disease (carotid bruits, 
peripheral arterial disease), and unrelated conditions that may exacer-
bate angina (anaemia, thyrotoxicosis).
Investigations
Stress testing and non-invasive imaging are advisable to conrm the diag-
nosis and to risk stratify patients with possible angina (see Box16.39). 
An algorithm for the investigation and treatment of patients with stable 
angina is shown in Fig. 16.54. An exercise ECG is commonly performed 
using a standard treadmill or bicycle ergometer protocol. while monitor-
ing the patient’s pulse, BP and general condition. Planar or down-slop-
ing ST segment depression of 1 mm or more is indicative of ischaemia 
(Fig. 16.55). Up-sloping ST depression is less specic; it often occurs 
in normal individuals and false-positive results can occur with digoxin 
therapy, left ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branch block and WPW 
syndrome. Overall, the exercise ECG conrms the history of exertional 
angina, provides an objective measure of the patient’s exercise tolerance 
and is indicative of the underlying disease severity (Fig. 16.56) that can 
identify high-risk individuals with severe coronary disease in combination 
with other clinical features (Box 16.41). However, exercise testing may 
be normal in a substantial proportion of patients with CAD or may be 
inconclusive because of inadequate exercise tolerance due to reduced 
mobility or other non-cardiac problems.
If the diagnosis is unclear following the investigations listed above, 
CT coronary angiography is the imaging investigation of rst choice. It 
claries the diagnosis and guides the use of preventative and anti-anginal 
therapies. It also serves as an excellent guide to the appropriate use of 
invasive cardiac catheterisation, reducing its use in those with normal 
coronary arteries (see Fig. 16.13) and targeting it to those with signi-
cant disease (see Fig. 16.54). Its use is also associated with a marked 
reduction in the future risk of MI, likely due to better targeted preventative 
interventions in those with previously unrecognised CAD.
In patients with known CAD, further imaging with myocardial per-
fusion scanning or stress echocardiography is indicated. A perfusion 
defect present during stress but not at rest provides evidence of revers-
ible myocardial ischaemia (Fig. 16.57), whereas a persistent perfusion 
defect seen during both phases of the study is usually indicative of pre-
vious MI.
Coronary angiography provides detailed anatomical information about 
the extent and nature of CAD (see Fig. 16.15). It is usually performed 
when coronary artery bypass graft surgery or percutaneous coronary 
intervention is being considered.
Management
This should begin with a careful explanation of the problem and a dis-
cussion of the lifestyle and medical interventions that can be deployed to 
relieve symptoms and improve prognosis (Box 16.42). Anxiety and mis-
conceptions often contribute to disability. For example, some patients 
avoid all forms of exertion because they believe that each attack of angina 
is a ‘mini-heart attack’ that results in permanent damage. Education and 
reassurance can dispel these misconceptions and make a huge differ-
ence to the patient’s quality of life.
The principles of management involve:
 identication and treatment of risk factors
 advice on smoking cessation
 introduction of drug treatment for symptom control
 a careful assessment of the extent and severity of CAD
 identication of high-risk patients for treatment to improve life 
expectancy.
All patients with angina secondary to CAD should receive antiplatelet 
therapy. Low-dose (75 mg) aspirin should be prescribed and continued 
16.39  Classication of angina pectoris and chest pain
Three characteristic features of angina
1.  Constricting discomfort in the centre of the chest, or in the neck, 
shoulders, jaw or arms
2. Precipitated by physical exertion
3. Relieved by rest (or GTN) within 5 minutes
Classication
 Typical angina: All three features
 Atypical angina: Two features
 Non-anginal chest pain: One or no features
NICE classication
 Possible angina: Typical angina, atypical angina or non-anginal chest pain with 
an abnormal resting 12-lead ECG
 Non-anginal chest pain: Non-anginal chest pain with a normal resting 12-lead 
ECG
(ECG = electrocardiogram; GTN = glyceryl trinitrate; NICE = National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence)
16.40  Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) angina score
Class I
 Angina only during strenuous or prolonged physical activity
Class II
 Slight limitation, with angina only during vigorous physical activity
Class III
 Moderate limitation where symptoms occur with everyday activities
Class IV
 Inability to perform any activity without angina or angina at rest, i.e. severe 
limitation

[[p472]]
428  CARDIOLOGY
indenitely since it reduces the risk of MI. Clopidogrel (75 mg daily) is 
an equally effective alternative if aspirin causes dyspepsia or other side- 
effects. Similarly, all patients should be prescribed a statin, even if the 
serum cholesterol concentration is normal.
Anti-anginal drug therapy
The goal of anti-anginal therapy is to control symptoms using a regi-
men that is as simple as possible and does not cause side-effects. Five 
main groups of drug are used in the treatment of angina but there is 
little evidence that one group is more effective than another. It is con-
ventional to start therapy with sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) and a 
β-blocker, and then add a calcium channel antagonist or a long-act-
ing nitrate if needed. If the combination of two drugs fails to achieve 
an acceptable symptomatic response, the addition of further classes 
of drug has modest additional benets and coronary revascularisation 
should be considered.
Nitrates
Nitrates act directly on vascular smooth muscle to produce venous 
and arteriolar dilatation. Several preparations are available, as shown in 
Box 16.43. They help angina by lowering preload and afterload, which 
reduces myocardial oxygen demand, and by increasing myocardial oxy-
gen supply through coronary vasodilatation. Sublingual GTN, admin-
istered from a metered-dose aerosol (400 µg per spray) or as a tablet 
(300 or 500 µg), is indicated for acute attacks and relieves symptoms 
in 2–3 minutes. It can also be used before taking exercise to avoid pro-
voking symptoms. Sublingual GTN has a short duration of action and 
side-effects include headache, symptomatic hypotension and, rarely, 
syncope. A more prolonged therapeutic effect can be achieved by giving 
GTN transcutaneously as a patch (5–10 mg daily) or as a slow-release 
Clinical consultation
History and examination
Blood tests and 12-lead ECG
Consider chest X-ray and
echocardiography
Consider exercise ECG
Clear diagnosis of angina?
Non-anginal chest pain
and normal ECG?
Yes
Yes
No
No
CT coronary angiography
Non-obstructive
coronary artery
disease
Consider
preventative therapies
No
coronary artery
disease
Consider
alternative diagnoses
Obstructive
coronary artery
disease
Preventative therapies
Anti-anginal therapy
Consider invasive
coronary angiography
± revascularisation
A
B
Fig. 16.54 
and possible angina. For patients with known coronary artery disease, further stress imaging (echocardiography, radionuclide perfusion or magnetic resonance perfusion) rather 
of ‘soft’ lipid-rich plaque (yellow arrow) and extensive calcied coronary atheroma (red arrow).
B
C
A
Fig. 16.55 Forms of exercise-induced ST depression.

[[p473]]
Coronary artery disease  429
16
buccal tablet (1–5 mg 4 times daily). Isosorbide dinitrate (10–20 mg 3 
times daily) and isosorbide mononitrate (20–60 mg once or twice daily) 
can be given by mouth, unlike GTN, which undergoes extensive metab-
olism in the liver. Headache is common with oral nitrates but tends to 
diminish if the patient perseveres with the treatment. Continuous nitrate 
therapy can cause pharmacological tolerance but this can be avoided by 
a 6–8-hour nitrate-free period, best achieved at night when the patient 
is inactive. If nocturnal angina is a predominant symptom, long-acting 
nitrates can be taken at the end of the day.
Beta-blockers
These lower myocardial oxygen demand by reducing heart rate, BP 
and myocardial contractility, but they may provoke bronchospasm in 
patients with asthma. Dosages of commonly used beta-blockers are 
shown in Box 16.18. In theory, non-selective β-blockers may aggravate 
coronary vasospasm by blocking coronary artery β2-adrenoceptors, 
and so a once-daily cardioselective preparation such as slow-release 
metoprolol (50–200 mg daily) or bisoprolol (5–15 mg daily) is preferable. 
Beta-blockers should not be withdrawn abruptly, as rebound effects may 
precipitate dangerous arrhythmias, worsening angina or precipitate MI: 
the β-blocker withdrawal syndrome.
Calcium channel antagonists
These drugs lower myocardial oxygen demand by reducing BP and 
myocardial contractility. Since dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, such 
as nifedipine and amlodipine, may cause a reex tachycardia, it is best 
to use them in combination with a β-blocker. In contrast, verapamil and 
diltiazem can be used as monotherapy because they slow SA node 
V3
V6
V5
V2
V1
V4
Fig. 16.56 A positive exercise test (chest leads only). The resting 12-lead ECG 
shows some minor T-wave changes in the inferolateral leads but is otherwise normal. 
After 3 minutes’ exercise on a treadmill, there is marked planar ST depression in 
leads V4 and V5 (right-hand offset). Subsequent coronary angiography revealed critical 
three-vessel coronary artery disease.
16.41  Risk stratication in patients with stable angina1
High risk
Low risk
Recent-onset symptoms  
(< 6 months)
Long-standing symptoms
Class II to IV symptoms†
Class I symptoms2
Diabetes mellitus
Comorbidity
Post-infarct angina
Predictable exertional angina
Ischaemia at low workload
Ischaemia only at high workload
Left main or three-vessel disease
Single-vessel or two-vessel disease
Poor left ventricular function
Good left ventricular function
1Patients may fall between these two categories. 2Canadian Cardiovascular Society Classication.
At rest
During stress
Fig. 16.57 A myocardial perfusion scan showing reversible anterior myocardial 
ischaemia. The images are cross-sectional tomograms of the left ventricle. The 
resting scans (left) show even uptake of the 99technetium-labelled tetrofosmin and look 
like doughnuts. During stress there is reduced uptake of technetium, particularly along 
the anterior wall (arrows), and the scans look like crescents (right).
16.42  Advice to patients with stable angina
 Do not smoke
 Aim for an ideal body weight
 Take regular exercise (exercise up to, but not beyond, the point of chest 
discomfort is benecial and may promote collateral vessels)
 Avoid severe unaccustomed exertion, and vigorous exercise after a heavy meal 
or in very cold weather
 Take sublingual nitrate before undertaking exertion that may induce angina
16.43  Duration of action of some nitrate preparations
Preparation
Peak action
Duration of action
Sublingual GTN
4–8 mins
10–30 mins
Buccal GTN
4–10 mins
30–300 mins
Transdermal GTN
1–3hrs
Up to 24hrs
Oral isosorbide 
dinitrate
45–120 mins
2–6hrs
Oral isosorbide 
mononitrate
45–120 mins
6–10hrs
(GTN = glyceryl trinitrate)

[[p474]]
430  CARDIOLOGY
ring, inhibit conduction through the AV node and tend to cause brady-
cardia. They are particularly useful when β-blockers are contraindicated. 
Calcium channel antagonists reduce myocardial contractility and must 
be used with care in patients with poor LV function, since they can aggra-
vate or precipitate heart failure. Other unwanted effects include periph-
eral oedema, ushing, headache and dizziness (Box 16.44).
Potassium channel activators
Nicorandil (10–30 mg twice daily orally) is the only drug in this class that 
is currently available for clinical use. It acts as a vasodilator with effects 
on the arterial and venous systems, and has the advantage that it does 
not exhibit the tolerance seen with nitrates.
If channel antagonist
Ivabradine (initial dose 2.5–5 mg twice daily orally) is the rst in this class 
of drug. It induces bradycardia by modulating ion channels in the sinus 
node. It does not inhibit myocardial contractility and appears to be safe 
in patients with heart failure.
Ranolazine
Ranolazine (initial dose 375 mg twice daily) inhibits the late inward sodium 
current in coronary artery smooth muscle cells, with a secondary effect 
on calcium ux and vascular tone, reducing angina symptoms.
Non-pharmacological treatments
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) involves passing a ne guide-
wire across a coronary stenosis under radiographic control and using 
it to position a balloon, which is then inated to dilate the stenosis (Fig. 
16.58). This can be combined with deployment of a coronary stent, 
which is a piece of metallic ‘scaffolding’ that can be impregnated with 
drugs with antiproliferative properties and that helps to maximise and 
maintain dilatation of a stenosed vessel. The routine use of stents in 
appropriate vessels reduces both acute complications and the incidence 
of clinically important restenosis (Fig. 16.59).
Treatment with PCI often provides excellent symptom control but 
it does not reduce MI or improve survival in patients with chronic 
stable angina. It is mainly used in single- or two-vessel disease. 
Stenoses in bypass grafts can be dilated, as well as those in the 
native coronary arteries. The technique is often used to provide 
16.44  Calcium channel antagonists used for the treatment 
ofangina
Drug
Dose
Feature
Nifedipine
5–20 mg 3 times daily*
May cause marked 
tachycardia
Nicardipine
20–40 mg 3 times daily
May cause less myocardial 
depression than the other 
calcium antagonists
Amlodipine
2.5–10 mg daily
Long-acting
Verapamil
40–80 mg 3 times daily*
Commonly causes 
constipation; useful anti-
arrhythmic properties
Diltiazem
60–120 mg 3 times daily*
Similar anti-arrhythmic 
properties to verapamil
*Once- or twice-daily sustained-release preparations are available.
1
2
3
Fig. 16.58 Percutaneous coronary intervention. A guidewire is advanced from 
the radial (or femoral) artery to the coronary artery under radiographic control (1). A 
ne balloon catheter is then advanced over the guidewire to the stenotic coronary 
artery and the balloon is inated to dilate the stenosis (2). When this has been 
achieved, a stent is usually placed at the site of the stenosis to maintain patency of 
the artery (3) (see text for more details).
A
B
C
Fig. 16.59 Primary percutaneous coronary intervention.

[[p475]]
Coronary artery disease  431
16
palliative therapy for patients with recurrent angina after coronary artery 
bypass grafting.
The main acute complications of PCI are occlusion of the coronary 
artery by thrombus or a loose ap of intima (coronary artery dissection), 
and consequent MI. This occurs in about 2%–5% of procedures and 
can often be corrected by further intervention, although emergency cor-
onary artery bypass grafting may occasionally be required. Mild myo-
cardial damage, as indicated by elevation of cardiac troponin, occurs 
in up to 25%–30% of cases. The main long-term complication of PCI is 
restenosis, in up to one-third of cases. This is due to a combination of 
elastic recoil and smooth muscle proliferation and tends to occur within 
3 months. Stenting substantially reduces the risk of restenosis, proba-
bly because it allows the operator to achieve more complete dilatation. 
Drug-eluting stents reduce this risk further by allowing an antiproliferative 
drug, such as sirolimus or paclitaxel, to elute slowly from the coating and 
prevent neo-intimal hyperplasia and in-stent restenosis. These are espe-
cially indicated in patients with diabetes, or in arteries with long calcic 
lesions or small diameters. Recurrent angina (affecting up to 5%–10% of 
patients at 6 months) may require further PCI or bypass grafting.
The risk of complications and the likely success of the procedure are 
closely related to the complexity of the disease, the experience of the 
operator and the presence of important comorbidity, such as diabetes 
and peripheral arterial disease. A good outcome is less likely if the target 
lesion is complex, long, eccentric or calcied, lies on a bend or within a 
tortuous vessel, involves a branch or contains thrombus.
Adjunctive therapy with a potent platelet inhibitor such as the P2Y12 
receptor antagonists (clopidogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor) in combination 
with aspirin and heparin improves the outcome following PCI.
Coronary artery bypass grafting
The internal mammary arteries, radial arteries or reversed segments of 
the patient’s own saphenous vein can be used to bypass coronary artery 
stenoses (Fig. 16.60). This usually involves major surgery under cardio-
pulmonary bypass but, in some cases, grafts can be applied to the beat-
ing heart: ‘off-pump’ surgery. The operative mortality is approximately 
1.5% but risks are higher in older patients, those with poor left ventricular 
function and those with signicant comorbidity, such as renal failure.
Approximately 90% of patients are free of angina 1 year after coronary 
artery bypass grafting (CABG), but fewer than 60% of patients are asymp-
tomatic after 5 or more years. Early post-operative angina is usually due 
to graft failure arising from technical problems during the operation, or 
poor ‘run-off’ due to disease in the distal native coronary vessels. Late 
recurrence of angina may be caused by progressive disease in the native 
coronary arteries or graft degeneration. Fewer than 50% of vein grafts 
are patent 10 years after surgery. Arterial grafts have a much better long-
term patency rate with more than 80% of internal mammary artery grafts 
patent at 10 years. This has led many surgeons to consider total arte-
rial revascularisation during CABG surgery. Aspirin (75–150 mg daily) and 
clopidogrel (75 mg daily) both improve graft patency, and one or the other 
should be prescribed indenitely. Intensive lipid-lowering therapy slows the 
progression of disease in the native coronary arteries and bypass grafts 
and reduces clinical cardiovascular events. There is substantial excess 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients who continue to smoke 
after bypass grafting. Persistent smokers are twice as likely to die in the 10 
years following surgery than those who give up at surgery.
Survival is improved by CABG in symptomatic patients with left main 
stem stenosis or three-vessel coronary disease when the LAD, CX and 
right coronary arteries are involved, or two-vessel disease involving the 
proximal LAD coronary artery. Improvement in survival is most marked 
in those with impaired left ventricular function or positive stress testing 
prior to surgery and in those who have undergone left internal mammary 
artery grafting.
Neurological complications are common, with a 1%–5% risk of peri-
operative stroke. Between 30% and 80% of patients develop short-
term cognitive impairment that typically resolves within 6 months. There 
are also reports of long-term cognitive decline that may be evident in 
more than 30% of patients at 5 years. PCI and CABG are compared in 
Box16.45
Prognosis
The prognosis of CAD is related to the burden of CAD and the degree 
of left ventricular dysfunction. A patient with single-vessel disease and 
good left ventricular function has a 5-year survival of more than 90%. In 
contrast, a patient with severe left ventricular dysfunction and extensive 
three-vessel disease has a 5-year survival of less than 30% unless revas-
cularisation is performed. Although symptoms are a poor guide to prog-
nosis, the 5-year mortality of patients with severe angina (CCS angina 
scale III or IV, see Box 16.40) is nearly double that of patients with mild 
symptoms.
Some considerations specic to angina in old age are listed in 
Box16.46
Acute coronary syndrome
Acute coronary syndrome is a term that encompasses both unstable 
angina and myocardial infarction. Unstable angina is characterised by 
Saphenous
vein bypass
graft
Blocked
artery
Internal mammary
artery bypass graft
A
LIMA-LAD
SVG-RCA
SVG-OM
SVG-LADD
B
Fig. 16.60 Coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
arteries are bypassed using saphenous vein grafts connected to the aorta or by 
multidetector CT of the heart. The image shows the patent saphenous vein grafts 
(SVG) to the right coronary artery (RCA), obtuse marginal branch (OM) and diagonal 
branch (LADD), and left internal mammary artery graft (LIMA) to the left anterior 
descending (LAD) coronary artery.

[[p476]]
432  CARDIOLOGY
new-onset or rapidly worsening angina (crescendo angina), angina on 
minimal exertion or angina at rest in the absence of myocardial injury. 
Myocardial infarction (MI) is distinguished from unstable angina by the 
occurrence of myocardial necrosis and is diagnosed when myocardial 
injury occurs in the presence of clinical evidence of acute myocardial 
ischaemia (Box 16.47). The diagnosis of a prior MI can be made when 
any one of the features shown in Box 16.48 is present.
Acute coronary syndrome may present as a new phenomenon in 
patients with no previous history of heart disease or against a background 
of chronic stable angina. Approximately 12% of patients with acute coro-
nary syndrome die within 1 month and 20% within 6 months of the index 
event. The risk markers that are indicative of an adverse prognosis include 
recurrent ischaemia, extensive ECG changes at rest or during pain, raised 
plasma troponin I or T concentrations, arrhythmias and haemodynamic 
complications (hypotension, mitral regurgitation) during episodes of ischae-
mia. Careful assessment and risk stratication are important because these 
guide the use of more complex pharmacological and interventional treat-
ments (Fig. 16.61 and see Fig. 16.69), which can improve outcome.
Pathogenesis
Acute coronary syndrome almost always occurs in patients who have 
coronary atherosclerosis. The culprit lesion that precipitates the acute 
event is usually a complex ulcerated or ssured atheromatous plaque 
with adherent platelet-rich thrombus and local coronary artery spasm 
(see Fig. 16.53). These vascular changes during an acute coronary 
syndrome are dynamic, such that the degree of obstruction may either 
increase, leading to complete vessel occlusion, or regress due to the 
effects of platelet disaggregation and endogenous brinolysis.
Myocardial infarction
The criteria for diagnosis classication of acute MI and classication of 
subtypes of MI are shown in Box 16.47. In acute type 1 MI, occlusive 
thrombus is present at the site of rupture or erosion of an atheroma-
tous plaque; so-called atherothrombosis. The thrombus may undergo 
spontaneous lysis over the course of the next few days, although irre-
versible myocardial damage will have occurred. Without treatment, the 
artery responsible for the type 1 MI remains permanently occluded in 
20%–30% of patients. Since the process of infarction progresses over 
several hours (Fig. 16.62), most patients present when it is still possible 
to salvage myocardium and improve outcome.
16.46  Angina in old age
 Incidence: coronary artery disease increases in old age and affects women 
almost as often as men.
 Comorbid conditions: anaemia and thyroid disease are common and may 
worsen angina.
 Calcic aortic stenosis: common and should be sought in all older people with 
angina.
 Atypical presentations: when myocardial ischaemia occurs, age-related 
changes in myocardial compliance and diastolic relaxation can cause the 
presentation to be with symptoms of heart failure, such as breathlessness, 
rather than with chest discomfort.
 Angioplasty and coronary artery bypass surgery: provide symptomatic relief, 
although with increased procedure-related morbidity and mortality. Outcome is 
determined by the number of diseased vessels, severity of cardiac dysfunction 
and the number of concomitant diseases, as much as by age itself.
16.47  Classication and criteria for diagnosis of acute 
myocardial infarction
Criteria for acute myocardial infarction
The term acute myocardial infarction (MI) should be used when there is acute 
myocardial injury with clinical evidence of acute myocardial ischaemia and with 
detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac troponin values with at least one value 
above the 99th centile upper reference limit and at least one of the following:
 Symptoms of myocardial ischaemia
 New ischaemic ECG changes
 Development of pathological Q waves
 Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion 
abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischaemic aetiology
 Identication of a coronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy
Classication of acute myocardial infarction
 Type 1 MI: Acute atherothrombosis in the artery supplying the infarcted 
myocardium
 Type 2 MI: An imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand 
unrelated to acute atherothrombosis
 Type 3 MI: Cardiac death in patients with symptoms suggestive of myocardial 
ischaemia and presumed new ischaemic ECG changes before cardiac troponin 
values become available or abnormal
 Type 4 MI: MI caused during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI; type 
4a). Other types include stent thrombosis (type 4b) and restenosis (type 4c) and 
consistent with type 1 MI
 Type 5 MI: MI caused during coronary artery bypass grafting
Coronary procedure-related MI ≤ 48 hours after the index procedure is 
arbitrarily dened by an elevation of cardiac troponin values > 5× for type 4a MI 
and > 10× for type 5 MI of the 99th centile upper reference limit in patients with 
normal baseline values together with at least one of the following:
 New ischaemic ECG changes (this criterion is related to type 4a MI only)
 Development of new pathological Q waves
 Imaging evidence of loss of viable myocardium that is presumed to be new and 
consistent with an ischaemic aetiology
 Angiographic ndings consistent with a procedural ow-limiting complication 
such as coronary dissection, occlusion of a major epicardial artery or graft, side-
branch occlusion-thrombus, disruption of collateral ow or distal embolisation
Adapted from Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal denition of myocardial 
infarction. Eur Heart J 2019; 40: 237–269.
16.48  Criteria for diagnosis of a previously unrecognised 
myocardial infarction
 Abnormal Q waves with or without symptoms in the absence of non-ischaemic 
causes
 Imaging evidence of loss of viable myocardium in a pattern consistent with 
ischaemic aetiology
 Patho-anatomical ndings of a prior MI
Adapted from Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal denition of myocardial 
infarction. Eur Heart J 2019; 40: 237–269.
16.45  Comparison of percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI)and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
PCI
CABG
Death
< 0.5%
<  1.5%
Myocardial 
infarction*
2%
10%
Hospital stay
6–18hrs
5–8 days
Return to work
2–5 days
6–12 weeks
Recurrent angina
15%–20% at 6 
months
10% at 1 year
Repeat 
revascularisation
10%–20% at 2 years
2% at 2 years
Neurological 
complications
Rare
Common (see text)
Other complications
Emergency CABG
Vascular damage 
related to access site
Diffuse myocardial 
damage
Infection (chest, 
wound)
Wound pain
*Dened as CK-MB > 2× normal

[[p477]]
Coronary artery disease  433
16
Myocardial infarction may also occur as the result of an imbalance 
between the blood supply and metabolic demands of the heart (type 
2 MI). This may occur because of the presence of CAD and major 
non-cardiac stress, such as sepsis in a patient with three-vessel CAD, 
or because there is overwhelming demand in the presence of unob-
structed coronary arteries, such as an excessively fast heart rate from 
a primary arrhythmia. For the diagnosis of type 2 MI, there needs to 
be clinical evidence of ischaemia, such as ECG changes or symptoms 
of chest pain. This should be distinguished from myocardial injury 
where there is evidence of elevated cardiac troponin concentration 
(myocardial necrosis) without evidence of myocardial ischaemia, such 
as occurs in myocarditis. Myocardial injury can be acute or chronic 
depending upon its underlying cause.
The term type 3 MI is used to describe the situation where there is 
sudden death presumed to be due to MI. The terms type 4 and type 5 
MI are used to describe the situations where MI occurs during or follow-
ing the conduct of the coronary revascularisation procedures PCI and 
CABG, respectively. In these situations, clinical evidence of ischaemia is 
required to distinguish MI from procedure-related myocardial injury.
Clinical features
The differential diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome is wide and includes 
most causes of central chest pain or collapse. Chest pain at rest is the car-
dinal symptom but breathlessness, vomiting and collapse are also com-
mon features (Box 16.49). The pain occurs in the same sites as angina but 
is usually more severe and lasts longer; it is often described as a tightness, 
heaviness or constriction in the chest. In acute MI, the pain can be excru-
ciating, and the patient’s expression and pallor may vividly convey the seri-
ousness of the situation. Most patients are breathless and, in some, this 
is the only symptom. Painless or ‘silent’ MI may also occur and is particu-
larly common in older patients or those with diabetes mellitus. If syncope 
occurs, it is usually caused by an arrhythmia or profound hypotension. 
Vomiting and sinus bradycardia are often due to vagal stimulation and are 
particularly common in patients with inferior MI. Nausea and vomiting may 
also be caused or aggravated by opiates given for pain relief. Sometimes 
1. Find points for each predictive factor
2. Sum points for all predictive factors
Killip
class
Points
I
II
III
IV
0
20
39
59
SBP
(mmHg)
Points
≤ 80
80–99
100–119
120–139
58
53
43
34
140–159
24
160–199
10
0
≥ 200
Heart rate
(beats/min)
Points
≤ 50
50–69
70–89
90–109
0
3
9
15
24
110–149
38
150–199
46
≥ 200
Age
(years)
Points
≤ 30
30–39
40–49
50–59
0
8
25
41
58
60–69
75
70–79
91
80–89
100
≥ 90
Serum
creatinine
level
(µmol/L)
Killip
class
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
SBP
Heart
rate
Age
Creatinine
level
Cardiac
arrest at
admission
ST-segment
deviation
=
Elevated
cardiac 
biomarker
concentrations
Total
points
3. Look up risk corresponding to total points
Total points
Probability of
in-hospital 
death (%)
≤ 60
≤ 0.2
70
0.3
80
0.4
90
0.6
100
0.8
110
1.1
120
1.6
130
2.1
140
2.9
150
3.9
160
5.4
170
7.3
180
9.8
190
13
200
18
210
23
220
29
230
36
240 ≥ 250
44 ≥ 52
Other risk
factors
Cardiac arrest at
admission
39
ST-segment 
deviation
28
Elevated cardiac
biomarker
concentrations
14
Points
Points
0–34
35–70
71–105
106–140
1
4
7
10
13
141–176
21
177–353
28
≥ 353
Examples
eatinine level of
76 µmol/L, did not have a cardiac arrest at admission but did have ST-segment deviation and elevated cardiac troponin. His
score would be: 20 + 53 + 15 + 58 + 7 + 0 + 28 + 14 = 195. This gives about a 16% risk of having an in-hospital death.
Similarly, a patient with Killip class I, SBP of 80 mmHg, heart rate of 60 beats/min, who is 55 years of age, has a serum
creatinine level of 30 µmol/L, and no risk factors would have the following score: 0 + 58 + 3 + 41 + 1 = 103. This gives
about a 0.9% risk of having an in-hospital death.
Fig. 16.61 Risk stratication in the acute coronary syndrome: the GRACE score. Killip class refers to a categorisation of the severity of heart failure based on easily 
obtained clinical signs. The main clinical features are as follows: class I = no heart failure; class II = crackles audible halfway up the chest; class III = crackles heard in all 
the lung elds; class IV = cardiogenic shock. To convert creatinine in µmol/L to mg/dL, divide by 88.4. (SBP = systolic blood pressure) From Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network (SIGN) Guideline no. 93 – Acute coronary syndromes; updated February 2013
Ischaemia
Infarction
4 hours
8 hours
1 hour
Fig. 16.62 The time course of myocardial infarction. The relative proportion of 
ischaemic, infarcting and infarcted tissue slowly changes over a period of 12 hours. In 
the early stages of myocardial infarction, a signicant proportion of the myocardium 
in jeopardy is potentially salvageable.

[[p478]]
434  CARDIOLOGY
infarction occurs in the absence of physical signs. Sudden death, from 
ventricular brillation or asystole, may occur immediately and often within 
the rst hour. If the patient survives this most critical stage, the liability 
to dangerous arrhythmias remains, but diminishes as each hour goes 
by. It is vital that patients know not to delay calling for help if symptoms 
occur. Complications may occur in all forms of acute coronary syndrome 
but have become less frequent in the modern era of immediate or early 
coronary revascularisation. Specic complications of acute coronary syn-
dromes and their management are discussed below.
Arrhythmias
Arrhythmias are common in patients with acute coronary syndrome 
(Box16.50) but are often transient and of no haemodynamic or prog-
nostic importance. The risk of arrhythmia can be minimised by ade-
quate pain relief, rest and the correction of hypokalaemia. VF occurs 
in 5%–10% of patients who reach hospital and is thought to be the 
major cause of death in those who die before receiving medical atten-
tion. Prompt debrillation restores sinus rhythm and is life-saving. The 
prognosis of patients with early VF (within the rst 48 hours) who are 
successfully and promptly resuscitated is identical to that of patients 
who do not suffer VF. The presence of ventricular arrhythmias during 
the convalescent phase of acute coronary syndrome may be a marker 
of poor ventricular function and may herald sudden death. Selected 
patients may benet from electrophysiological testing and specic 
anti-arrhythmic therapy, including ICDs, as discussed in the previous 
section on cardiac arrhythmias. AF is a common but frequently tran-
sient arrhythmia, and usually does not require emergency treatment. 
However, if it causes a rapid ventricular rate with hypotension or circu-
latory collapse, prompt cardioversion is essential. In other situations, 
digoxin or a β-blocker is usually the treatment of choice. AF may be a 
feature of impending or overt left ventricular failure, and therapy may 
be ineffective if heart failure is not recognised and treated appropri-
ately. Anticoagulation is required if AF persists. Bradycardia may occur 
but does not require treatment unless there is hypotension or haemo-
dynamic deterioration, in which case atropine (0.6–1.2 mg IV) may be 
given. Inferior MI may be complicated by AV block, which is usually 
temporary and often resolves following reperfusion therapy. If there is 
clinical deterioration due to second-degree or complete AV block, a 
temporary pacemaker should be considered. AV block complicating 
anterior infarction is more serious because asystole may suddenly 
supervene. A prophylactic temporary pacemaker should be inserted 
in these patients.
Recurrent angina
Patients who develop recurrent angina at rest or on minimal exertion 
following an acute coronary syndrome are at high risk and should be 
considered for prompt coronary angiography with a view to revascular-
isation. Patients with dynamic ECG changes and ongoing pain should 
be treated with intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists 
(tiroban 400 ng/kg/min for 30 min, then 100 ng/kg/min for 48 hrs, or 
abciximab, initially 180 μg/kg, then 2 μg/kg/min for up to 72 hrs). Patients 
with resistant pain or marked haemodynamic changes should be consid-
ered for intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation and emergency coronary 
revascularisation. Post-infarct angina occurs in up to 50% of patients 
treated with thrombolysis. Most patients have a residual stenosis in the 
infarct-related vessel, despite successful thrombolysis, and this may 
cause angina if there is still viable myocardium downstream. For this rea-
son, all patients who have received successful thrombolysis should be 
considered for early (within the rst 24 hours) coronary angiography with 
a view to coronary revascularisation.
Acute heart failure
Acute heart failure usually reects extensive myocardial damage and is asso-
ciated with a poor prognosis. All the other complications of MI are more likely 
to occur when acute heart failure is present. The assessment and manage-
ment of heart failure is discussed in more detail earlier in this chapter.
Pericarditis
This only occurs following infarction and is particularly common on the 
second and third days. The patient may recognise that a different pain 
has developed, even though it is at the same site, and that it is posi-
tional and tends to be worse or sometimes present only on inspiration. 
A pericardial rub may be audible. Opiate-based analgesia should be 
used. Non-steroidal (NSAIDs) and steroidal anti-inammatory drugs may 
increase the risk of aneurysm formation and myocardial rupture in the 
early recovery period, and should be avoided.
Dressler syndrome
This syndrome is characterised by persistent fever, pericarditis and pleu-
risy, and is probably due to autoimmunity. The symptoms tend to occur a 
few weeks or even months after MI and often subside after a few days. If 
the symptoms are prolonged or severe, treatment with high-dose aspirin, 
NSAIDs or even glucocorticoid steroids may be required.
Papillary muscle rupture
This typically presents with acute pulmonary oedema and shock due 
to the sudden onset of severe mitral regurgitation. Examination usually 
reveals a pansystolic murmur and third heart sound but the murmur may 
be quiet or absent in patients with severe regurgitation. The diagnosis 
is conrmed by echocardiography, and emergency valve replacement 
may be necessary. Lesser degrees of mitral regurgitation due to papillary 
muscle dysfunction are common and may be transient.
Ventricular septal rupture
This usually presents with sudden haemodynamic deterioration 
accompanied by a new loud pansystolic murmur radiating to the 
right sternal border, which may be difcult to distinguish from acute 
mitral regurgitation. Rupture of the intraventricular septum causes left-
to-right shunting through a ventricular septal defect, which tends to 
cause acute right heart failure rather than pulmonary oedema. Doppler 
echocardiography and right heart catheterisation will conrm the diag-
nosis. Treatment is by emergency surgical repair; without this, the 
 condition is usually fatal.
16.49  Clinical features of acute coronary syndromes
Symptoms
Prolonged cardiac pain: chest, throat, arms, 
epigastrium or back
Anxiety and fear of impending death
Nausea and vomiting
Breathlessness
Collapse/syncope
Physical signs
Signs of sympathetic activation
Pallor
Sweating
Tachycardia
Signs of vagal activation
Vomiting
Bradycardia
Signs of impaired myocardial function
Hypotension, oliguria, cold peripheries
Narrow pulse pressure
Raised jugular venous pressure
Third heart sound
Quiet rst heart sound
Diffuse apical impulse
Lung crepitations
Low-grade fever
16.50  Common arrhythmias in acute coronary syndrome
 Ventricular brillation
 Ventricular tachycardia
 Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
 Ventricular ectopics
 Atrial brillation
 Sinus bradycardia (particularly after 
inferior myocardial infarction)
 Atrioventricular block

[[p479]]
Coronary artery disease  435
16
Ventricular rupture
Rupture of the ventricle may lead to cardiac tamponade and is usually 
fatal, although it is occasionally possible to support a patient with an 
incomplete rupture until emergency surgery can be performed.
Embolism
Thrombus often forms on the endocardial surface of freshly infarcted 
myocardium. This can lead to systemic embolism and occasionally 
causes a stroke or ischaemic limb. Venous thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism may occur but have become less common with the use of 
prophylactic anticoagulants and early mobilisation.
Ventricular remodelling
This is a potential complication of an acute transmural MI due to thinning 
and stretching of the infarcted segment. This leads to an increase in 
wall stress with progressive dilatation and hypertrophy of the remaining 
ventricle (ventricular remodelling, Fig. 16.63). As the ventricle dilates, it 
becomes less efcient and heart failure may supervene. Infarct expan-
sion occurs over a few days and weeks but ventricular remodelling can 
take years. Beta-blocker, ACE inhibitor and mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist therapies can reduce late ventricular remodelling and prevent 
the onset of heart failure.
Ventricular aneurysm
Ventricular aneurysm develops in approximately 10% of patients with 
MI and is particularly common when there is persistent occlusion of the 
infarct-related vessel. Heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, mural throm-
bus and systemic embolism are all recognised complications of aneu-
rysm formation. Other features include a paradoxical impulse on the chest 
wall, persistent ST elevation on the ECG, and sometimes an unusual 
bulge from the cardiac silhouette on the chest X-ray. Echocardiography 
is diagnostic. Surgical removal of a left ventricular aneurysm carries a 
high morbidity and mortality but is sometimes necessary.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram
The standard 12-lead ECG is central to conrming the diagnosis and 
deciding immediate management but may be difcult to interpret if there 
is bundle branch block or previous MI. The initial ECG may be normal or 
non-diagnostic in one-third of cases. Repeated ECGs are important, espe-
cially where the diagnosis is uncertain or the patient has recurrent or persis-
tent symptoms. The earliest ECG change is usually ST-segment deviation. 
With proximal occlusion of a major coronary artery, ST-segment elevation 
(or new bundle branch block) is seen initially, with later diminution in the 
size of the R wave and, in transmural (full-thickness) infarction, develop-
ment of a Q wave. Subsequently, the T wave becomes inverted because 
of a change in ventricular repolarisation; this change persists after the ST 
segment has returned to normal. These sequential features (Fig. 16.64) are 
sufciently reliable for the approximate age of the infarct to be deduced.
In non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syndrome, there is partial 
occlusion of a major vessel or complete occlusion of a minor vessel, 
causing unstable angina or partial-thickness (subendocardial) MI. This is 
usually associated with ST-segment depression and T-wave changes. In 
the presence of infarction, this may be accompanied by some loss of R 
waves in the absence of Q waves (Fig. 16.65).
I
n
f
a
c
t
e
x
p
a
n
s
i
o
n
Increased
wall
stress
Fig. 16.63 Infarct expansion and ventricular remodelling. Full-thickness 
myocardial infarction causes thinning and stretching of the infarcted segment (infarct 
expansion), which leads to increased wall stress with progressive dilatation and 
hypertrophy of the remaining ventricle (ventricular remodelling).
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 16.64 The serial evolution of ECG changes in transmural myocardial 
infarction. 
established infarct pattern; the Q wave tends to persist but the T-wave changes become 
less marked. The rate of evolution is very variable but, in general, stage B appears within 
minutes, stage C within hours, stage D within days and stage E after several weeks or 
months. This should be compared with the 12-lead ECGs in Figs. 16.65–16.67
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
aVF
V3
V6
III
II
I
Fig. 16.65 Recent anterior non-ST elevation (subendocardial) myocardial 
infarction. This ECG demonstrates deep symmetrical T-wave inversion, together with 
a reduction in the height of the R wave in leads V1, V2, V3 and V4.

[[p480]]
436  CARDIOLOGY
The ECG changes are best seen in the leads that ‘face’ the ischae-
mic or infarcted area. When there has been anteroseptal infarction, 
abnormalities are found in one or more leads from V1 to V4, while 
anterolateral infarction produces changes from V4 to V6, in aVL and 
in lead I. Inferior infarction is best shown in leads II, III and aVF, while, 
at the same time, leads I, aVL and the anterior chest leads may 
show ‘reciprocal’ changes of ST depression (Figs. 16.66 and 16.67). 
Infarction of the posterior wall of the LV does not cause ST elevation 
or Q waves in the standard leads, but can be diagnosed by the pres-
ence of reciprocal changes (ST depression and a tall R wave in leads 
V1–V4). Some infarctions (especially inferior) also involve the RV. This 
may be identied by recording from additional leads placed over the 
right precordium.
Cardiac biomarkers
Serial measurements of cardiac troponin concentration should be taken. 
In unstable angina, there is no detectable rise in troponin and the diag-
nosis is made on the basis of the clinical features and investigations such 
as ECG or coronary angiography. In contrast, MI causes a rise in plasma 
concentrations of troponin T and I and other cardiac muscle enzymes 
(Fig. 16.68 and see Box 16.47). Levels of troponins T and I increase 
within 3–6 hours, peak at about 36 hours and remain elevated for up to 
2 weeks. A full blood count may reveal the presence of a leucocytosis, 
which reaches a peak on the rst day. The erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are also elevated. Lipids should 
be measured within 24 hours of presentation because there is often a 
transient fall in cholesterol in the 3 months following infarction.
Radiography
A chest X-ray should be performed since this may demonstrate pulmo-
nary oedema that is not evident on clinical examination (see Fig. 16.25). 
The heart size is often normal but there may be cardiomegaly due to 
pre-existing myocardial damage.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is normally performed before discharge from hos-
pital and is useful for assessing ventricular function and for detect-
ing important complications, such as mural thrombus, cardiac 
rupture, ventricular septal defect, mitral regurgitation and pericardial 
effusion.
Coronary angiography
Coronary arteriography should be considered with a view to revasculari-
sation in all patients at moderate or high risk of a further event, including 
those who fail to settle on medical therapy, those with extensive ECG 
changes, those with an elevated cardiac troponin and those with severe 
pre-existing stable angina (see Fig. 16.69). This often reveals disease that 
is amenable to PCI or urgent CABG (see below).
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
aVF
V3
V6
III
II
I
Fig. 16.66 Acute transmural anterior myocardial infarction. This ECG was 
recorded from a patient who had developed severe chest pain 6 hours earlier. There 
is ST elevation in leads I, aVL, V2, V3, V4, V5 and V6, and there are Q waves in leads 
V3, V4 and V5. Anterior infarcts with prominent changes in leads V2, V3 and V4 are 
sometimes called ‘anteroseptal’ infarcts, as opposed to ‘anterolateral’ infarcts, in 
which the ECG changes are predominantly found in V4, V5 and V6
aVR
V1
V4
V2
V5
aVL
V3
V6
aVF
III
II
I
Fig. 16.67 Acute transmural inferolateral myocardial infarction. This ECG was 
recorded from a patient who had developed severe chest pain 4 hours earlier. There 
is ST elevation in inferior leads II, III and aVF and lateral leads V4, V5 and V6. There is 
also ‘reciprocal’ ST depression in leads aVL and V2
Hours after coronary occlusion
LDH
2
4
6
8
10
Tn-T/Tn-I
AST
CK(R)
Normal plasma activity
0 6 12
24
36
48
72
96
Fig. 16.68 Changes in plasma cardiac biomarker concentrations after 
myocardial infarction. Creatine kinase (CK) and troponins T (Tn-T) and I (Tn-I) 
are the rst to rise, followed by aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and then lactate 
(hydroxybutyrate) dehydrogenase (LDH). In patients treated with reperfusion therapy, a 
rapid rise in plasma creatine kinase (curve CK(R)) occurs, due to a washout effect.

[[p481]]
Coronary artery disease  437
16
Management
All patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome should be admit-
ted urgently to hospital because there is a risk of death or recurrent 
myocardial ischaemia during the early unstable phase. Appropriate 
medical therapy can reduce the incidence of these complications by 
at least 60%. The key elements of immediate in-hospital management 
are shown in Fig. 16.69. Patients should ideally be managed in a ded-
icated cardiac unit, where the necessary expertise, monitoring and 
resuscitation facilities are available. Clinical risk factor analysis using 
tools such as the GRACE score (see Fig. 16.61) should be performed 
to identify patients that should be selected for intensive therapy, and 
specically early inpatient coronary angiography (thresholds vary, but a 
score of 140 points or more supports early intervention). If there are no 
complications and risk factor analysis shows that angiography is not 
required, the patient can be mobilised from the second day and dis-
charged after 2–3 days. Low-risk patients without spontaneous angina 
may be considered for an exercise tolerance test 4-6 weeks after the 
acute coronary syndrome. This will help to identify those individuals 
who may require further investigation, and may help to boost the con-
dence of the remainder. Management of the acute event is discussed 
below and the principles of long-term management are summarised 
in Box 16.51
Immediate clinical assessment
ECG
Troponin
ST segment
elevation ACS?
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Presenting
< 12 hrs from
symptom onset?
Yes
Thrombolysis IV +
fondaparinux or
LMW heparin IV
Is delayed
PCI possible?
Yes
No
Medium-
to high-risk
ACS?
No
Recurrent
symptoms?
No
Yes
Failed
reperfusion?
Calculate GRACE score:
In-hospital death
Low risk < 1%
Medium risk 1–9%
High risk > 9%
Early in-hospital
coronary angiography
+ consider
GP IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonist IV infusion
Maintenance in-hospital medication:
aspirin, P2Y12 receptor antagonist,
fondaparinux/LMW heparin,*
statin, -blocker and ACE inhibitor therapy
Eligible for
thrombolysis?
PCI +
GP IIb/IIIa receptor
antagonists IV
Is primary PCI
feasible within
120 mins?
Yes
Fondaparinux or
LMW heparin SC
Consider nitrate
IV infusion
Reperfusion
therapy
Oxygen + cardiac rhythm monitoring
Aspirin 300 mg PO
P2Y12 receptor antagonist 
Metoprolol 5–15 mg IV/50–100 mg PO
Transfer to a specialist cardiology unit
Fig. 16.69 Summary of treatment for acute coronary syndrome (ACS). *Not required following PCI. For details of the GRACE score, see Fig. 16.61. (ACE = angiotensin-
converting enzyme; ECG = electrocardiogram; GP = glycoprotein; IV = intravenous; LMW = low-molecular-weight; PCI = percutaneous coronary intervention; PO = by mouth; 
SC = subcutaneous) Adapted from Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) Guideline no. 93 – Acute coronary syndromes, February 2007 
and updated in SIGN 148, April 2016.

[[p482]]
438  CARDIOLOGY
Analgesia
Adequate analgesia is essential, not only to relieve distress but also 
to lower adrenergic drive and thereby reduce vascular resistance, BP, 
infarct size and susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias. Intravenous opi-
ates (initially, morphine sulphate 5–10 mg or diamorphine 2.5–5 mg) and 
antiemetics (initially, metoclopramide 10 mg) should be administered, 
and titrated until the patient is comfortable. Intramuscular injections 
should be avoided because the clinical effect may be delayed by poor 
skeletal muscle perfusion, and a painful haematoma may form following 
thrombolytic or antithrombotic therapy.
Reperfusion therapy
Immediate reperfusion therapy with PCI (see Fig. 16.59) is indicated 
when the ECG shows new bundle branch block or characteristic 
ST-segment elevation in two contiguous leads of 1 mm or more in the 
limb leads or 2 mm or more in the chest leads. This is the treatment of 
choice for those presenting within 12  hours of symptom onset (see Fig. 
16.69). If PCI cannot be performed within 120 minutes for any reason, 
and thrombolysis is contraindicated, the procedure should be performed 
as soon as practically possible. Patients should be considered for PCI 
within the rst 24 hours, even if they have reperfused spontaneously or 
with thrombolytic therapy. Coronary artery patency is restored in over 
95% of patients undergoing PCI. The procedure preserves left ventricular 
function with a marked reduction in the progression to heart failure, more 
than halves rates of recurrent MI and dramatically improves mortality with 
more than 95% 1-year survival rates in clinical trials. Successful therapy 
is also associated with rapid pain relief, resolution of acute ST elevation 
and occasional transient arrhythmias.
Reperfusion therapy with PCI confers no immediate mortality benet 
in patients with non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syndrome. 
Selected medium- to high-risk patients do benet from in-hospital coro-
nary angiography and coronary revascularisation but this does not need 
to take place in the rst 12 hours unless there are high-risk features, such 
as ongoing chest pain or ECG changes.
Thrombolytic therapy
If primary PCI cannot be achieved in a timely manner in patients with 
ST-segment elevation MI (see Fig. 16.69), thrombolytic therapy should be 
administered. Although the survival advantage is not as good as primary 
PCI, mortality is reduced and this is maintained for at least 10 years. 
The benet of thrombolytic therapy is greatest in those patients who 
receive treatment within the rst 12 hours and especially the rst 2 hours. 
Modern thrombolytic agents, such as tenecteplase (TNK) and reteplase 
(rPA), are analogues of human tissue plasminogen activator and can be 
given as an intravenous bolus, allowing prompt treatment to be given in 
the emergency department or in the pre-hospital setting. The major haz-
ard of thrombolytic therapy is bleeding. Cerebral haemorrhage causes 4 
extra strokes per 1000 patients treated, and the incidence of other major 
bleeds is between 0.5% and 1%. Accordingly, the treatment should be 
withheld if there is a signicant risk of serious bleeding (Box 16.52). For 
some patients, thrombolytic therapy is contraindicated or fails to achieve 
coronary arterial reperfusion (see Fig. 16.69). Emergency PCI may then 
be considered, particularly where there is evidence of cardiogenic shock. 
Even where thrombolysis successfully achieves reperfusion, PCI should 
be considered within 24 hours to prevent recurrent infarction and improve 
outcome.
Antithrombotic therapy
Oral administration of 75–325 mg aspirin daily improves survival, with a 
25% relative risk reduction in mortality. The rst tablet (300 mg) should 
be given orally within the rst 12 hours and therapy should be continued 
indenitely if there are no side-effects. A P2Y12 receptor antagonist (tica-
grelor (180 mg, followed by 90 mg twice daily), prasugrel (60 mg, followed 
by 10 mg daily) or clopidogrel (300 mg, followed by 75 mg daily)) should 
be given in combination with aspirin for up to 12 months. Glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists, such as tiroban and abciximab, block the 
nal common pathway of platelet aggregation and are potent inhibitors 
of platelet-rich thrombus formation. They are of particular benet in high-
risk patients with acute coronary syndromes who undergo PCI, espe-
cially those with a high thrombus burden at angiography or who have 
received inadequate prior antiplatelet therapy. These intravenous agents 
should be administered in addition to oral aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor 
antagonist. Anticoagulation further reduces the risk of thromboembolic 
complications, and prevents re-infarction in the absence of reperfu-
sion therapy or after successful thrombolysis. Anticoagulation can be 
achieved using unfractionated heparin, fractioned (low-molecular-weight) 
heparin or a pentasaccharide, such as subcutaneous fondaparinux 
(2.5 mg daily). Comparative clinical trials show that the pentasaccha-
rides have the best safety and efcacy prole but low-molecular-weight 
heparin, such as subcutaneous enoxaparin (1 mg/kg twice daily), is a 
reasonable alternative. Anticoagulation should be continued for 8 days 
or until discharge from hospital or coronary revascularisation has been 
completed. A period of treatment with an oral anticoagulant should be 
considered if there is persistent AF or evidence of extensive anterior 
infarction with mural thrombus because these patients are at increased 
risk of systemic thromboembolism.
Anti-anginal therapy
Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (300–500 µg) is a valuable rst-aid measure in 
unstable angina or threatened infarction, and intravenous nitrates (glyceryl 
trinitrate 0.6–1.2 mg/hr or isosorbide dinitrate 1–2 mg/hr) are useful for the 
treatment of left ventricular failure and the relief of recurrent or persistent 
ischaemic pain. Intravenous β-blockade (atenolol 5–10 mg or metoprolol 
5–15 mg given over 5 min) relieves pain, reduces arrhythmias and improves 
short-term mortality in patients who present within 12 hours of symptom 
onset (see Fig. 16.69). However, they should be avoided if there is heart 
failure (pulmonary oedema), hypotension (systolic BP < 105 mmHg) or 
bradycardia (heart rate < 65/min). Nifedipine or amlodipine can be added 
if there is persistent chest discomfort but these drugs may cause tachy-
cardia if used alone. Verapamil and diltiazem should be used if β-blockade 
16.51  Late management of myocardial infarction
Risk stratication and further investigation
See text for details
Lifestyle modication
 Diet (weight control, lipid-lowering, 
‘Mediterranean diet’)
 Cessation of smoking
 Regular exercise
Secondary prevention drug therapy
 Antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and/or 
clopidogrel)
 β-blocker
 ACE inhibitor/ARB
 Statin
 Additional therapy for control of 
diabetes and hypertension
 Mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist
Rehabilitation
Devices
 Implantable cardiac debrillator (high-risk patients)
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker)
16.52  Relative contraindications to thrombolytic therapy
 Active internal bleeding
 Previous subarachnoid or intracerebral haemorrhage
 Uncontrolled hypertension
 Recent surgery (within 1 month)
 Recent trauma (including traumatic resuscitation)
 High probability of active peptic ulcer
 Pregnancy

[[p483]]
Coronary artery disease  439
16
is contraindicated. In the longer term, treatment with an oral β-blocker 
reduces long-term mortality by approximately 25% among the survivors 
of an acute MI, especially those with left ventricular systolic dysfunction. 
Patients with heart failure, COPD or peripheral arterial disease appear to 
derive similar secondary preventative benets from β-blocker therapy and 
should receive maintenance therapy unless poorly tolerated. Unfortunately, 
a minority of patients do not tolerate β-blockade because of bradycardia, 
AV block, hypotension or asthma.
Renin–angiotensin blockade
Long-term treatment with ACE inhibitors such as enalapril (10 mg 
twice daily) or ramipril (2.5–5 mg twice daily) can counteract ventricular 
remodelling, prevent the onset of heart failure, improve survival, reduce 
recurrent MI and avoid rehospitalisation. The benets are greatest in 
those with overt heart failure (clinical or radiological) but extend to 
patients with asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dysfunction and 
those with preserved left ventricular function. They should be con-
sidered in all patients with acute coronary syndrome. Caution must 
be exercised in hypovolaemic or hypotensive patients because ACE 
inhibition may exacerbate hypotension and impair coronary perfusion. 
In patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors, ARBs such as valsartan (40–
160 mg twice daily) or candesartan (4–16 mg daily) are alternatives that 
are better tolerated.
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
Patients with acute MI and left ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction 
< 35%) and either pulmonary oedema or diabetes mellitus further ben-
et from additional mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (eplerenone 
25–50 mg daily, or spironolactone 25–50 mg daily).
Lipid-lowering therapy
The benets of lowering serum cholesterol following acute coronary 
syndrome have been demonstrated in several large-scale randomised 
trials. All patients should receive therapy with HMG CoA reductase 
enzyme inhibitors (statins) after acute coronary syndrome, irrespective 
of serum cholesterol concentrations. Patients with serum LDL cho-
lesterol concentrations above 3.2 mmol/L (approximately 120 mg/dL) 
benet from more intensive therapy, such as atorvastatin (80 mg daily). 
Other agents, such as ezetimibe, brates, anion exchange resins and 
injectable PCSK9 inhibitors, may be used in cases where total choles-
terol or LDL cholesterol cannot be lowered adequately using statins 
alone.
Smoking cessation
The 5-year mortality of patients who continue to smoke cigarettes is dou-
ble that of those who quit smoking at the time of their acute coronary 
syndrome. Giving up smoking is the single most effective contribution a 
patient can make to their future. The success of smoking cessation can 
be increased by supportive advice and pharmacological therapy.
Diet and exercise
Maintaining an ideal body weight, eating a Mediterranean-style diet, tak-
ing regular exercise, and achieving good control of hypertension and dia-
betes mellitus may all improve the long-term outlook.
Rehabilitation
When there are no complications, the patient can mobilise on the second 
day, return home in 2–3 days and gradually increase activity, with the aim 
of returning to work in 4 weeks. The majority of patients may resume driv-
ing after 1–4 weeks, although, in most countries, drivers of heavy goods 
and public service vehicles require special assessment before returning 
to work. Emotional problems, such as denial, anxiety and depression, 
are common and must be addressed. Some patients are severely and 
even permanently incapacitated as a result of the psychological effects 
of acute coronary syndrome rather than the physical ones, and all benet 
from thoughtful explanation, counselling and reassurance. Many patients 
mistakenly believe that stress was the cause of their heart attack and may 
restrict their activity inappropriately. The patient’s spouse or partner will 
also require emotional support, information and counselling. Formal reha-
bilitation programmes, based on graded exercise protocols with individual 
and group counselling, are often very successful and, in some cases, have 
been shown to improve quality of life and long-term outcome.
Implantable debrillators
These devices are of benet in preventing sudden cardiac death in 
patients who have severe left ventricular impairment (ejection fraction 
≤ 30%) after MI. More details are provided in the section on treatment of 
cardiac arrhythmias.
Type 2 myocardial infarction
The optimal management and treatment of patients with type 2 MI has 
yet to be established. There is currently no evidence that treatments for 
type 1 MI are effective in the setting of type 2 MI. The focus for patients 
with type 2 MI should be on treating the underlying cause of their pres-
entation and, where applicable, their previously undiagnosed concomi-
tant CAD.
Prognosis
The prognosis of patients who have survived an acute coronary syn-
drome is related to the extent of residual myocardial ischaemia, the 
degree of myocardial damage and the presence of ventricular arrhyth-
mias. In almost one-quarter of all cases of MI, death occurs within a few 
minutes without medical care. Half the deaths occur within 24 hours of 
the onset of symptoms and about 40% of all affected patients die within 
the rst month. The prognosis of those who survive to reach hospital 
is much better, with a 28-day survival of more than 85%. Patients with 
unstable angina have a mortality of approximately half that of patients 
with MI. Early death is usually due to an arrhythmia and is independ-
ent of the extent of MI. However, late outcomes are determined by the 
extent of myocardial damage, and unfavourable features include poor left 
ventricular function, AV block and persistent ventricular arrhythmias. The 
prognosis is worse for anterior than for inferior infarcts. Bundle branch 
block and high cardiac marker concentrations both indicate extensive 
myocardial damage. Old age, depression and social isolation are also 
associated with a higher mortality. Of those who survive an acute attack, 
more than 80% live for a further year, about 75% for 5 years, 50% for 
10 years and 25% for 20 years.
Some considerations specic to myocardial infarction in old age are 
listed in Box 16.53
Non-cardiac surgery in patients with heart disease
Non-cardiac surgery, particularly major vascular, abdominal or thoracic 
surgery, can precipitate serious perioperative cardiac complications, 
16.53  Myocardial infarction in old age
 Atypical presentation: often with anorexia, fatigue, weakness, delirium or falls 
rather than chest pain.
 Case fatality: rises steeply. Hospital mortality exceeds 25% in those over 75 
years old, which is ve times greater than that seen in those aged less than 55 
years.
 Survival benet of treatments: not inuenced by age. The absolute benet of 
evidence-based treatments may therefore be greatest in older people.
 Hazards of treatments: rise with age (for example, increased risk of 
intracerebral bleeding after thrombolysis) and are due partly to increased 
comorbidity.
 Quality of evidence: older patients, particularly those with signicant comorbidity, 
were under-represented in many of the randomised controlled clinical trials that 
helped to establish the treatment of myocardial infarction. The balance of risk 
and benet for many treatments, such as thrombolysis and primary percutaneous 
transluminal coronary angiography, in frail older people is uncertain.

[[p484]]
440  CARDIOLOGY
such as MI and death, in patients with CAD and other forms of heart 
disease. Careful pre-operative cardiac assessment may help to deter-
mine the balance of benet versus risk on an individual basis, and identify 
measures that minimise the operative risk (Box 16.54).
A hypercoagulable state is part of the normal physiological response 
to surgery, and may promote coronary thrombosis leading to an acute 
coronary syndrome in the early post-operative period. Patients with a 
history of recent PCI or acute coronary syndrome are at greatest risk 
and, whenever possible, elective non-cardiac surgery should be avoided 
for 3 months after such an event. Where possible, antiplatelet, statin and 
β-blocker therapies should be continued throughout the perioperative 
period.
Careful attention to uid balance during and after surgery is particularly 
important in patients with impaired left ventricular function and valvu-
lar heart disease because vasopressin is released as part of the nor-
mal physiological response to surgery and, in these circumstances, the 
over-zealous administration of intravenous uids can easily precipitate 
heart failure. Patients with severe valvular heart disease, particularly aor-
tic stenosis and mitral stenosis, are also at increased risk because they 
may not be able to increase their cardiac output in response to the stress 
of surgery.
Atrial brillation is a common post-operative complication in 
patients with pre-existing heart disease which may be triggered by 
hypoxia, myocardial ischaemia or heart failure. It usually terminates 
spontaneously when the precipitating factors have been eliminated, 
but digoxin or β-blockers can be prescribed to control the heart rate 
if necessary.
Peripheral arterial disease
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) has been estimated to affect about 20% 
of individuals aged 55–75 years in the UK. Only 25% of patients present 
with symptoms, the commonest of which is intermittent claudication (IC). 
About 1%–2% of patients with IC per year progress to a point where 
amputation or revascularisation is required. However, the annual mor-
tality rate of people with IC is about 5%, which is 2–3 times higher than 
the general population of the same age and sex. The cause of death is 
typically an MI or stroke, reecting the fact that IC nearly always occurs 
in association with widespread atherosclerosis.
Pathogenesis
In developed countries, almost all PAD is due to atherosclerosis and 
the risk factors are the same as described in patients with CAD. As 
with CAD, plaque rupture is responsible for the most serious mani-
festations of PAD, and not infrequently occurs in a plaque that hith-
erto has been asymptomatic. The clinical manifestations depend on 
the anatomical site, the presence or absence of a collateral sup-
ply, the speed of onset and the mechanism of injury (Box 16.55). 
Approximately 5%–10% of patients with PAD have diabetes but this 
proportion increases to 30%–40% in those with severe limb ischae-
mia. The mechanism of PAD in diabetes is atheroma affecting the 
medium to large-sized arteries rather than obstructive microangio-
pathy and so diabetes is not a contraindication to lower limb revas-
cularisation. Nevertheless, patients with diabetes and PAD pose a 
number of particular problems (Box 16.56).
Clinical features
Symptomatic PAD affects the legs about eight times more commonly 
than the arms. Several locations may be affected, including the aortoiliac 
vessels, the femoropopliteal vessels and the infrapopliteal vessels. One 
or more of these segments may be affected in a variable and asymmetric 
manner. In the arm, the subclavian artery is the most common site of 
disease. Peripheral artery disease can present clinically in a variety of 
ways, as detailed below.
Intermittent claudication
This is the most common presentation of PAD affecting the lower limbs. 
It is characterised by ischaemic pain affecting the muscles of the leg. The 
pain is usually felt in the calf because the disease most commonly affects 
the supercial femoral artery, but it may be felt in the thigh or buttock if 
the iliac arteries are involved. Typically, the pain comes on after walking, 
often once a specic distance has been covered, and rapidly subsides 
on resting. Resumption of walking leads to a return of the pain. Most 
patients describe a cyclical pattern of exacerbation and resolution due 
to the progression of disease and the subsequent development of col-
laterals. When PAD affects the upper limbs, arm claudication may occur, 
although this is uncommon.
Critical limb ischaemia
Critical limb ischaemia (CLI) is dened as rest pain requiring opiate anal-
gesia, or ulceration or gangrene that has been present for more than 
16.54  Major risk factors for cardiac complications of 
non-cardiac surgery
 Recent (< 6 months) myocardial infarction or unstable angina
 Severe coronary artery disease: left main stem or three-vessel disease
 Severe stable angina on effort
 Severe left ventricular dysfunction
 Severe valvular heart disease (especially aortic stenosis)
16.55  Factors inuencing the clinical manifestations of 
peripheral arterial disease (PAD)
Anatomical site
Cerebral circulation
 TIA, amaurosis fugax, vertebrobasilar insufciency
Renal arteries
 Hypertension and renal failure
Mesenteric arteries
 Mesenteric angina, acute intestinal ischaemia
Limbs (legs >> arms)
 Intermittent claudication, critical limb ischaemia, acute limb ischaemia
Collateral supply
 In a patient with a complete circle of Willis, occlusion of one carotid artery may 
be asymptomatic
 In a patient without cross-circulation, stroke is likely
Speed of onset
 Where PAD develops slowly, a collateral supply will develop
 Sudden occlusion of a previously normal artery is likely to cause severe distal 
ischaemia
Mechanism of injury
Haemodynamic
 Plaque must reduce arterial diameter by 70% (‘critical stenosis’) to reduce ow 
and pressure at rest. On exertion a moderate stenosis may become ‘critical’. 
This mechanism tends to have a relatively benign course due to collateralisation
Thrombotic
 Occlusion of a long-standing critical stenosis may be asymptomatic due 
to collateralisation. However, acute rupture and thrombosis of a non-
haemodynamically signicant plaque usually has severe consequences
Atheroembolic
 Symptoms depend on embolic load and size
 Carotid (TIA, amaurosis fugax or stroke) and peripheral arterial (blue toe/nger 
syndrome) plaque are common examples
Thromboembolic
 Usually secondary to atrial brillation
 The consequences are usually dramatic, as the thrombus load is often large 
and occludes a major, previously healthy, non-collateralised artery suddenly and 
completely
(TIA = transient ischaemic attack)

[[p485]]
Peripheral arterial disease  441
16
2 weeks, in the presence of an ankle BP of less than 50 mmHg. The typi-
cal progression of symptoms in CLI is summarised in Fig. 16.70. Rest pain 
only, with ankle pressures above 50 mmHg, is known as subcritical limb 
ischaemia (SCLI). The term severe limb ischaemia (SLI) is used to describe 
the situation where either CLI and SCLI occurs. Whereas IC is usually due 
to single-segment plaque, SLI is always due to multilevel disease. Many 
patients with SLI have not previously sought medical advice, principally 
because they have other comorbidity that prevents them from walking to 
a point where IC develops. Patients with SLI are at high risk of losing their 
limb, and sometimes their life, in a matter of weeks or months without sur-
gical bypass or endovascular revascularisation by angioplasty or stenting. 
Treatment of these patients is difcult because most are older adults with 
extensive and severe disease and major multisystem comorbidities.
Acute limb ischaemia
This is most frequently caused by acute thrombotic occlusion of a pre-ex-
isting stenotic arterial segment, thromboembolism and trauma that may 
be iatrogenic. The typical presentation is with paralysis (inability to wiggle 
toes or ngers) and paraesthesia (loss of light touch over the dorsum 
of the foot or hand); the so-called ‘Ps of acute ischaemia’ (Box 16.57). 
These features are non-specic and inconsistently related to its severity. 
Pain on squeezing the calf indicates muscle infarction and impending 
irreversible ischaemia. All patients with suspected acutely ischaemic 
limbs must be discussed immediately with a vascular surgeon; a few 
hours can make the difference between death/amputation and complete 
recovery of limb function. If there are no contraindications (acute aor-
tic dissection or trauma, particularly head injury), an intravenous bolus 
of heparin (3000–5000U) should be administered to limit propagation 
of thrombus and protect the collateral circulation. Distinguishing throm-
bosis from embolism is frequently difcult but is important because 
treatment and prognosis are different (Box 16.58). Acute limb ischaemia 
due to thrombosis in situ can usually be treated medically in the rst 
instance with intravenous heparin (target activated partial thromboplastin 
time (APTT) 2.0–3.0), antiplatelet agents, high-dose statins, intravenous 
uids to avoid dehydration, correction of anaemia, oxygen and some-
times prostaglandins, such as iloprost. Embolism will normally result in 
extensive tissue necrosis within 6 hours unless the limb is revascularised. 
The indications for thrombolysis, if any, remain controversial. Irreversible 
ischaemia mandates early amputation or palliative care.
Atheroembolism
This may be a presenting feature of PAD affecting the subclavian arter-
ies. The presentation is with blue ngers, which are due to small emboli 
lodging in digital arteries. This may be confused with Raynaud’s phenom-
enon but the symptoms of atheroembolism are typically unilateral rather 
than bilateral as in Raynaud’s.
Subclavian steal
This can be a feature of PAD affecting the upper limbs. The presentation 
is with dizziness, cortical blindness and/or collapse, which occurs when 
the arm is used and is thought to be caused by diversion (or steal) of 
blood from the brain to the limbs via the vertebral artery.
16.56  Peripheral vascular disease in diabetes
Feature
Difculty
Arterial calcication
Spuriously high ABPI due to incompressible 
ankle vessels. Inability to clamp arteries for 
the purposes of bypass surgery. Resistant to 
angioplasty
Immunocompromise
Prone to rapidly spreading cellulitis, gangrene 
and osteomyelitis
Multisystem arterial 
disease
Coronary and cerebral arterial disease increase 
the risks of intervention
Distal disease
Diabetic vascular disease has a predilection for 
the calf vessels. Although vessels in the foot are 
often spared, performing a satisfactory bypass or 
angioplasty to these small vessels is a technical 
challenge
Sensory neuropathy
Even severe ischaemia and/or tissue loss may 
be completely painless. Diabetic patients often 
present late with extensive destruction of the 
foot. Loss of proprioception leads to abnormal 
pressure loads and worsens joint destruction 
(Charcot joints)
Motor neuropathy
Weakness of the long and short exors and 
extensors leads to abnormal foot architecture, 
abnormal pressure loads, callus formation and 
ulceration
Autonomic neuropathy
Leads to a dry foot decient in sweat that 
normally lubricates the skin and is antibacterial. 
Scaling and ssuring create a portal of entry for 
bacteria. Abnormal blood ow in the bones of the 
ankle and foot may also contribute to osteopenia 
and bony collapse
(ABPI = ankle–brachial pressure index)
Pain develops, typically in forefoot, about
an hour after patient goes to bed because:
 beneficial effects of gravity on perfusion
  are lost
 patient’s blood pressure and cardiac
  output fall during sleep
Severe pain awakens patient
Pain relieved by hanging limb out of bed.
In due course patient has to get up and
walk about, with resulting loss of sleep
Patient takes to sleeping in chair, leading
to dependent oedema. Interstitial tissue
pressure is increased so arterial perfusion is
further reduced. Vicious circle of increasing
pain and sleep loss
Trivial injury fails to heal, and entry
of bacteria leads to infection and increase
in metabolic demands of foot.
Rapid development of ulcers and gangrene
Fig. 16.70 Progressive night pain and the development of tissue loss.
16.57  Symptoms and signs of acute limb ischaemia
Symptoms/signs
Comment
Pain
May be absent in complete acute 
ischaemia, and can be present in 
chronic ischaemia
Pallor
Pulselessness
Perishing cold
Unreliable, as the ischaemic limb takes 
on the ambient temperature
Paraesthesia
Important features of impending 
irreversible ischaemia
Paralysis

[[p486]]
442  CARDIOLOGY
Investigations
The presence and severity of ischaemia can usually be determined by 
clinical examination (Box 16.59) and measurement of the ankle–brachial 
pressure index (ABPI), which is the ratio between the highest systolic 
ankle and brachial blood pressures. In health, the ABPI is over 1.0, in 
IC typically 0.5–0.9 and in CLI usually less than 0.5. Further investiga-
tion with duplex ultrasonography, MRI or CT with intravenous injection 
of contrast agents may be used to characterise the sites of involvement 
further. Intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography (IA-DSA) is used for 
those undergoing endovascular revascularisation. Other investigations 
should look for evidence of treatable secondary causes including a full 
blood count (for thrombocythaemia), lipids (for hyperlipidaemia) and 
blood glucose (for diabetes mellitus).
Management
Key elements of medical management are summarised in Box 16.60. 
This consists of smoking cessation (if applicable), taking regular exercise, 
antiplatelet therapy with low-dose aspirin or clopidogrel, therapy with a 
statin, and treatment of coexisting disease such as diabetes, hyperten-
sion or polycythaemia. Recent evidence suggests that low-dose factor 
Xa inhibition (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily) when used in combination 
with aspirin can further reduce cardiovascular events, ischaemic limb 
events and mortality in patients with PAD although there is a modest 
increase in bleeding risk. The peripheral vasodilator cilostazol has been 
shown to improve walking distance and should be considered in patients 
who do not respond adequately to best medical therapy. Intervention with 
angioplasty, stenting, endarterectomy or bypass is usually considered 
only after medical therapy has been given for at least 6 months to effect 
symptomatic improvement, and then just in patients who are severely 
disabled or whose livelihood is threatened by their disability. Subclavian 
artery disease is usually treated by means of angioplasty and stenting, as 
carotid–subclavian bypass surgery can be technically difcult.
Some considerations specic to atherosclerotic vascular disease in 
old age are listed in Box 16.61
Buerger’s disease
Buerger’s disease or thromboangiitis obliterans is an inammatory dis-
ease of the arteries that is distinct from atherosclerosis and usually pre-
sents in young (20–30 years) male smokers. It is most common in those 
from the Mediterranean and North Africa. It characteristically affects distal 
arteries, giving rise to claudication in the feet or rest pain in the ngers or 
toes. Wrist and ankle pulses are absent but brachial and popliteal pulses 
are present. It may also affect the veins, giving rise to supercial throm-
bophlebitis. It often remits if the patient stops smoking. Symptomatic 
therapy with vasodilators such as prostacyclin and calcium antagonists 
or sympathectomy may also be helpful. Major limb amputation is the 
most frequent outcome if patients continue to smoke.
Raynaud’s syndrome
This common disorder affects 5%–10% of young women aged 15–30 
years in temperate climates. It does not progress to ulceration or infarction, 
and signicant pain is unusual. The underlying cause is unclear and no 
investigation is necessary. The patient should be reassured and advised to 
avoid exposure to cold. Usually, no other treatment is required, although 
vasodilators such as nifedipine can may be helpful if symptoms are trou-
blesome. More severe Raynaud’s syndrome can also occur in association 
with digital ulceration in patients with connective tissue disease.
Diseases of the aorta
Aortic aneurysm
Aortic aneurysm is dened as an abnormal dilatation of the aortic lumen. 
The most common site is the infrarenal abdominal aorta. The supra renal 
abdominal aorta and a variable length of the descending thoracic aorta 
16.58  Distinguishing features of embolism and thrombosis in 
peripheral arteries
Clinical features
Embolism
Thrombosis
Severity
Complete (no 
collaterals)
Incomplete (collaterals)
Onset
Seconds or minutes
Hours or days
Limb
Leg 3:1 arm
Leg 10:1 arm
Multiple sites
Up to 15%
Rare
Embolic source
Present (usually atrial 
brillation)
Absent
Previous claudication
Absent
Present
Palpation of artery
Soft, tender
Hard, calcied
Bruits
Absent
Present
Contralateral leg 
pulses
Present
Absent
Diagnosis
Clinical
Angiography
Treatment
Embolectomy, 
warfarin
Medical, bypass, 
thrombolysis
Prognosis
Loss of life > loss 
of limb
Loss of limb > loss 
of life
16.59  Clinical features of chronic lower limb ischaemia
 Pulses: diminished or absent
 Bruits: denote turbulent ow but bear no relationship to the severity of the 
underlying disease
 Reduced skin temperature
 Pallor on elevation and rubor on dependency (Buerger’s sign)
 Supercial veins that ll sluggishly and empty (‘gutter’) on minimal elevation
 Muscle-wasting
 Skin and nails: dry, thin and brittle
 Loss of hair
Box 16.60  Medical therapy for peripheral arterial disease
 Smoking cessation
 Regular exercise (30 mins of walking, three times per week)
 Antiplatelet agent (aspirin 75 mg or clopidogrel 75 mg daily)
 Consider low-dose factor Xa inhibitor (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily)
 Reduction of cholesterol: statins
 Diet and weight loss
 Diagnosis and treatment of diabetes mellitus
 Diagnosis and treatment of associated conditions:
Hypertension
Anaemia
Heart failure
16.61  Atherosclerotic vascular disease in old age
 Prevalence: related almost exponentially to age in developed countries, 
although atherosclerosis is not considered part of the normal ageing process.
 Statin therapy: no role in the primary prevention of atherosclerotic disease in 
those over 75 years but reduces cardiovascular events in those with established 
vascular disease, albeit with no reduction in overall mortality.
 Presentation in the frail: frequently with advanced multisystem arterial 
disease, along with a host of other comorbidities.
 Intervention in the frail: in those with extensive disease and limited life 
expectancy, the risks of surgery may outweigh the benets, and symptomatic 
care is all that should be offered.

[[p487]]
Diseases of the aorta  443
16
may be affected in 10%–20% of patients but the ascending aorta is 
usually spared. Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) affect men three 
times more commonly than women and are estimated to occur in about 
5% of men over the age of 60 years.
Pathogenesis
The most common cause of aortic aneurysm is atherosclerosis, the risk 
factors for which have previously been described. However, smoking 
and hypertension predominate with 90%–95% of patients having one 
or both of these risk factors. There also appears to be an additional and 
specic genetic component since aortic aneurysm tends to run in fami-
lies. This may explain in part why only some patients with risk factors for 
atheroma develop aneurysmal disease. Marfan syndrome is an inherited 
disorder of connective tissue that is associated with aortic aneurysm and 
aortic dissection.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is dependent on the site of the aneurysm. 
Thoracic aneurysms may typically present with acute severe chest pain 
but other features, including aortic regurgitation, compressive symptoms 
such as stridor (trachea, bronchus), hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal 
nerve) and superior vena cava syndrome, may occur (Fig. 16.71A). If the 
aneurysm erodes into an adjacent structure, such as the oesophagus or 
bronchus, the presentation may be with massive bleeding. AAAs affect 
the infrarenal segment of the aorta. They can present in a number of 
ways, as summarised in Box 16.62. The usual age at presentation is 
65–75 years for elective presentations and 75–85 years for emergency 
presentations.
Investigations
Ultrasound is the best way of establishing the diagnosis of an abdominal 
aneurysm and of following up patients with asymptomatic aneurysms 
that are not yet large enough to warrant surgical repair. In the UK, a 
national screening programme for men over 65 years of age has been 
introduced using ultrasound scanning. For every 10 000 men scanned, 
65 ruptures are prevented and 52 lives saved. CT provides more accurate 
information about the size and extent of the aneurysm, the surrounding 
structures and the presence of any other intra-abdominal pathology. It 
is the standard pre-operative investigation but is not suitable for surveil-
lance because of the high cost and radiation dose.
Management
The risks of surgery generally outweigh the risks of rupture until an 
asymptomatic AAA has reached a maximum of 5.5 cm in diameter. All 
symptomatic AAAs should be considered for repair, not only to rid the 
patient of symptoms but also because pain often predates rupture. Distal 
DILATED THORACIC
ABDOMINAL
Expansion
Thrombus
Embolism
Aortic
regurgitation
Compression of 
adjacent structures
Coronary
occlusion
Aortic
regurgitation
Loss of
arm pulse
Neurological
deficit
Renal or
mesenteric
occlusion
Loss of
leg pulse
Type A
Type B
Aortic dissection
Aortic aneurysm
A
B
Diaphragm
SACCULAR THORACIC
Fig. 16.71 Types of aortic disease and their complications.

[[p488]]
444  CARDIOLOGY
embolisation is a strong indication for repair, regardless of size, because 
otherwise limb loss is common. Most patients with a ruptured AAA do 
not survive to reach hospital, but if they do and surgery is thought to 
be appropriate, there must be no delay in getting them to the operating 
theatre to clamp the aorta.
Open AAA repair has been the treatment of choice in both the elective 
and the emergency settings, and entails replacing the aneurysmal segment 
with a prosthetic (usually Dacron) graft. The 30-day mortality for this proce-
dure is approximately 5%–8% for elective asymptomatic AAA, 10%–20% 
for emergency symptomatic AAA and 50% for ruptured AAA. However, 
patients who survive the operation to leave hospital have a long-term sur-
vival approaching that of the normal population. Increasingly, endovascu-
lar aneurysm repair (EVAR), using a stent graft introduced via the femoral 
arteries in the groin, is replacing open surgery. It is cost-effective and likely 
to become the treatment of choice for infrarenal AAA. It is possible to treat 
many suprarenal and thoraco-abdominal aneurysms by EVAR too. If the 
aneurysm is secondary to Marfan syndrome, treatment with β-blockers 
reduces the rate of aortic dilatation and the risk of rupture. Elective replace-
ment of the ascending aorta may also be considered in patients with evi-
dence of progressive aortic dilatation but carries a mortality of 5%–10%.
Aortic dissection
Aortic dissection occurs when a breach in the integrity of the aortic wall 
allows arterial blood to enter the media, which is then split into two layers, 
creating a false lumen alongside the existing or true lumen (Fig. 16.71B). 
The aortic valve may be damaged and the branches of the aorta may 
be compromised. Typically, the false lumen eventually re-enters the true 
lumen, creating a double-barrelled aorta, but it may also rupture into 
the left pleural space or pericardium with fatal consequences. The peak 
incidence is in the sixth and seventh decades but dissection can occur 
in younger patients, usually in association with Marfan syndrome, preg-
nancy or trauma; men are affected twice as frequently as women.
Pathogenesis
The primary event is often a spontaneous or iatrogenic tear in the intima 
of the aorta; multiple tears or entry points are common. Other dissec-
tions are triggered by primary haemorrhage in the media of the aorta, 
which then ruptures through the intima into the true lumen. This form of 
spontaneous bleeding from the vasa vasorum is sometimes conned to 
the aortic wall, when it may present as a painful intramural haematoma. 
Aortic disease and hypertension are the most important aetiological fac-
tors but other conditions may also be implicated (Box 16.63). Chronic 
dissections may lead to aneurysmal dilatation of the aorta, and thoracic 
aneurysms may be complicated by dissection. It can therefore be difcult 
to identify the primary pathology.
Aortic dissection is classied anatomically and for management pur-
poses into type A and type B (see Fig. 16.71B), involving or sparing the 
ascending aorta, respectively. Type A dissections account for two-thirds 
of cases and frequently also extend into the descending aorta.
Clinical features
Involvement of the ascending aorta typically gives rise to anterior chest 
pain, and involvement of the descending aorta to intrascapular back 
pain. The pain is typically described as ‘tearing’ and very abrupt in 
onset; collapse is common. Unless there is major haemorrhage, the 
patient is invariably hypertensive. There may be asymmetry of the 
brachial, carotid or femoral pulses and signs of aortic regurgitation. 
Occlusion of aortic branches may cause MI (coronary), stroke (carotid), 
paraplegia (spinal), mesenteric infarction with an acute abdomen (coe-
liac and superior mesenteric), renal failure (renal) and acute limb (usually 
leg) ischaemia.
Investigations
The investigations of choice are CT or MR angiography (Figs. 16.72 and 
16.73), both of which are highly specic and sensitive. A chest X-ray 
should be performed. It characteristically shows broadening of the upper 
mediastinum and distortion of the aortic ‘knuckle’ but these ndings are 
absent in 10% of cases. A left-sided pleural effusion is common. The 
16.62  Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA): common 
presentations
Incidental
 On physical examination, plain X-ray or, most commonly, abdominal ultrasound
 Even large AAAs can be difcult to feel, so many remain undetected until they 
rupture
 Studies are currently under way to determine whether screening will reduce the 
number of deaths from rupture
Pain
 In the central abdomen, back, loin, iliac fossa or groin
Thromboembolic complications
 Thrombus within the aneurysm sac may be a source of emboli to the lower 
limbs
 Less commonly, the aorta may undergo thrombotic occlusion
Compression
 Surrounding structures such as the duodenum (obstruction and vomiting) and 
the inferior vena cava (oedema and deep vein thrombosis)
Rupture
 Into the retroperitoneum, the peritoneal cavity or surrounding structures (most 
commonly the inferior vena cava, leading to an aortocaval stula)
16.63  Risk factors for aortic dissection
 Hypertension (in 80%)
 Atherosclerosis
 Coarctation
 Genetic:
Marfan syndrome
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
 Fibromuscular dysplasia
 Previous cardiac surgery:
CABG
Aortic valve replacement
 Pregnancy (usually third trimester)
 Trauma
 Iatrogenic:
Cardiac catheterisation
Intra-aortic balloon pumping
(CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting)
FL
TL
Fig. 16.72 Sagittal view of an MRI scan from a patient with long-standing 
aortic dissection, illustrating a biluminal aorta. There is sluggish ow in the false 
lumen (FL), accounting for its grey appearance. (TL = true lumen)

[[p489]]
Diseases of the aorta  445
16
ECG may show left ventricular hypertrophy in patients with hypertension 
or, rarely, changes of acute MI (usually inferior). Doppler echocardiogra-
phy may show aortic regurgitation, a dilated aortic root and, occasionally, 
the ap of the dissection. TOE is particularly helpful because transthor-
acic echocardiography can provide images of the rst 3–4 cm of the 
ascending aorta only (Fig. 16.74).
Management
The early mortality of acute dissection is approximately 1%–5% per 
hour and so treatment is urgently required. Initial management com-
prises pain control and antihypertensive treatment. Type A dissections 
require emergency surgery to replace the ascending aorta. Type B 
dissections are treated medically unless there is actual or impending 
external rupture, or vital organ (gut, kidneys) or limb ischaemia, as the 
morbidity and mortality associated with surgery are very high. The aim 
of medical management is to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) 
of 60–75 mmHg to reduce the force of the ejection of blood from the 
LV. First-line therapy is with β-blockers; the additional α-blocking prop-
erties of labetalol make it especially useful. Rate-limiting calcium chan-
nel blockers, such as verapamil or diltiazem, are used if β-blockers are 
contraindicated. Sodium nitroprusside may be considered if these fail 
to control BP adequately.
Percutaneous or minimal access endoluminal repair is sometimes 
possible and involves either ‘fenestrating’ (perforating) the intimal ap so 
that blood can return from the false to the true lumen (so decompressing 
the former), or implanting a stent graft placed from the femoral artery 
(see Fig. 16.73).
Aortitis
Syphilis is a rare cause of aortitis that characteristically produces saccu-
lar aneurysms of the ascending aorta containing calcication. Other con-
ditions that may be associated with aortitis include Takayasu’s disease, 
giant cell arteritis and axial spondyloarthritis, all of which are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 26
Marfan syndrome
Marfan syndrome is a rare (0.02% of the population) inherited autosomal 
dominant disorder of connective tissue with a high risk of aortic aneu-
rysm and dissection. It is caused by mutations of the FBN1 gene which 
leads to deciency of brillin-1 leading to reduced microbril formation. 
This disrupts the mechanical integrity of connective tissue, giving rise to 
a wide range of clinical features.
Clinical features
Aortic dissection and aneurysm are the most serious complications 
of Marfan syndrome but many other clinical manifestations may be 
observed. These include aortic and mitral valve regurgitation; skin lax-
ity and joint hypermobility; abnormalities of body habitus, including long 
arms, legs and ngers (arachnodactyly), scoliosis, pectus excavatum 
and a high-arched palate; ocular abnormalities, such as lens dislocation 
and retinal detachment; and an increased risk of pneumothorax.
E
D
C
A
B
Fig. 16.73 Images from a patient with an acute type B aortic dissection that had ruptured into the left pleural space and was repaired by deploying an endoluminal 
stent graft.
(E) Courtesy of Dr T. Lawton
TL
FL
Fig. 16.74 Echocardiograms from a patient with a chronic aortic dissection.
Colour-ow Doppler shows ow from the larger false lumen (FL) into the true lumen 
(TL), characteristic of chronic disease.

[[p490]]
446  CARDIOLOGY
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually suspected on the basis of the characteristic clin-
ical features and can be conrmed by genetic testing. Imaging by chest 
X-ray may reveal evidence of aortic dilatation but echocardiography is 
more sensitive and can also demonstrate valvular disease, if present. 
Patients with Marfan syndrome should undergo serial monitoring of the 
aortic root by echocardiography; if evidence of dilatation is observed, 
then elective surgery should be considered.
Management
Treatment with β-blockers or angiotensin receptor blockers may reduce 
the risk of aortic dilatation and should be given in all patients with Marfan 
syndrome. Activities that are associated with increases in cardiac output 
are best avoided. Surgery to replace the aortic root can be performed in 
patients with progressive aortic dilatation.
Coarctation of the aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is the term used to describe a narrowing 
distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. It is most commonly 
due to congenital heart disease, but narrowing of the aorta leading to 
similar symptoms can occur in other conditions such as Takayasu’s 
arteritis and trauma. Diagnosis and management of coarctation are 
discussed later in this chapter in the section on congenital heart 
disease.
Hypertension
The risk of cardiovascular diseases such as stroke and CAD is closely 
related to levels of BP, which follows a normal distribution in the general 
population. Although there is no specic cut-off above which the risk of 
cardiovascular risk suddenly increases, the diagnosis of hypertension 
is made when systolic and diastolic values rise above a specic thresh-
old that corresponds to the level of BP at which the risk of cardiovas-
cular complications and benets of treatment outweigh the treatment 
costs and potential side-effects of therapy. The British Hypertension 
Society classication, provided in Box 16.64, denes mild hypertension 
as existing when the BP is above 140/90 mmHg. Similar thresholds 
have been published by the European Society of Hypertension and the 
WHO–International Society of Hypertension. The cardiovascular risks 
associated with high BP depend on the combination of risk factors 
in an individual, such as age, sex, weight, physical activity, smoking, 
family history, serum cholesterol, diabetes mellitus and pre-existing 
vascular disease.
Pathogenesis
Many factors may contribute to the regulation of BP and the develop-
ment of hypertension, including renal dysfunction, peripheral resistance, 
vessel tone, endothelial dysfunction, autonomic tone, insulin resistance 
and neurohumoral factors. In more than 95% of cases, no specic under-
lying cause of hypertension can be found. Such patients are said to have 
essential hypertension. Hypertension is more common in some ethnic 
groups, particularly African Americans and Japanese, and approximately 
40%–60% is explained by genetic factors. Age is a strong risk factor in all 
ethnic groups. Important environmental factors include a high salt intake, 
heavy consumption of alcohol, obesity and lack of exercise. Impaired 
intrauterine growth and low birth weight are associated with an increased 
risk of hypertension later in life. In about 5% of cases, hypertension is 
secondary to a specic disease, as summarised in Box 16.65
Hypertension has a number of adverse effects on the cardiovascu-
lar system. In larger arteries (> 1 mm in diameter), the internal elastic 
lamina is thickened, smooth muscle is hypertrophied and brous tis-
sue is deposited. The vessels dilate and become tortuous, and their 
walls become less compliant. In smaller arteries (< 1 mm), hyaline 
arteriosclerosis occurs in the wall, the lumen narrows and aneurysms 
may develop. Widespread atheroma develops and may lead to cor-
onary and cerebrovascular disease, particularly if other risk factors 
are present. These structural changes in the vasculature often per-
petuate and aggravate hypertension by increasing peripheral vascular 
resistance and reducing renal blood ow, thereby activating the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone axis.
Clinical features
Hypertension is usually asymptomatic until the diagnosis is made at a 
routine physical examination or when a complication arises. Reecting 
this fact, a BP check is advisable every 5 years in adults over 40 years 
of age to pick up occult hypertension. Sometimes clinical features may 
be observed that can give a clue to the underlying cause of hyperten-
sion. These include radio-femoral delay in patients with coarctation of 
the aorta (see Fig. 16.93), enlarged kidneys in patients with polycystic 
kidney disease, abdominal bruits that may suggest renal artery stenosis 
and the characteristic facies and habitus of Cushing’s syndrome (see 
Box16.65). Examination may also reveal evidence of risk factors for 
hypertension, such as central obesity and hyperlipidaemia. Other signs 
may be observed that are due to the complications of hypertension. 
These include signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, accentuation of the 
aortic component of the second heart sound, and a fourth heart sound. 
16.64  Denition of hypertension
Category
Systolic blood 
pressure (mmHg)
Diastolic blood 
pressure (mmHg)
Blood pressure
Optimal
< 120
< 80
Normal
< 130
85
High normal
130–139
85–89
Hypertension
Grade 1 (mild)
140–159
90–99
Grade 2 (moderate)
160–179
100–109
Grade 3 (severe)
≥  180
> 110
Isolated systolic hypertension
Grade 1
140–159
<  90
Grade 2
≥  160
< 90
16.65  Causes of secondary hypertension
Alcohol
Obesity
Pregnancy
Renal disease
 Parenchymal renal disease, 
particularly glomerulonephritis
 Renal vascular disease
 Polycystic kidney disease
Endocrine disease
 Phaeochromocytoma
 Cushing’s syndrome
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn 
syndrome)
 Glucocorticoid-suppressible 
hyperaldosteronism
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Acromegaly
 Primary hypothyroidism
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 
11β-hydroxylase or 17α-hydroxylase 
deciency
 Liddle syndrome
 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deciency
Drugs
Coarctation of the aorta

[[p491]]
Diseases of the aorta  447
16
AF is common and may be due to diastolic dysfunction caused by left 
ventricular hypertrophy or the effects of CAD.
Severe hypertension can cause left ventricular failure in the absence 
of CAD, particularly when there is an impairment of renal function. The 
optic fundi are often abnormal (see Fig. 16.75 below) and there may 
be evidence of generalised atheroma or specic complications, such as 
aortic aneurysm, PAD or stroke. Examination of the optic fundi reveals 
a gradation of changes linked to the severity of hypertension; fundos-
copy can provide an indication of the arteriolar damage occurring else-
where (Box 16.66). ‘Cotton wool’ exudates are associated with retinal 
ischaemia or infarction, and fade in a few weeks (Fig. 16.75A). ‘Hard’ 
exudates (small, white, dense deposits of lipid) and microaneurysms 
(‘dot’ haemorrhages) are more characteristic of diabetic retinopathy 
(see Fig. 30.12A). Hypertension is also associated with central retinal vein 
thrombosis (Fig.16.75B).
Investigations
A decision to embark on antihypertensive therapy effectively commits 
the patient to life-long treatment, so readings must be as accurate as 
possible. The objectives are to:
 conrm the diagnosis by obtaining accurate, representative BP 
measurements
 identify contributory factors and any underlying causes
 assess other risk factors and quantify cardiovascular risk
 detect any complications that are already present
 identify comorbidity that may inuence the choice of antihyperten-
sive therapy.
Blood pressure measurements
Measurements should be made to the nearest 2 mmHg, in the sitting 
position with the arm supported, and repeated after 5 minutes’ rest if 
the rst recording is high (Box 16.67). To avoid spuriously high read-
ings in obese subjects, the cuff should contain a bladder that encom-
passes at least two-thirds of the arm circumference. Exercise, anxiety, 
discomfort and unfamiliar surroundings can all lead to a transient rise in 
BP. Sphygmomanometry, particularly when performed by a doctor, can 
cause a transient elevation in BP, which has been termed ‘white coat’ 
hypertension. It has been estimated that up to 20% of patients with a 
raised BP at outpatient clinics have a normal BP when it is recorded by 
automated devices used at home. The risk of cardiovascular disease in 
these patients is less than that in patients with sustained hypertension 
but greater than that in normotensive subjects. If clinic BP measurements 
show borderline levels or if white coat hypertension is suspected, then 
ambulatory measurement or home-based measurements are of value in 
conrming the diagnosis.
Ambulatory blood pressure measurements
A series of automated ambulatory BP measurements obtained over 
24 hours or longer provide a better prole than a limited number of 
clinic readings and correlate more closely with evidence of target 
organ damage than casual BP measurements. Treatment thresholds 
and targets (see Box 16.71) must be adjusted downwards, because 
ambulatory BP readings are systematically lower (approximately 
12/7 mmHg) than clinic measurements. The average ambulatory day-
time (not 24-hour or night-time) BP should be used to guide manage-
ment decisions.
Home blood pressure measurements
Patients can measure their own BP at home using a range of commer-
cially available semi-automatic devices. The value of such measurements 
is dependent on the environment and timing of the readings measured. 
Home or ambulatory BP measurements are particularly helpful in patients 
with unusually labile BP, those with refractory hypertension, those who 
may have symptomatic hypotension, and those in whom white coat 
hypertension is suspected.
A
B
Fig. 16.75 Retinal changes in hypertension.
showing swollen optic disc, retinal haemorrhages and multiple cotton wool spots 
widespread fundal haemorrhage, commonly associated with systemic hypertension. 
(Aand B) Courtesy of Dr B. Cullen.
16.66  Hypertensive retinopathy
Grade 1
 Arteriolar thickening, tortuosity and increased reectiveness (‘silver wiring’)
Grade 2
 Grade 1 plus constriction of veins at arterial crossings (‘arteriovenous nipping’)
Grade 3
 Grade 2 plus evidence of retinal ischaemia (ame-shaped or blot haemorrhages 
and ‘cotton wool’ exudates)
Grade 4
 Grade 3 plus papilloedema
16.67  How to measure blood pressure
 Use a machine that has been validated, well maintained and properly calibrated
 Measure sitting BP routinely, with additional standing BP in older and diabetic 
patients and those with possible postural hypotension; rest the patient for  
2 minutes
 Remove tight clothing from the arm
 Support the arm at the level of the heart
 Use a cuff of appropriate size (the bladder must encompass more than two-
thirds of the arm)
 Lower the pressure slowly (2 mmHg per second)
 Read the BP to the nearest 2 mmHg
 Use phase V (disappearance of sounds) to measure diastolic BP
 Take two measurements at each visit

[[p492]]
448  CARDIOLOGY
Other investigations
All hypertensive patients should undergo a limited number of investiga-
tions (Box 16.68) but additional investigations are appropriate in patients 
younger than 40 years of age or those with resistant hypertension 
(Box16.69). Family history, lifestyle (exercise, salt intake, smoking habit) 
and other risk factors should also be recorded. A careful history will iden-
tify those patients with drug- or alcohol-induced hypertension and may 
elicit the symptoms of other causes of secondary hypertension, such as 
phaeochromocytoma (paroxysmal headache, palpitation and sweating) 
or complications such as CAD.
Management
The objective of antihypertensive therapy is to reduce the incidence of 
adverse cardiovascular events, particularly CAD, stroke and heart failure. 
Randomised controlled trials have demonstrated that antihypertensive 
therapy can reduce the incidence of stroke and, to a lesser extent, CAD. 
The relative benets (approximately 30% reduction in risk of stroke and 
20% reduction in risk of CAD) are similar in all patient groups, so the 
absolute benet of treatment (total number of events prevented) is great-
est in those at highest risk. For example, to extrapolate from the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) Mild Hypertension Trial (1985), 566 young 
patients would have to be treated with bendroumethiazide for 1 year 
to prevent 1 stroke, while in the MRC trial of antihypertensive treatment 
in older adults (1992), 1 stroke was prevented for every 286 patients 
treated for 1 year.
A formal estimate of absolute cardiovascular risk, which takes account 
of all the relevant risk factors, may help to determine whether the likely 
benets of therapy will outweigh its costs and hazards. Several online 
risk calculators are available for this purpose, such as the Joint British 
Societies risk calculator (http://www.jbs3risk.com and see ‘Further infor-
mation’). Most of the excess morbidity and mortality associated with 
hypertension are attributable to CAD and many treatment guidelines are 
therefore based on estimates of the 10-year CAD risk. Total cardiovas-
cular risk can be estimated by multiplying CAD risk by 4/3 (i.e. if CAD risk 
is 30%, cardiovascular risk is 40%). The value of this approach can be 
illustrated by comparing the two hypothetical cases on page 426.
Intervention thresholds
Systolic BP and diastolic BP are both powerful predictors of cardiovas-
cular risk. The British Hypertension Society management guidelines use 
both readings, and treatment should be initiated if they exceed the given 
threshold (Fig. 16.76).
Patients with diabetes or cardiovascular disease are at particularly high 
risk and the threshold for initiating antihypertensive therapy is therefore 
lower (≤ 130/80 ) in these patient groups. The thresholds for treatment in 
older adults are the same as for younger patients (Box 16.70).
Treatment targets
The optimum BP for reduction of major cardiovascular events has been 
found to be 139/83 mmHg, and even lower in patients with diabetes 
mellitus. The targets suggested by the British Hypertension Society 
(Box 16.71) are ambitious. Primary care strategies have been devised 
to improve screening and detection of hypertension that, in the past, 
remained undetected in up to half of affected individuals. Application of 
new guidelines should help establish patients on appropriate treatment, 
and allow step-up if lifestyle modication and rst-line drug therapy fail to 
control hypertension.
Patients taking antihypertensive therapy require follow-up at regular 
intervals to monitor BP, minimise side-effects and reinforce lifestyle advice.
Non-drug therapy
Appropriate lifestyle measures may obviate the need for drug therapy in 
patients with borderline hypertension, reduce the dose or the number 
of drugs required in patients with established hypertension, and directly 
reduce cardiovascular risk.
Correcting obesity, reducing alcohol intake, restricting salt intake, 
taking regular physical exercise and increasing consumption of fruit and 
vegetables can all lower BP. Moreover, stopping smoking, eating oily 
sh and adopting a diet that is low in saturated fat may produce further 
reductions in cardiovascular risk that are independent of changes in BP.
Drug therapy
Thiazides The mechanism of action of these drugs is incompletely 
understood and it may take up to a month for the maximum effect to be 
observed. An appropriate daily dose is 2.5 mg bendroumethiazide or 
0.5 mg cyclopenthiazide. More potent loop diuretics, such as furosemide 
(40 mg daily) or bumetanide (1 mg daily), have few advantages over thi-
azides in the treatment of hypertension, unless there is substantial renal 
impairment or they are used in conjunction with an ACE inhibitor.
ACE inhibitors ACE inhibitors (enalapril 5–40 mg daily, ramipril 5–10 mg 
daily or lisinopril 10–40 mg daily) are effective and usually well tolerated. 
They should be used with care in patients with impaired renal function 
or renal artery stenosis because they can reduce glomerular ltration 
rate and precipitate renal failure. Electrolytes and creatinine should be 
checked before and 1–2 weeks after commencing therapy. Side-effects 
include rst-dose hypotension, cough, rash, hyperkalaemia and renal 
dysfunction.
Angiotensin receptor blockers ARBs (irbesartan 75–300 mg daily, valsar-
tan 40–160 mg daily) have similar efcacy to ACE inhibitors but they do 
not cause cough and are better tolerated.
Calcium channel antagonists Amlodipine (5–10 mg daily) and nifedipine 
(30–90 mg daily) are effective and usually well tolerated antihypertensive 
drugs that are particularly useful in older people. Side-effects include 
ushing, palpitations and uid retention. The rate-limiting calcium chan-
nel antagonists (diltiazem 200–500 mg daily, verapamil 240–480 mg 
daily in divided doses) can be useful when hypertension coexists with 
angina but may cause bradycardia. The main side-effect of verapamil is 
constipation.
Beta-blockers These are no longer used as rst-line antihyperten-
sive therapy, except in patients with another indication for the drug 
such as angina. Metoprolol (100–200 mg daily), atenolol (50–100 mg 
daily) and bisoprolol (5–10 mg daily), which preferentially block cardiac 
16.68  Investigation of hypertension
Urinalysis for blood, protein and glucose
Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
Hypokalaemic alkalosis may indicate primary hyperaldosteronism but is 
usually due to diuretic therapy
Blood glucose
Serum total and HDL cholesterol
Thyroid function tests
12-lead ECG (left ventricular hypertrophy, coronary artery disease)
(HDL = high-density lipoprotein)
16.69  Specialised investigation of hypertension
 Chest X-ray: to detect cardiomegaly, heart failure, coarctation of the aorta
 Ambulatory BP recording: to assess borderline or ‘white coat’ hypertension
 Echocardiogram: to detect or quantify left ventricular hypertrophy
 Renal ultrasound: to detect possible renal disease
 Renal angiography: to detect or conrm the presence of renal artery stenosis
 Urinary catecholamines: to detect possible phaeochromocytoma)
 Urinary cortisol and dexamethasone suppression test: to detect possible 
Cushing s syndrome
 Plasma renin activity and aldosterone: to detect possible primary aldosteronism

[[p493]]
Diseases of the aorta  449
16
β1-adrenoceptors, should be used rather than non-selective agents 
that also block β2-adrenoceptors, which mediate vasodilatation and 
bronchodilatation.
Combined β- and α-blockers Labetalol (200mg–2.4 g daily in divided 
doses) and carvedilol (6.25–25 mg twice daily) are combined β- and 
α-adrenoceptor antagonists that are sometimes more effective than pure 
β-blockers. Labetalol can be used as an infusion in malignant phase 
hypertension (see below).
Other vasodilators A variety of other vasodilators may be used. These 
include the α1-adrenoceptor antagonists prazosin (0.5–20 mg daily 
in divided doses), indoramin (25–100 mg twice daily) and doxazosin 
(1–16 mg daily), and drugs that act directly on vascular smooth mus-
cle, such as hydralazine (25–100 mg twice daily) and minoxidil (10–
50 mg daily). Side-effects include rst-dose and postural hypotension, 
Clinic blood pressure
 140/90 mmHg
Offer
antihypertensive
drug treatment
Consider alternative
causes for target
organ damage
Clinic blood pressure
 180/110 mmHg
Consider starting hypertensive
drug treatment immediately
Offer ABPM (or HBPM if ABPM is declined
or not tolerated)
Offer lifestyle interventions
Offer patient education and interventions to support
adherence to treatment
Offer annual review of care to monitor blood pressure, provide
support and discuss lifestyle, symptoms and medication
Offer to check blood pressure
at least every 5 yrs, more
often if blood pressure is close
to 140/90 mmHg
Offer to assess cardiovascular risk
and target organ damage
ABPM/HBPM
 135/85 mmHg
Stage 1 hypertension
ABPM/HBPM
 150/95 mmHg
Stage 2 hypertension
ABPM/HBPM
< 135/85 mmHg
Normotensive
If accelerated
hypertension1
or suspected
phaeochromocytoma2
If target organ damage
present or 10-yr
cardiovascular risk > 20%
Consider
specialist
referral
If < 40 yrs
If evidence
of target organ
damage
Refer
same day
for
specialist
care
Clinic blood pressure
< 140/90 mmHg
Normotensive
Fig. 16.76 Management of hypertension. 1Signs of papilloedema or retinal haemorrhage. 2Labile or postural hypotension, headache, palpitations, pallor and diaphoresis. 
(ABPM = ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; HBPM = home blood pressure monitoring). Adapted from 2020 International Society of Hypertension Global Hypertension 
Practice Guidelines
16.71  Optimal target blood pressures1
Age
Clinic BP (mmHg)
Ambulatory or home 
BP (mmHg)2
< 80 years
< 140/90
< 135/85
≥ 80 years
< 150/90
<  140/85
1Both systolic and diastolic values should be attained. 2Average BP during waking hours.
16.70  Hypertension in old age
 Prevalence: hypertension affects more than half of all people over the age of 
60 years (including isolated systolic hypertension).
 Risks: hypertension is the most important risk factor for myocardial infarction, 
heart failure and stroke in older people.
 Benet of treatment: absolute benet from therapy is greatest in older people 
(at least up to age 80 years).
 Target blood pressure: targets may be relaxed in older people to 
150/90 mmHg.
 Tolerance of treatment: antihypertensives are tolerated as well as in younger 
patients.
 Drug of choice: low-dose thiazides but, in the presence of coexistent disease 
such as gout or diabetes, other agents may be more appropriate.

[[p494]]
450  CARDIOLOGY
headache, tachycardia and uid retention. Minoxidil also causes 
increased facial hair and is therefore unsuitable for female patients.
Aspirin Antiplatelet therapy is a powerful means of reducing cardio-
vascular risk but may cause bleeding, particularly intracerebral haem-
orrhage, in a small number of patients. The benets are thought to 
outweigh the risks in hypertensive patients aged 50 years or over who 
have well-controlled BP and either target organ damage or diabetes or 
a 10-year CAD risk of at least 15% (or 10-year cardiovascular disease 
risk of at least 20%).
Statins Treating hyperlipidaemia can produce a substantial reduction in 
cardiovascular risk. These drugs are strongly indicated in patients who 
have established vascular disease, or hypertension with a high (at least 
10% in 10 years) risk of developing cardiovascular disease.
Choice of antihypertensive drug
Trials that have compared thiazides, calcium antagonists, ACE inhibitors 
and ARBs have not shown consistent differences in outcome, efcacy, 
side-effects or quality of life. Beta-blockers, which previously featured 
as rst-line therapy in guidelines, have a weaker evidence base. The 
choice of antihypertensive therapy is initially dictated by the patient’s 
age and ethnic background, although cost and convenience will inu-
ence the exact drug and preparation used. Response to initial therapy 
and side-effects guide subsequent treatment. Comorbid conditions also 
have an inuence on initial drug selection (Box 16.72); for example, a 
β-blocker might be the most appropriate treatment for a patient with 
angina. Thiazide diuretics and dihydropyridine calcium channel antago-
nists are the most suitable drugs for treatment in older people.
Combination therapy
Although some patients can be treated with a single antihypertensive 
drug, a combination of drugs is often required to achieve optimal con-
trol (Fig. 16.77). Combination therapy may be desirable for other rea-
sons; for example, low-dose therapy with two drugs may produce fewer 
unwanted effects than treatment with the maximum dose of a single 
drug. Some drug combinations have complementary or synergistic 
actions; for example, thiazides increase activity of the renin–angiotensin 
system, while ACE inhibitors block it.
Refractory hypertension
Refractory hypertension refers to the situation where multiple drug treat-
ments do not give adequate control of BP. Although this may be due to 
genuine resistance to therapy in some cases, a more common cause 
of treatment failure is non-adherence to drug therapy. Resistant hyper-
tension can also be caused by failure to recognise an underlying cause, 
such as renal artery stenosis or phaeochromocytoma. There is no easy 
solution to problems with adherence, but simple treatment regimens, 
16.72  The inuence of comorbidity on choice of antihypertensive drug therapy
Class of drug
Compelling indications
Possible indications
Caution
Compelling contraindications
α blockers
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
–
Postural hypotension, heart 
failure1
Urinary incontinence
ACE inhibitors
Heart failure
Chronic renal disease2
Renal impairment2
Pregnancy
Left ventricular dysfunction, 
post-MI or established CAD
Type 2 diabetic 
nephropathy
PAD3
Renovascular disease2
Type 1 diabetic nephropathy
Secondary stroke prevention4
Angiotensin II receptor 
blockers
ACE inhibitor intolerance
Left ventricular dysfunction 
after MI
Renal impairment2
Pregnancy
Type 2 diabetic nephropathy
Intolerance of other 
antihypertensive drugs
PAD3
Hypertension with left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Proteinuric or chronic renal 
disease2
Heart failure in ACE-intolerant 
patients, after MI
Heart failure
β-blockers
MI, angina
–
Heart failure5
Asthma or chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Heart failure5
PAD
Heart block
Diabetes (except with CAD)
Calcium channel 
blockers 
(dihydropyridine)
Older patients, isolated systolic 
hypertension
Angina
–
–
Calcium channel 
blockers (rate-limiting)
Angina
Older patients
Combination with β-blockade
Atrioventricular block, heart 
failure
Thiazides or thiazide-like 
diuretics
Older patients, isolated systolic 
hypertension, heart failure, 
secondary stroke prevention
–
–
Gout6
1ln heart failure when used as monotherapy. 2ACE inhibitors or ARBs may be benecial in chronic renal failure and renovascular disease but should be used with caution, close supervision and 
specialist advice when there is established and signicant renal impairment. 3Caution with ACE inhibitors and ARBs in PAD because of association with renovascular disease.
4In combination with a thiazide or thiazide-like diuretic. 5β-blockers are used increasingly to treat stable heart failure but may worsen acute heart failure. 6Thiazides or thiazide-like diuretics may 
sometimes be necessary to control BP in people with a history of gout, ideally used in combination with allopurinol.
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs = angiotensin II receptor blockers; CAD = coronary artery disease; MI = myocardial infarction; PAD = peripheral arterial disease)

[[p495]]
Diseases of the heart valves  451
16
attempts to improve rapport with the patient and careful supervision can 
all help. Spironolactone is a particularly useful addition in patients with 
treatment-resistant hypertension.
Accelerated hypertension
Accelerated or malignant hypertension is a rare condition that can 
complicate hypertension of any aetiology. It is characterised by accel-
erated microvascular damage with necrosis in the walls of small arter-
ies and arterioles (brinoid necrosis) and by intravascular thrombosis. 
The diagnosis is based on evidence of high BP and rapidly progres-
sive end-organ damage, such as retinopathy (grade 3 or 4), renal 
dysfunction (especially proteinuria) and hypertensive encephalopathy 
(see above). Left ventricular failure may occur and death occurs within 
months if untreated.
Management
In accelerated phase hypertension, lowering BP too quickly may com-
promise tissue perfusion due to altered autoregulation and can cause 
cerebral damage, including occipital blindness, and precipitate cor-
onary or renal insufciency. Even in the presence of cardiac failure or 
hypertensive encephalopathy, a controlled reduction to a level of about 
150/90 mmHg over a period of 24–48 hours is ideal.
In most patients, it is possible to avoid parenteral therapy and bring 
BP under control with bed rest and oral drug therapy. Intravenous or 
intramuscular labetalol (2 mg/min to a maximum of 200 mg), intravenous 
GTN (0.6–1.2 mg/hr), intramuscular hydralazine (5 or 10 mg aliquots 
repeated at half-hourly intervals) and intravenous sodium nitroprusside 
(0.3–1.0 µg/kg body weight/min) are all effective but require careful 
supervision, preferably in a high-dependency unit.
Diseases of the heart valves
The heart valves allow forward movement of blood through the cardiac 
chambers when they are open and prevent backward ow when they 
are closed. A diseased valve may become narrowed, obstructing for-
ward ow, or become leaky, causing backward ow or regurgitation. 
Breathlessness is a common symptom of valve disease, and acute 
severe breathlessness may be a presenting symptom of valve failure. The 
causes of this are shown in Box 16.73. Predisposition to valvular disease 
may be genetically determined, can arise as the result of rheumatic fever 
or infections, or can occur in association with dilatation of the cardiac 
chambers in heart failure. The principal causes of valvular disease are 
summarised in Box 16.74
Rheumatic heart disease
Acute rheumatic fever
Acute rheumatic fever usually affects children and young adults between 
the ages of 5 and 15 years. It is now rare in high-income countries in 
Western Europe and North America, where the incidence is about 0.5 
cases per 100 000, but remains endemic in South Asia, Africa and South 
America. Recent studies indicate that the current incidence of rheumatic 
heart disease in India ranges between 13 and 150 cases per 100 000 
population per year, where it is the commonest cause of acquired heart 
disease in childhood and adolescence.
Pathogenesis
The condition is triggered by an immune-mediated delayed response to 
infection with specic strains of group A streptococci, which have anti-
gens that cross-react with cardiac myosin and sarcolemmal membrane 
proteins. Antibodies produced against the streptococcal antigens cause 
inammation in the endocardium, myocardium and pericardium, as well 
as the joints and skin. Histologically, brinoid degeneration is seen in the 
collagen of connective tissues. Aschoff nodules are pathognomonic and 
Aged < 55 yrs
A1
A + C
C2
Step 1
Step 2
A + C + D3
Step 3
Resistant hypertension
A + C + D + consider
further diuretic4 or 
- or -blocker5
Consider seeking expert
advice
Step 4
Aged > 55 yrs or
persons
of African or
Caribbean descent
of any age*
Fig. 16.77 Antihypertensive drug combinations. *Does not apply to those 
who are of mixed race. 1A = Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or 
consider angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB); choose a low-cost ARB. 2C = 
calcium channel blocker (CCB); a CCB is preferred but consider a thiazide-like 
diuretic if a CCB is not tolerated or the person has oedema, evidence of heart 
failure or a high risk of heart failure. 3D = thiazide-type diuretic. 4Consider a low 
dose of spironolactone or higher doses of a thiazide-like diuretic. 5Consider an 
α- or β-blocker if further diuretic therapy is not tolerated, or is contraindicated 
or ineffective. Adapted from 2020 International Society of Hypertension Global 
Hypertension PracticeGuidelines
16.73  Causes of acute valve failure
Aortic regurgitation
 Aortic dissection
 Infective endocarditis
Mitral regurgitation
 Papillary muscle rupture due to acute myocardial infarction
 Infective endocarditis
 Rupture of chordae due to myxomatous degeneration
Prosthetic valve failure
 Mechanical valves: fracture, jamming, thrombosis, dehiscence
 Biological valves: degeneration with cusp tear
16.74  Principal causes of valve disease
Valve regurgitation
 Congenital
 Acute rheumatic carditis
 Chronic rheumatic carditis
 Infective endocarditis
 Cardiac failure*
 Syphilitic aortitis
 Traumatic valve rupture
 Senile degeneration
 Damage to chordae and 
papillary muscles
Valve stenosis
 Congenital
 Rheumatic carditis
 Senile degeneration
*Causes dilatation of the valve ring.

[[p496]]
452  CARDIOLOGY
occur only in the heart. They are composed of multinucleated giant cells 
surrounded by macrophages and T lymphocytes, and are not seen until 
the subacute or chronic phases of rheumatic carditis.
Clinical features
Acute rheumatic fever is a multisystem disorder that usually presents 
with fever, anorexia, lethargy and joint pain, 2–3weeks after an episode 
of streptococcal pharyngitis although there may be no history of sore 
throat. Arthritis occurs in approximately 75% of patients. Other fea-
tures include rashes, subcutaneous nodules, carditis and neurological 
changes (Fig. 16.78). Using the revised Jones criteria (Box 16.75), the 
diagnosis is based on two or more major manifestations, or one major 
and two or more minor manifestations, along with evidence of preced-
ing streptococcal infection. A presumptive diagnosis of acute rheumatic 
fever can be made without evidence of preceding streptococcal infection 
in cases of isolated chorea or pancarditis, if other causes have been 
excluded. In cases of established rheumatic heart disease or prior rheu-
matic fever, acute rheumatic fever can be diagnosed based only on the 
presence of multiple minor criteria and evidence of preceding group A 
streptococcal pharyngitis.
Carditis
Rheumatic fever causes a pancarditis involving the endocardium, myo-
cardium and pericardium to varying degrees. Its incidence declines with 
increasing age, ranging from 90% at 3 years to around 30% in adoles-
cence. It may manifest as breathlessness (due to heart failure or per-
icardial effusion), palpitations or chest pain (usually due to pericarditis 
or pancarditis). Other features include tachycardia, cardiac enlargement 
and new or changed murmurs. A soft systolic murmur due to mitral 
regurgitation is very common. A soft mid-diastolic murmur (the Carey 
Coombs murmur) is typically due to valvulitis, with nodules forming on the 
mitral valve leaets. Aortic regurgitation occurs in 50% of cases but the 
tricuspid and pulmonary valves are rarely involved. Pericarditis may cause 
chest pain, a pericardial friction rub and precordial tenderness. Cardiac 
failure may be due to myocardial dysfunction or valvular regurgitation. 
ECG evidence commonly includes ST and T wave changes. Conduction 
defects, including AV block, sometimes occur and may cause syncope.
Arthritis
This is the commonest major manifestation and occurs early when 
streptococcal antibody titres are high. An acute painful, asymmet-
ric and migratory inammation of the large joints typically affects the 
knees, ankles, elbows and wrists. The joints are involved in quick suc-
cession and are usually red, swollen and tender for between a day 
and 4 weeks.
Skin lesions
Erythema marginatum occurs in less than 5% of patients. The lesions 
start as red macules that fade in the centre but remain red at the edges, 
and occur mainly on the trunk and proximal extremities but not the 
face. The resulting red rings or ‘margins’ may coalesce or overlap (see 
Fig.16.78). Subcutaneous nodules occur in 5%–7% of patients. They 
are small (0.5–2.0 cm), rm and painless, and are best felt over extensor 
surfaces of bone or tendons. They typically appear more than 3 weeks 
after the onset of other manifestations and therefore help to conrm 
rather than make the diagnosis.
Sydenham’s chorea
Sydenham’s chorea, also known as St Vitus dance, is a late neurolog-
ical manifestation that appears at least 3 months after the episode of 
acute rheumatic fever, when all the other signs may have disappeared. 
It occurs in up to one-third of cases and is more common in females. 
Emotional lability may be the rst feature and is typically followed by 
purposeless, involuntary, choreiform movements of the hands, feet or 
face. Speech may be explosive and halting. Spontaneous recovery usu-
ally occurs within a few months. Approximately one-quarter of affected 
patients will go on to develop chronic rheumatic valve disease.
Other features
Other systemic manifestations, such as pleurisy, pleural effusion and 
pneumonia, may occur but are rare.
Investigations
Blood should be taken for measurement of ESR and CRP since these 
are useful for monitoring progress of the disease (Box 16.76). Throat 
cultures should be taken but positive results are obtained in only 
10%–25% of cases since the infection has often resolved by the time 
of presentation. Serology for antistreptolysin O antibodies (ASO) should 
be performed and provide supportive evidence for the diagnosis but are 
normal in one-fth of adult cases of rheumatic fever and most cases 
of chorea. Echocardiography should be carried out and typically shows 
mitral regurgitation with dilatation of the mitral annulus and prolapse of 
the anterior mitral leaet; it may also demonstrate aortic regurgitation and 
pericardial effusion.
Sydenham's chorea
St Vitus dance
Carditis
Dyspnoea (CCF)
Syncope
Pericarditis (pain, rub)
Carey Coombs murmur
Aortic or mitral
regurgitation
Heart block
Erythema marginatum
Oedema
(heart failure)
Flitting
polyarthritis
+ arthralgia
Subcutaneous
nodules (over bones
or tendons)
Fever
39° C
38° C
37° C
Prior sore throat
Fig. 16.78 Clinical features of rheumatic fever. Bold labels indicate Jones major 
criteria. (CCF = congestive cardiac failure) Inset (Erythema marginatum) From Savin 
JA, Hunter JAA, Hepburn NC. Skin signs in clinical medicine. London: Mosby–Wolfe, 
Elsevier; 1997
16.75  Jones criteria for the diagnosis of rheumatic fever
Major manifestations
 Carditis
 Polyarthritis
 Chorea
 Erythema marginatum
 Subcutaneous nodules
Minor manifestations
 Fever
 Arthralgia
 Raised erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate or C-reactive protein
 Previous rheumatic fever
 Leucocytosis
 First-degree atrioventricular block
Plus
 Supporting evidence of preceding streptococcal infection: recent scarlet fever, 
raised antistreptolysin O or other streptococcal antibody titre, positive throat 
culture*
*Evidence of recent streptococcal infection is particularly important if there is only one major 
manifestation.

[[p497]]
Diseases of the heart valves  453
16
Management
The aims of management are to limit cardiac damage and relieve 
symptoms.
Bed rest
Bed rest is important, as it lessens joint pain and reduces cardiac work-
load. The duration should be guided by symptoms, along with tempera-
ture, leucocyte count and ESR, and should be continued until these have 
settled. Patients can then return to normal physical activity but strenuous 
exercise should be avoided in those who have had carditis.
Treatment of cardiac failure
Some patients, particularly those in early adolescence, can develop a 
fulminant form of the disease with severe mitral regurgitation and, some-
times, concomitant aortic regurgitation. If heart failure does not respond 
to medical treatment, valve replacement may be necessary and is often 
associated with a dramatic decline in rheumatic activity. Occasionally, AV 
block may occur but is seldom progressive and usually resolves sponta-
neously. Rarely, pacemaker insertion may be required.
Antibiotic therapy
A single dose of benzathine benzylpenicillin (1.2millionU IM) or oral phe-
noxymethylpenicillin (250 mg 4 times daily for 10 days) should be given on 
diagnosis to eliminate any residual streptococcal infection. If the patient is 
penicillin-allergic, erythromycin or a cephalosporin can be used. Patients 
are susceptible to further attacks of rheumatic fever if another streptococ-
cal infection occurs, and long-term prophylaxis with penicillin should be 
given with oral phenoxymethylpenicillin (250 mg twice daily) or as benza-
thine benzylpenicillin (1.2millionU IM monthly), if adherence is in doubt. 
Sulfadiazine or erythromycin may be used if the patient is allergic to penicil-
lin; sulphonamides prevent infection but are not effective in the eradication 
of group A streptococci. Further attacks of rheumatic fever are unusual 
after the age of 21, when antibiotic treatment can usually be stopped. The 
duration of prophylaxis should be extended if an attack has occurred in the 
last 5 years, or if the patient lives in an area of high prevalence and has an 
occupation (such as teaching) with a high risk of exposure to streptococcal 
infection. In those with residual heart disease, prophylaxis should continue 
until 10 years after the last episode or 40 years of age, whichever is later. 
While long-term antibiotic prophylaxis prevents further attacks of acute 
rheumatic fever, it does not protect against infective endocarditis.
Aspirin
This usually relieves the symptoms of arthritis rapidly and a response 
within 24 hours helps conrm the diagnosis. A reasonable starting dose 
is 60 mg/kg body weight/day, divided into six doses. In adults, 100 mg/kg 
per day may be needed up to the limits of tolerance or a maximum of 
8 g per day. Mild toxicity includes nausea, tinnitus and deafness; vomit-
ing, tachypnoea and acidosis are more serious. Aspirin should be contin-
ued until the ESR has fallen and then gradually tailed off.
Glucocorticoid steroids
These produce more rapid symptomatic relief than aspirin and are indi-
cated in cases with carditis or severe arthritis. There is no evidence that 
long-term steroids are benecial. Prednisolone (1.0–2.0 mg/kg per day 
in divided doses) should be continued until the ESR is normal and then 
gradually reduced.
Chronic rheumatic heart disease
Chronic valvular heart disease develops in at least half of those affected 
by rheumatic fever with carditis. Two-thirds of cases occur in women. 
Some episodes of rheumatic fever pass unrecognised and it is possible 
to elicit a history of rheumatic fever or chorea in only about half of all 
patients with chronic rheumatic heart disease.
The mitral valve is affected in more than 90% of cases; the aortic 
valve is the next most frequently involved, followed by the tricuspid and 
then the pulmonary valve. Isolated mitral stenosis accounts for about 
25% of all cases, and an additional 40% have mixed mitral stenosis and 
regurgitation.
Pathogenesis
The main pathological process in chronic rheumatic heart disease 
is progressive brosis. The heart valves are predominantly affected 
but involvement of the pericardium and myocardium also occurs and 
may contribute to heart failure and conduction disorders. Fusion of 
the mitral valve commissures and shortening of the chordae tend-
ineae may lead to mitral stenosis with or without regurgitation. Similar 
changes in the aortic and tricuspid valves produce distortion and 
rigidity of the cusps, leading to stenosis and regurgitation. Once a 
valve has been damaged, the altered haemodynamic stresses per-
petuate and extend the damage, even in the absence of a continuing 
rheumatic process.
Mitral valve disease
Mitral stenosis
Mitral stenosis is almost always rheumatic in origin, although in older 
people it can be caused by heavy calcication of the mitral valve. There 
is also a rare form of congenital mitral stenosis.
Pathogenesis
In rheumatic mitral stenosis, the mitral valve orice is slowly diminished 
by progressive brosis, calcication of the valve leaets, and fusion of 
the cusps and subvalvular apparatus. The mitral valve orice is nor-
mally about 5cm2 in diastole but can be reduced to < 1cm2 in severe 
mitral stenosis. The patient is usually asymptomatic until the orice is 
< 2cm2. As stenosis progresses, left ventricular lling becomes more 
dependent on left atrial contraction. There is dilatation and hypertrophy 
of the LA and left atrial pressure rises, leading to pulmonary venous 
congestion and breathlessness. Any increase in heart rate shortens 
diastole when the mitral valve is open and produces a further rise in left 
atrial pressure. Situations that demand an increase in cardiac output, 
such as pregnancy and exercise, also increase left atrial pressure and 
are poorly tolerated.
Atrial brillation is very common due to progressive dilatation of 
the LA. Its onset often precipitates pulmonary oedema because the 
accompanying tachycardia and loss of atrial contraction lead to haem-
odynamic deterioration and a rapid rise in left atrial pressure. In the 
absence of AF, a more gradual rise in left atrial pressure may occur. 
Irrespective of AF, pulmonary hypertension may occur, which can pro-
tect the patient from pulmonary oedema. Pulmonary hypertension 
leads to right ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation, tricuspid regur-
gitation and right heart failure. Fewer than 20% of patients remain in 
sinus rhythm but many of these have a small brotic LA and severe 
pulmonary hypertension.
16.76  Investigations in acute rheumatic fever
Evidence of a systemic illness
 Leucocytosis, raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
Evidence of preceding streptococcal infection
 Throat swab culture: group A β-haemolytic streptococci (also from family 
members and contacts)
 Antistreptolysin O antibodies (ASO titres): rising titres, or levels of > 200U 
(adults) or > 300U (children)
Evidence of carditis
 Chest X-ray: cardiomegaly; pulmonary congestion
 ECG: rst- and, rarely, second-degree atrioventricular block; features of 
pericarditis; T-wave inversion; reduction in QRS voltages
 Echocardiography: cardiac dilatation and valve abnormalities

[[p498]]
454  CARDIOLOGY
Clinical features
Effort-related dyspnoea is usually the dominant symptom (Box 16.77). 
Typically, exercise tolerance diminishes very slowly over many years until 
symptoms eventually occur at rest. Patients frequently do not appreciate 
the extent of their disability until the diagnosis is made and their valve 
disease is treated. Acute pulmonary oedema or pulmonary hypertension 
can lead to haemoptysis. Fatigue is a common symptom due to a low 
cardiac output. Thromboembolism is a common complication, especially 
in patients with AF. Prior to the advent of anticoagulant therapy, emboli 
caused one-quarter of all deaths.
The physical signs of mitral stenosis are often found before symptoms 
develop and their recognition is of particular importance in pregnancy. 
The forces that open and close the mitral valve increase as left atrial 
pressure rises. The rst heart sound (S1) is therefore loud and can be pal-
pable (tapping apex beat). An opening snap may be audible and moves 
closer to the second sound (S2) as the stenosis becomes more severe 
and left atrial pressure rises. However, the rst heart sound and opening 
snap may be inaudible if the valve is heavily calcied.
Turbulent ow produces the characteristic low-pitched mid-
diastolic murmur and sometimes a thrill (Fig. 16.79). The murmur is 
accentuated by exercise and during atrial systole (pre-systolic accentua-
tion). Early in the disease a pre-systolic murmur may be the only auscul-
tatory abnormality, but in patients with symptoms, the murmur extends 
from the opening snap to the rst heart sound. Coexisting mitral regur-
gitation causes a pansystolic murmur that radiates towards the axilla.
Pulmonary hypertension may ultimately lead to right ventricular hyper-
trophy and dilatation with secondary tricuspid regurgitation, which 
causes a parasternal lift, and a systolic murmur and giant ‘v waves’ in 
the venous pulse.
16.77  Clinical features of mitral stenosis
Clinical feature
Cause
Symptoms
Breathlessness
Pulmonary congestion, low cardiac 
output
Fatigue
Low cardiac output
Oedema, ascites
Right heart failure
Palpitation
Atrial brillation
Haemoptysis
Pulmonary congestion
Cough
Pulmonary congestion
Chest pain
Pulmonary hypertension
Thromboembolism
Atrial stasis and atrial brillation
Signs
Atrial brillation
Atrial dilatation
Mitral facies
Low cardiac output
Auscultation:
Loud rst heart sound, opening 
snap
Non-compliant, stenotic valve
Mid-diastolic murmur
Crepitations
Left heart failure
Pulmonary oedema
Pleural effusions
Right ventricular heave, loud P2
Pulmonary hypertension
Roll patient towards left to
hear murmur best
(low-pitched, use bell of
stethoscope at apex)
A
B
Loud
Loud
MDM
Stenosed
mitral valve
Dilated left
atrium
Increased
pulmonary
artery pressure
OS
A2P2
Right ventricular
hypertrophy
Normal left
ventricle
Diastolic
gradient
across valve
mmHg
LV
LA
Systole
0
25
50
75
100
Fig. 16.79 Mitral stenosis: murmur and the diastolic pressure gradient between left atrium (LA) and left ventricle (LV). (Mean gradient is reected by the area 
between LA and LV in diastole.) The rst heart sound is loud, and there is an opening snap (OS) and mid-diastolic murmur (MDM) with pre-systolic accentuation. 

[[p499]]
Diseases of the heart valves  455
16
Investigations
Doppler echocardiography is the investigation of choice for evalu-
ation of suspected mitral stenosis (see Fig. 16.79). Cardiac cathe-
terisation may also be required if surgery or valvuloplasty is being 
considered, to screen for coexisting conditions such as CAD. The 
ECG may show either AF or bid P waves (P mitrale) associated with 
left atrial hypertrophy (Box16.78). A typical chest X-ray is shown in 
Fig. 16.9
Management
Patients with mild symptoms can be treated medically but intervention by 
balloon valvuloplasty, mitral valvotomy or mitral valve replacement should 
be considered if the patient remains symptomatic despite medical treat-
ment or if pulmonary hypertension develops.
Medical management
This consists of anticoagulation to reduce the risk of systemic embo-
lism, ventricular rate control with digoxin, β-blockers or rate-limiting cal-
cium antagonists for AF, and diuretic to control pulmonary congestion. 
Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis is no longer routinely 
recommended.
Mitral balloon valvuloplasty and valve replacement
Valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice if specic criteria are fullled 
(Box16.79 and Fig. 16.80), although surgical closed or open mitral val-
votomy is an acceptable alternative. Patients who have undergone mitral 
valvuloplasty or valvotomy should be followed up at 1–2-yearly intervals 
because restenosis may occur. Clinical symptoms and signs are a guide 
to the severity of mitral restenosis but Doppler echocardiography pro-
vides a more accurate assessment.
Valve replacement is indicated if there is substantial mitral reux or if 
the valve is rigid and calcied.
Mitral regurgitation
Rheumatic disease is the principal cause in countries where rheumatic 
fever is common but elsewhere, including in the UK, other causes are 
more important (Box 16.80). Mitral regurgitation may also follow mitral 
valvotomy or valvuloplasty.
Pathogenesis
Chronic mitral regurgitation causes gradual dilatation of the LA with little 
increase in pressure and relatively few symptoms. Nevertheless, the LV 
dilates slowly and the left ventricular diastolic and left atrial pressures 
gradually increase as a result of chronic volume overload of the LV. In 
contrast, acute mitral regurgitation causes a rapid rise in left atrial pres-
sure (because left atrial compliance is normal) and marked symptomatic 
deterioration.
Mitral valve prolapse
This is also known as ‘oppy’ mitral valve and is a common cause of mild 
mitral regurgitation (Fig. 16.81). Some cases are thought to be due to a 
developmental abnormality of the mitral valve and others due to degen-
erative myxomatous change in a normal mitral valve. Rarely, mitral valve 
prolapse may occur in association with Marfan syndrome.
In its mildest forms, the valve remains competent but bulges back into 
the atrium during systole, causing a mid-systolic click but no murmur. In 
the presence of a regurgitant valve, the click is followed by a late systolic 
murmur, which lengthens as the regurgitation becomes more severe. A 
click is not always audible and the physical signs may vary with both 
posture and respiration. Progressive elongation of the chordae tendineae 
leads to increasing mitral regurgitation, and if chordal rupture occurs, 
regurgitation suddenly becomes severe. This is rare before the fth or 
sixth decade of life.
Mitral valve prolapse is associated with a variety of typically benign 
arrhythmias, atypical chest pain and a very small risk of embolic stroke 
or transient ischaemic attack (TIA). Nevertheless, the overall long-term 
prognosis is good.
16.78  Investigations in mitral stenosis
ECG
 Right ventricular hypertrophy: tall R 
waves in V1–V3
 P mitrale or atrial brillation
Chest X-ray
Enlarged left atrium and appendage
Signs of pulmonary venous 
congestion
Echo
 Thickened immobile cusps
 Reduced valve area
 Enlarged left atrium
 Reduced rate of diastolic lling 
ofleft ventricle
Doppler
 Pressure gradient across mitral valve
 Pulmonary artery pressure
 Left ventricular function
Cardiac catheterisation
 Coronary artery disease
 Pulmonary artery pressure
 Mitral stenosis and regurgitation
16.79  Criteria for mitral valvuloplasty*
 Signicant symptoms
 Isolated mitral stenosis
 No (or trivial) mitral regurgitation
 Mobile, non-calcied valve/subvalve apparatus on echo
 Left atrium free of thrombus
*For comprehensive guidelines on valvular heart disease, see www.acc.org
Atrial septal
puncture
Balloon
catheter
Mitral
valve
IVC
RA
Fig. 16.80 Mitral valvuloplasty. A guidewire is introduced into the right atrium 
(RA) from the femoral vein and the inferior vena cava (IVC). The interatrial septum is 
punctured, providing access to the left atrium and mitral valve. A balloon catheter is 
then advanced over the guidewire across the mitral valve and the balloon dilated to 
stretch the valve and reduce the degree of stenosis.
16.80  Causes of mitral regurgitation
 Mitral valve prolapse
 Dilatation of the left ventricle and mitral valve ring (coronary artery disease, 
cardiomyopathy)
 Damage to valve cusps and chordae (rheumatic heart disease, endocarditis)
 Ischaemia or infarction of the papillary muscle
 Myocardial infarction

[[p500]]
456  CARDIOLOGY
Other causes of mitral regurgitation
Mitral valve function depends on the chordae tendineae and their pap-
illary muscles; dilatation of the LV distorts the geometry of these and 
may cause mitral regurgitation (see Box 16.80). Dilated cardiomyopathy 
and heart failure from CAD are common causes of so-called ‘functional’ 
mitral regurgitation. Endocarditis is an important cause of acute mitral 
regurgitation.
Clinical features
Symptoms and signs depend on the underlying cause and how suddenly the 
regurgitation develops (Box 16.81). Chronic mitral regurgitation produces a 
symptom complex that is similar to that of mitral stenosis but sudden-onset 
mitral regurgitation usually presents with acute pulmonary oedema.
The regurgitant jet causes an apical systolic murmur (Fig. 16.82), which 
radiates into the axilla and may be accompanied by a thrill. Increased 
forward ow through the mitral valve causes a loud third heart sound 
and even a short mid-diastolic murmur. The apex beat feels active and 
rocking due to left ventricular volume overload and is usually displaced 
to the left as a result of left ventricular dilatation.
Investigations
Echocardiography is a pivotal investigation. The severity of regurgitation 
can be assessed by Doppler and information may also be gained on 
papillary muscle function and valve prolapse. An ECG should be per-
formed and commonly shows AF, as a consequence of atrial dilatation. 
Pansystolic murmur heard best at apex
and left sternal edge (diaphragm),
radiates to axilla
LA
LV
A
B
0
25
Systolic
wave in LA
Dilated left
ventricle
Dilated left
atrium
50
75
100
LA
LV
Systole
mmHg
1
1
Soft
PSM
A2P2
S3
Fig. 16.81 Mitral regurgitation: murmur and systolic wave in left atrial pressure. The rst sound is normal or soft and merges with a pansystolic murmur (PSM) 
 = left ventricle)
16.81  Clinical features of mitral regurgitation
Clinical feature
Cause
Symptoms
Breathlessness
Fatigue
Oedema, ascites
Palpitation
Pulmonary congestion
Low cardiac output
Right heart failure
Atrial brillation
Signs
Atrial brillation
Atrial dilatation
Displaced apex beat
Cardiomegaly
Auscultation:
 Apical pansystolic murmur
Regurgitation of blood from left 
ventricle to left atrium
 Soft S1
Valve does not close properly
 Apical S3
Rapid ow of blood into left ventricle
Crepitations 
Left heart failure
Pulmonary oedema 
Pleural effusions 
Right ventricular heave
Pulmonary hypertension
Raised jugular venous pressure
Right heart failure
Oedema
Right heart failure
}

[[p501]]
Diseases of the heart valves  457
16
Cardiac catheterisation is indicated when surgery is being considered 
(Box 16.82). During catheterisation, the severity of mitral regurgitation 
can be assessed by left ventriculography and by the size of the v (sys-
tolic) waves in the left atrial or pulmonary artery wedge pressure trace.
Management
Mitral regurgitation of moderate severity can be treated medically with 
diuretics and vasodilators. Digoxin and anticoagulants should be given if 
AF is present (Box 16.83). If systemic hypertension is present, it should 
be treated with vasodilators such as ACE inhibitors or ARBs, since high 
afterload may worsen the degree of regurgitation. All patients should be 
reviewed at regular intervals, both clinically and by echocardiography. 
Worsening symptoms, progressive cardiomegaly or echocardiographic 
evidence of deteriorating left ventricular function are indications for mitral 
valve replacement or repair. Mitral valve repair is now the treatment of 
choice for severe mitral regurgitation, because early repair appears to 
prevent irreversible left ventricular damage. Mitral regurgitation often 
accompanies left ventricular failure associated with CAD. If such patients 
are to undergo CABG surgery, it is common practice to repair the valve 
and restore mitral valve function by inserting an annuloplasty ring to over-
come annular dilatation and to bring the valve leaets closer together. 
Unfortunately, it can be difcult to determine whether it is the ventricular 
dilatation or the mitral regurgitation that is the predominant problem. If 
ventricular dilatation is the underlying cause of mitral regurgitation, then 
mitral valve repair or replacement may actually worsen ventricular func-
tion, as the ventricle can no longer empty into the low-pressure LA.
Aortic valve disease
Aortic stenosis
There are several causes of aortic stenosis but the age at which 
patientspresent can give a clue to the most likely diagnosis (Box16.84). 
mmHg
Peak-to-peak
systolic gradient
Diminished
pulse pressure
Systolic
pressure gradient
Aorta
LV
50
0
100
150
Ejection systolic murmur
radiates to right upper sternal
edge, suprasternal notch
and carotids
Murmur also heard
at apex
Post-stenotic
dilatation of
aortic arch
Stenosed
aortic valve
Left ventricular
hypertrophy
4
1
EC
A2 P2
Soft
1
EC
A2 P2
Fig. 16.82 Aortic stenosis. Pressure traces show the systolic gradient between left ventricle (LV) and aorta. The ‘diamond-shaped’ murmur is heard best with the diaphragm in the 
aortic outow and also at the apex. An ejection click (EC) may be present in young patients with a bicuspid aortic valve but not in older patients with calcied valves. Aortic stenosis 
may lead to left ventricular hypertrophy with a fourth sound at the apex and post-stenotic dilatation of the aortic arch. Fig. 16.11 shows the typical Doppler signal with aortic stenosis.
16.82  Investigations in mitral regurgitation
ECG
 P-mitrale
 Atrial brillation
Chest X-ray
 Enlarged left atrium
 Enlarged left ventricle
 Pulmonary venous congestion
 Pulmonary oedema (if acute)
Echo
 Dilated left atrium, left ventricle
 Dynamic left ventricle (unless myocardial 
dysfunction predominates)
 Structural abnormalities of 
mitral valve
Doppler
 Detects and quanties regurgitation
Cardiac catheterisation
 Dilated left atrium, dilated left ventricle, 
mitral regurgitation
 Pulmonary hypertension
 Coexisting coronary artery 
disease
16.83  Medical management of mitral regurgitation
 Diuretics
 Vasodilators if hypertension is present
 Digoxin if atrial brillation is present
 Anticoagulants if atrial brillation is present

[[p502]]
458  CARDIOLOGY
In congenital aortic stenosis, obstruction is present from birth or 
becomes apparent during infancy. With bicuspid aortic valves, 
obstruction may take years to develop as the valve becomes brotic 
and calcied, and these patients present as young to middle-aged 
adults. Rheumatic disease of the aortic valve presents at a similar age 
but is usually accompanied by mitral valve disease. In older people, 
tricuspid aortic valves may become stenotic as the result of bro-
sis and calcication. Stenosis develops slowly, typically occurring at 
30–60 years in those with rheumatic disease, 50–60 years in those 
with bicuspid aortic valves and 70–90 years in those with calcic 
aortic disease.
Pathogenesis
Cardiac output is initially maintained in patients with aortic stenosis at the 
cost of a steadily increasing pressure gradient across the aortic valve. 
With progression of the stenosis, the LV becomes increasingly hyper-
trophied and coronary blood ow may be inadequate to supply the 
myocardium, such that angina can develop even in the absence of coex-
isting CAD. The xed outow obstruction limits the increase in cardiac 
output required on exercise. Eventually, the LV can no longer overcome 
the outow tract obstruction and LV failure results, leading to pulmonary 
oedema.
Clinical features
Aortic stenosis is commonly picked up in asymptomatic patients at rou-
tine clinical examination but the three cardinal symptoms are angina, 
breathlessness and syncope (Box 16.85). Angina arises either because 
of the increased demands of the hypertrophied LV working against the 
high-pressure outow tract obstruction, or the presence of coexisting 
CAD, which affects over 50% of patients. Exertional breathlessness 
suggests cardiac decompensation as a consequence of the excessive 
pressure overload placed on the LV. Syncope usually occurs on exertion 
when cardiac output fails to rise to meet demand, leading to a fall in 
BP. Sometimes patients with severe aortic stenosis do not complain of 
symptoms. If, on clinical evaluation, this appears to be due to a seden-
tary lifestyle, a careful exercise test may reveal symptoms on modest 
exertion.
The characteristic clinical signs of severe aortic stenosis are shown 
in Box 16.85. A harsh ejection systolic murmur radiates to the neck, 
with a soft second heart sound, particularly in those with calcic valves. 
The murmur is often likened to a saw cutting wood and may (especially 
in older patients) have a musical quality like the ‘mew’ of a seagull (see 
Fig. 16.82). The severity of aortic stenosis may be difcult to gauge clin-
ically, as older patients with a non-compliant ‘stiff’ arterial system may 
have an apparently normal carotid upstroke in the presence of severe 
aortic stenosis. Milder degrees of stenosis may be difcult to distinguish 
from aortic sclerosis, in which the valve is thickened or calcied but 
not obstructed. A careful examination should be made for other valve 
lesions, particularly in rheumatic heart disease, when there is frequently 
concomitant mitral valve disease. In contrast to patients with mitral ste-
nosis, which tends to progress very slowly, patients with aortic stenosis 
typically remain asymptomatic for many years but deteriorate rapidly 
when symptoms develop; if otherwise untreated, they usually die within 
3–5 years of presentation.
Investigations
Echocardiography is a pivotal investigation in patients suspected of 
having aortic stenosis. It can demonstrate restricted valve opening 
(Fig.16.83) and Doppler assessment permits calculation of the systolic 
gradient across the aortic valve, from which the severity of stenosis can 
be assessed (see Fig. 16.11). In patients with impaired left ventricular 
function, velocities across the aortic valve may be diminished because 
of a reduced stroke volume; this is called low-ow aortic stenosis. When 
marked aortic regurgitation or elevated cardiac output is present, veloc-
ities are increased because of an increased stroke volume and this 
may overestimate stenosis severity on Doppler echocardiography. In 
advanced cases, ECG features of LV hypertrophy (Box 16.86) are often 
pronounced (Fig. 16.84), and down-sloping ST segments and T inver-
sion (‘strain pattern’) are seen in the lateral leads, reecting left ventricular 
brosis. Nevertheless, the ECG can be normal, despite severe stenosis. 
Occasionally, there is evidence of AV block due to the encroachment of 
the brocalcic process on the adjacent AV node and His–Purkinje sys-
tem; an occasional cause of syncope in these patients. Imaging with CT 
may be useful in assessing the degree of valve calcication where there 
is uncertainty of disease severity.
Management
Irrespective of the severity of valve stenosis, patients with asymptomatic 
aortic stenosis have a good immediate prognosis and conservative man-
agement is appropriate. Such patients should be kept under review, as 
the development of angina, syncope, symptoms of low cardiac output 
or heart failure has a poor prognosis and is an indication for prompt 
surgery. In practice, patients with moderate or severe stenosis should 
be evaluated every 1–2 years with Doppler echocardiography to detect 
evidence of progression in severity. The intervals between reviews should 
be more frequent (typically 3–6-monthly) in older patients with heavily 
calcied valves.
Patients with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis should have prompt 
aortic valve replacement. Delay exposes the patient to the risk of sud-
den death or irreversible deterioration in ventricular function. Old age is 
not a contraindication to valve replacement and results are very good in 
experienced centres, even for those in their eighties (Box 16.87). This is 
especially the case with transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI, see 
Fig. 16.86). Aortic balloon valvuloplasty is useful in congenital aortic ste-
nosis but has limited value in older patients with calcic aortic stenosis.
Anticoagulants are required only in patients who have AF or those who 
have had a valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis.
Aortic regurgitation
This condition can result from either disease of the aortic valve cusps, 
infection, trauma or dilatation of the aortic root. The causes are summa-
rised in Box 16.88
16.84  Causes of aortic stenosis
Infants, children, adolescents
 Congenital aortic stenosis
 Congenital subvalvular aortic stenosis
 Congenital supravalvular aortic stenosis
Young to middle-aged adults
 Calcication and brosis of congenitally bicuspid aortic valve
 Rheumatic aortic stenosis
Middle-aged to older adults
 Senile degenerative aortic stenosis
 Calcication of bicuspid valve
 Rheumatic aortic stenosis
16.85  Clinical features of aortic stenosis
Symptoms
 Mild or moderate stenosis: usually 
asymptomatic
 Exertional dyspnoea
 Angina
 Exertional syncope
 Sudden death
 Episodes of acute pulmonary oedema
Signs
 Ejection systolic murmur
 Slow-rising carotid pulse
 Heaving apex beat (left ventricular 
pressure overload)
 Narrow pulse pressure
 Signs of pulmonary venous congestion

[[p503]]
Diseases of the heart valves  459
16
Pathogenesis
Regurgitation of blood through the aortic valve causes the LV to dilate 
as cardiac output increases to maintain the demands of the circulation. 
The stroke volume of the LV may eventually be doubled and the major 
arteries are then conspicuously pulsatile. As the disease progresses, left 
ventricular failure develops, leading to a rise in left ventricular end-dias-
tolic pressure and pulmonary oedema.
Clinical features
Until the onset of breathlessness, the only symptom may be an aware-
ness of the heart beat (Box 16.89), particularly when lying on the left side, 
which results from the increased stroke volume. Paroxysmal nocturnal 
A
C
D
B
Fig. 16.83 Two-dimensional echocardiogram comparing a normal individual 
and a patient with calcic aortic stenosis.
the thickened leaets have barely moved (arrows). From Newby D, Grubb N. Cardiology: 
an illustrated colour text. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2005
16.86  Investigations in aortic stenosis
ECG
 Left ventricular hypertrophy
 Left bundle branch block
Chest X-ray
 May be normal; sometimes enlarged left ventricle and dilated ascending aorta 
on postero-anterior view, calcied valve on lateral view
Echo
 Calcied valve with restricted opening, hypertrophied left ventricle
Doppler
 Measurement of severity of stenosis
 Detection of associated aortic regurgitation
Cardiac catheterisation
 Mainly to identify associated coronary artery disease
 May be used to measure gradient between left ventricle and aorta
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
II
I
Fig. 16.84 Left ventricular hypertrophy. QRS complexes in limb leads have 
increased amplitude with very large R waves in V4 and V5 and a deep S wave in V3. 
There is ST depression and T-wave inversion in leads II, III, aVF, V5 and V6: a ‘left 
ventricular strain’ pattern.

[[p504]]
460  CARDIOLOGY
dyspnoea is sometimes the rst symptom, and peripheral oedema or 
angina may occur. The characteristic murmur is best heard to the left 
of the sternum during held expiration (Fig. 16.85); a thrill is rare. A sys-
tolic murmur due to the increased stroke volume is common and does 
not necessarily indicate stenosis. The regurgitant jet causes uttering 
of the mitral valve and, if severe, causes partial closure of the anterior 
mitral leaet, leading to functional mitral stenosis and a soft mid-diastolic 
(Austin Flint) murmur.
Acute severe regurgitation may occur as the result of perforation or 
tear of an aortic cusp in endocarditis. In this circumstance there may 
be no time for compensatory left ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation 
to develop and the features of heart failure may predominate. The clas-
sical signs of aortic regurgitation in such patients may be masked by 
tachycardia and an abrupt rise in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. 
The pulse pressure may also be normal or near-normal and the diastolic 
murmur may be short or even absent.
Investigations
Doppler echocardiography is the investigation of rst choice for detecting 
regurgitation (Box 16.90). In severe acute aortic regurgitation the rapid 
rise in left ventricular diastolic pressure may cause premature mitral valve 
closure. Cardiac catheterisation and aortography are usually performed 
to assess the severity of regurgitation, to determine if there is dilatation of 
the aorta and to screen for the presence of coexisting CAD. MRI can also 
be useful in assessing the degree and extent of aortic dilatation if this is 
suspected on chest X-ray or echocardiography.
Management
Treatment may be required for underlying conditions, such as endocardi-
tis or syphilis. Aortic valve replacement is indicated if aortic regurgitation 
causes symptoms, and this may need to be combined with aortic root 
replacement and coronary bypass surgery. Those with chronic aortic 
regurgitation can remain asymptomatic for many years because com-
pensatory ventricular dilatation and hypertrophy occur, but should be 
advised to report the development of any symptoms of breathlessness 
or angina. Asymptomatic patients should also be followed up annually 
with echocardiography for evidence of increasing ventricular size. If this 
occurs or if the end-systolic dimension increases to 55 mm or more, then 
aortic valve replacement should be undertaken. If systemic hypertension 
is present, non-rate-limiting vasodilators, such as nifedipine, should be 
used to control systolic BP. There is conicting evidence regarding the 
need for aortic valve replacement in asymptomatic patients with severe 
aortic regurgitation. When aortic root dilatation is the cause of aortic 
regurgitation, as can occur in Marfan syndrome, aortic root replacement 
is usually necessary.
Tricuspid valve disease
Tricuspid stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis is usually rheumatic in origin and is rare in higher- 
income countries. Tricuspid disease occurs in fewer than 5% of patients 
with rheumatic heart disease and then nearly always occurs in associa-
tion with mitral and aortic valve disease. Tricuspid stenosis and regurgi-
tation may also occur in the carcinoid syndrome.
Clinical features and investigations
Although the symptoms of mitral and aortic valve disease predominate, 
tricuspid stenosis may cause symptoms of right heart failure, including 
hepatic discomfort and peripheral oedema.
The main clinical feature is a raised JVP with a prominent a wave, 
and a slow y descent due to the loss of normal rapid right ventricular 
lling. There is also a mid-diastolic murmur, best heard at the lower left or 
right sternal border. This is generally higher-pitched than the murmur of 
mitral stenosis and is increased by inspiration. Right heart failure causes 
hepatomegaly with pre-systolic pulsation (large a wave), ascites and 
peripheral oedema. The diagnosis can be conrmed by Doppler echo-
cardiography, which shows similar appearances to those of rheumatic 
mitral stenosis.
Management
In patients who require surgery to other valves, the tricuspid valve can 
either be replaced or treated with valvotomy. Balloon valvuloplasty can 
be used to treat rare cases of isolated tricuspid stenosis.
16.87 Aortic stenosis in old age
 Incidence: the most common form of valve disease affecting the very old.
 Symptoms: a common cause of syncope, angina and heart failure in the very 
old.
 Signs: because of increasing stiffening in the central arteries, low pulse 
pressure and a slow-rising pulse may not be present.
 Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI): a good option in older 
individuals because less invasive than surgery.
 Surgery: can be successful in those aged 80 years or more in the absence of 
comorbidity, but with a higher operative mortality. The prognosis without surgery 
is poor once symptoms have developed.
 Valve replacement type: a biological valve is often preferable to a mechanical 
one because this obviates the need for anticoagulation, and the durability of 
biological valves usually exceeds the patient’s anticipated life expectancy.
16.88 Causes of aortic regurgitation
Congenital
 Bicuspid valve or disproportionate cusps
Acquired
 Rheumatic disease
 Infective endocarditis
 Trauma
 Causes of aortic dilatation:
Marfan syndrome
Aneurysm
Aortic dissection
Syphilis
Ankylosing spondylitis
16.89 Clinical features of aortic regurgitation
Symptoms
Mild to moderate aortic regurgitation
 Often asymptomatic
 Palpitations
Severe aortic regurgitation
 Breathlessness
 Angina
Signs
Pulses
 Large-volume or ‘collapsing’ pulse
 Low diastolic and increased pulse pressure
 Bounding peripheral pulses
 Capillary pulsation in nail beds: Quincke’s sign
 Femoral bruit (‘pistol shot’): Duroziez’s sign
 Head nodding with pulse: de Musset’s sign
Murmurs
 Early diastolic murmur
 Systolic murmur (increased stroke volume)
 Austin Flint murmur (soft mid-diastolic)
Other signs
 Displaced, thrusting apex beat (volume overload)
 Pre-systolic impulse
 Third heart sound
 Fourth heart sound
 Crepitations (pulmonary venous congestion)

[[p505]]
Diseases of the heart valves  461
16
Tricuspid regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation is common, and is most frequently functional, 
occurring as a result of right ventricular dilatation due to right heart failure 
or biventricular failure. It may also be the result of other conditions, as 
summarised in Box 16.91
Clinical features
Symptoms are usually non-specic, with tiredness related to reduced 
cardiac output, and oedema and hepatic enlargement due to venous 
congestion. The most prominent sign is a ‘giant’ v wave in the jugular 
venous pulse (a cv wave replaces the normal x descent). Other features 
include a pansystolic murmur at the left sternal border and a pulsatile 
liver. Echocardiography may reveal dilatation of the RV. If the valve has 
been affected by rheumatic disease, the leaets will appear thickened 
and, in endocarditis, vegetations may be seen.
Management
Tricuspid regurgitation due to right ventricular dilatation often improves 
when the cardiac failure is treated. Patients with a normal pulmonary 
artery pressure tolerate isolated tricuspid reux well, and valves dam-
aged by endocarditis do not usually need to be replaced. Patients under-
going mitral valve replacement, who have tricuspid regurgitation due to 
marked dilatation of the tricuspid annulus, benet from valve repair with 
an annuloplasty ring to bring the leaets closer together. Those with 
rheumatic damage may require tricuspid valve replacement.
Pulmonary valve disease
Pulmonary stenosis
This can occur in the carcinoid syndrome but is usually congenital, in 
which case it may be isolated or associated with other abnormalities, 
such as Fallot’s tetralogy.
Clinical features
The principal nding on examination is an ejection systolic murmur, 
loudest at the left upper sternum and radiating towards the left shoul-
der. There may be a thrill, best felt when the patient leans forwards 
and breathes out. The murmur is often preceded by an ejection sound 
(click). Delay in right ventricular ejection may cause wide splitting of 
the second heart sound. Severe pulmonary stenosis is characterised 
by a loud, harsh murmur, an inaudible pulmonary closure sound (P2), 
an increased right ventricular heave, and prominent a waves in the 
jugular pulse.
1
A2 P2
Aorta
LV
150
100
50
0
mmHg
Increased
pulse
pressure
Lean patient forward with
breath held in expiration
to hear early diastolic
murmur best
Dilated
aorta
Aortic
valve
Dilated left
ventricle
Colour jet of aortic
regurgitation
Fig. 16.85 Aortic regurgitation. The early diastolic murmur is best heard at the left sternal border and may be accompanied by an ejection systolic (‘to-and-fro’) murmur. The 
aortic arch and left ventricle (LV) may become dilated.The inset shows a Doppler echocardiogram with the regurgitant jet (arrows). Inset (Colour Doppler echo) From Newby D, 
Grubb N. Cardiology: an illustrated colour text. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2005
16.90  Investigations in aortic regurgitation
ECG
 Initially normal, later left ventricular hypertrophy and T-wave inversion
Chest X-ray
 Cardiac dilatation, maybe aortic dilatation
 Features of left heart failure
Echo
 Dilated left ventricle
 Hyperdynamic left ventricle
 Doppler detects reux
 Fluttering anterior mitral leaet
Cardiac catheterisation*
 Dilated left ventricle
 Aortic regurgitation
 Dilated aortic root
*Not always required.
16.91  Causes of tricuspid regurgitation
Primary
 Rheumatic heart disease
 Endocarditis, particularly in intravenous drug users
 Ebstein’s congenital anomaly (see Box 16.102)
Secondary
 Right ventricular failure
 Right ventricular infarction
 Pulmonary hypertension, secondary to chronic pulmonary disease

[[p506]]
462  CARDIOLOGY
Investigations
Doppler echocardiography is the denitive investigation. ECG may show 
evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy, and post-stenotic dilatation in 
the pulmonary artery may be observed on the chest X-ray.
Management
Mild to moderate isolated pulmonary stenosis is relatively common and 
does not usually progress or require treatment. Severe pulmonary ste-
nosis (resting gradient > 50 mmHg with a normal cardiac output) can be 
treated by percutaneous pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty or, if this is not 
available, by surgical valvotomy. Long-term results are very good. Post-
operative pulmonary regurgitation is common but benign.
Pulmonary regurgitation
This is rare in isolation and is usually associated with pulmonary artery 
dilatation due to pulmonary hypertension. It may complicate mitral steno-
sis, producing an early diastolic decrescendo murmur at the left sternal 
border that is difcult to distinguish from aortic regurgitation (Graham 
Steell murmur). The pulmonary hypertension may be secondary to other 
disease of the left side of the heart, primary pulmonary vascular disease 
or Eisenmenger syndrome. Trivial pulmonary regurgitation is a frequent 
nding in normal individuals and has no clinical signicance.
Prosthetic valves
Diseased heart valves can be replaced with mechanical or biological 
prostheses. The three main types of mechanical prosthesis are the ball 
and cage, tilting single disc and tilting bi-leaet valves. All generate pros-
thetic sounds or clicks on auscultation. Pig or allograft valves mounted 
on a supporting stent are the most commonly used biological valves. 
They generate normal heart sounds. All prosthetic valves used in the 
aortic position produce a systolic ow murmur.
All mechanical valves require long-term anticoagulation because they 
can cause systemic thromboembolism or may develop valve thrombosis 
or obstruction (Box 16.92); the prosthetic clicks may become inaudi-
ble if the valve malfunctions. Biological valves have the advantage of 
not requiring anticoagulants to maintain proper function although many 
patients undergoing valve replacement surgery, especially mitral valve 
replacement, will have AF that requires anticoagulation anyway. Biological 
valves are less durable than mechanical valves and may degenerate 7 or 
more years after implantation, particularly when used in the mitral posi-
tion. They are more durable in the aortic position and in older patients, so 
are particularly appropriate for patients over 65 undergoing aortic valve 
replacement.
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation
For patients being considered for aortic valve surgery, especially due 
to aortic stenosis, transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is an 
alternative to surgical aortic valve replacement. The native valve is not 
removed but is compressed by the new bioprosthetic valve, which is 
implanted within it. The bioprosthetic valve is mounted on a large stent-
like structure and is implanted through a catheter inserted in the femoral 
artery (Fig. 16.86). TAVI has several major advantages. It avoids the need 
for a sternotomy, is associated with a short recovery period, can be used 
in high-risk and otherwise inoperable patients, and is much better tol-
erated by older patients. Complications include stroke (2%) and heart 
block necessitating pacemaker implantation (5%–15%).
Prosthetic valve dysfunction
Symptoms or signs of unexplained heart failure in a patient with a pros-
thetic heart valve may be due to valve dysfunction, and urgent assess-
ment is required. Metallic valves can suffer strut fracture and fail, causing 
catastrophic regurgitation. Alternatively, they may thrombose and cause 
systemic thromboembolism or valve obstruction, especially in the pres-
ence of inadequate anticoagulation. Biological valve dysfunction is usu-
ally associated with the development of a regurgitant murmur and may 
begin to develop 8–10 years after implantation.
Infective endocarditis
This is caused by microbial infection of a heart valve, the lining of a car-
diac chamber or blood vessel, or a congenital anomaly. Both native and 
prosthetic valves can be affected. The most common causes of infective 
endocarditis are streptococci and staphylococci but other organisms 
may also be involved.
Epidemiology
The incidence of infective endocarditis in community-based studies 
ranges from 5 to 15 cases per 100 000 per annum. More than 50% of 
patients are over 60 years of age (Box 16.93). In a large British study, the 
underlying condition was rheumatic heart disease in 24% of patients, 
congenital heart disease in 19%, and other cardiac abnormalities such 
as calcied aortic valve or oppy mitral valve in 25%. The remaining 32% 
were not thought to have a pre-existing cardiac abnormality. Bacterial 
endocarditis is a serious illness; the case fatality is approximately 20% 
even with treatment, and is even higher in those with prosthetic valve 
endocarditis and those infected with antibiotic-resistant organisms.
Pathophysiology
Infective endocarditis typically occurs at sites of pre-existing endocardial 
damage, but infection with particularly virulent or aggressive organisms, 
such as Staphylococcus aureus, can cause endocarditis in a previously 
normal heart. Staphylococcal endocarditis of the tricuspid valve is a 
common complication of intravenous drug use. Many acquired and con-
genital cardiac lesions are vulnerable, particularly areas of endocardial 
damage caused by a high-pressure jet of blood, such as ventricular sep-
tal defect, mitral regurgitation and aortic regurgitation, many of which are 
haemodynamically insignicant. In contrast, the risk of endocarditis at the 
site of haemodynamically important low-pressure lesions, such as a large 
atrial septal defect, is minimal.
Infection tends to occur at sites of endothelial damage because they 
attract deposits of platelets and brin that are vulnerable to colonisation 
by blood-borne organisms. The avascular valve tissue and presence of 
brin and platelet aggregates help to protect proliferating organisms from 
host defence mechanisms. When the infection is established, vegetations 
composed of organisms, brin and platelets grow and may become large 
enough to cause obstruction or embolism. Adjacent tissues are destroyed 
and abscesses may form. Valve regurgitation may develop or increase if 
the affected valve is damaged by tissue distortion, cusp perforation or 
disruption of chordae. Extracardiac manifestations, such as vasculitis and 
skin lesions, may occur as the result of either emboli or immune com-
plex deposition. Mycotic aneurysms may develop in arteries at the site of 
infected emboli. In fatal cases, infarction of the spleen and kidneys and, 
sometimes, an immune glomerulonephritis may be found at postmortem.
Microbiology
Over three-quarters of cases are caused by streptococci or staphylo-
cocci. Viridans streptococci, such as Streptococcus mitis and Strep. 
16.92  Anticoagulation targets and prosthetic heart valves
Mechanical valves
Target INR
Ball and cage (e.g. Starr–Edwards)
3.0–4.0
Tilting disc (e.g. Bjork–Shiley)
Bi-leaet (e.g. St Jude)
2.5–3.0
Biological valves with atrial brillation
2.0–3.0
(INR = International Normalised Ratio)

[[p507]]
Diseases of the heart valves  463
16
sanguis, which are commensals in the oral cavity, can enter the blood 
stream on chewing or tooth-brushing, or at the time of dental treatment, 
and are common causes of subacute endocarditis (Box 16.94). Other 
organisms, including Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium and Strep. gallo-
lyticus subsp. gallolyticus (previously known as Strep. bovis), may enter 
the blood from the bowel or urinary tract. Patients who are found to have 
endocarditis caused by Strep. gallolyticus should undergo colonoscopy, 
since this organism is associated with large-bowel malignancy.
Staph. aureus has now overtaken streptococci as the most common 
cause of acute endocarditis. It originates from skin infections, abscesses or 
vascular access sites such as intravenous and central lines, or from intra-
venous drug use. It is highly virulent and invasive, usually producing orid 
vegetations, rapid valve destruction and abscess formation. Other causes 
of acute endocarditis include Strep. pneumoniae and Strep. pyogenes
Post-operative endocarditis after cardiac surgery may affect native or 
prosthetic heart valves or other prosthetic materials. The most common 
organisms are coagulase-negative staphylococci such as Staph. epi-
dermidis, which are part of the normal skin ora. There is frequently a 
history of wound infection with the same organism. Coagulase-negative 
staphylococci cause native valve endocarditis in approximately 5% of 
cases and this possibility should always be considered before they are 
dismissed as blood culture contaminants. Another coagulase-negative 
staphylococcus, Staph. lugdenensis, causes a rapidly destructive acute 
endocarditis that is associated with previously normal valves and multi-
ple emboli. Unless accurately identied, it may also be overlooked as a 
contaminant.
In Q fever endocarditis due to Coxiella burnetii, the patient often has a 
history of contact with farm animals. The aortic valve is usually affected 
and there may also be hepatitis, pneumonia and purpura. Life-long anti-
biotic therapy may be required.
In about 3%–4% of cases, endocarditis may be caused by Gram-
negative bacteria of the so-called HACEK group (Haemophilus aphro-
philus – now known as Aggregatibacter aphrophilus Aggregatibacter 
actinomycetemcomitans; Cardiobacterium hominis; Eikenella corrodens; 
and Kingella kingae). These are slow-growing, fastidious Gram-negative 
organisms that are oropharyngeal commensals. The diagnosis may be 
revealed only after prolonged culture and the organisms may be resistant 
to penicillin.
Brucella endocarditis is associated with a history of contact with goats 
or cattle and often affects the aortic valve.
Yeasts and fungi, such as Candida and Aspergillus, may attack pre-
viously normal or prosthetic valves, particularly in immunocompromised 
patients or those with in-dwelling intravenous catheters. Abscesses and 
emboli are common, therapy is difcult, surgery is often required and 
mortality is high. Concomitant bacterial infection may be present.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 16.86 Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).
16.93  Endocarditis in old age
 Symptoms and signs: may be non-specic, with delirium, weight loss, malaise 
and weakness, and the diagnosis may not be suspected.
 Common causative organisms: often enterococci (from the urinary tract) and 
Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (from a colonic source).
 Morbidity and mortality: much higher.

[[p508]]
464  CARDIOLOGY
Clinical features
Endocarditis can take either an acute or a more insidious ‘subacute’ 
form; the latter often passes undetected initially. There is considerable 
overlap because the clinical pattern is inuenced not only by the organ-
ism but also by the site of infection, prior antibiotic therapy and the pres-
ence of a valve or shunt prosthesis. The subacute form may abruptly 
develop acute life-threatening complications, such as valve disruption 
or emboli. The Duke criteria for diagnosis of infective endocarditis are 
shown in Box 16.95
Subacute endocarditis
This should be suspected when a patient with congenital or valvular heart 
disease develops a persistent fever, complains of unusual tiredness, night 
sweats or weight loss, or develops new signs of valve dysfunction or 
heart failure. Less often, it presents as an embolic stroke or peripheral 
arterial embolism. Other features (Fig. 16.87) include purpura and pete-
chial haemorrhages in the skin and mucous membranes, and splinter 
haemorrhages under the ngernails or toenails. Osler’s nodes are painful, 
tender swellings at the ngertips that are probably the product of vascu-
litis; they are rare. Digital clubbing is a late sign. The spleen is frequently 
palpable; in Coxiella infections, the spleen and the liver may be consider-
ably enlarged. Non-visible haematuria is common. The nding of any of 
these features in a patient with persistent fever or malaise is an indication 
for re-examination to detect hitherto unrecognised heart disease.
Acute endocarditis
This presents as a severe febrile illness with prominent and changing 
heart murmurs and petechiae. Clinical stigmata of chronic endocarditis 
are usually absent. Embolic events are common, and cardiac or renal 
failure may develop rapidly. Abscesses may be detected on echocar-
diography. Partially treated acute endocarditis behaves like subacute 
endocarditis.
Post-operative endocarditis
This may present as an unexplained fever in a patient who has had 
heart valve surgery. The infection usually involves the valve ring and may 
resemble subacute or acute endocarditis, depending on the virulence 
of the organism. Morbidity and mortality are high and revision surgery is 
often required. The range of organisms is similar to that seen in native 
valve disease, but when endocarditis occurs during the rst few weeks 
after surgery it is usually due to infection with a coagulase-negative 
staphylococcus that was introduced during the perioperative period.
Investigations
Blood culture (see Fig. 6.6) is the pivotal investigation to identify the 
organism that is the cause of the infection and to guide antibiotic therapy. 
Three to six sets of blood cultures should be taken prior to commenc-
ing therapy and should not wait for episodes of pyrexia. The rst two 
specimens will detect bacteraemia in 90% of culture-positive cases. A 
meticulous aseptic technique is essential. Taking discrete sets of blood 
cultures from peripheral sites at intervals of ≥ 6 hours reduces the risk of 
misdiagnosis due to contamination with skin commensals. Isolation of 
a typical organism in more than one culture provides strong evidence in 
favour of the diagnosis (see Box 16.95). An in-dwelling line should not be 
used to take cultures. Both aerobic and anaerobic cultures are required.
Echocardiography is key for detecting and following the progress 
of vegetations, for assessing valve damage and for detecting abscess 
formation. Vegetations as small as 2–4 mm can be detected by trans-
thoracic echocardiography, and even smaller ones (1–1.5 mm) can be 
visualised by TOE, which is particularly valuable for identifying abscess 
formation and investigating patients with prosthetic heart valves. 
Vegetations may be difcult to distinguish in the presence of an abnormal 
16.94  Microbiology of infective endocarditis
Pathogen
Of native valve (n = 280)
In injection drug users (n = 87)
Of prosthetic valve
Early (n = 15)
Late (n = 72)
Staphylococci
124 (44%)
60 (69%)
10 (67%)
33 (46%)
Staph. aureus
106 (38%)
60 (69%)
3 (20%)
15 (21%)
Coagulase-negative
18 (6%)
0
7 (47%)
18 (25%)
Streptococci
86 (31%)
7 (8%)
0
25 (35%)
Oral
59 (21%)
3 (3%)
0
19 (26%)
Others (non-enterococcal)
27 (10%)
4 (5%)
0
6 (8%)
Enterococcus spp.
21 (8%)
2 (2%)
1 (7%)
5 (7%)
HACEK
12 (4%)
0
0
1 (1%)
Polymicrobial
6 (2%)
8 (9%)
0
1 (1%)
Other bacteria
12 (4%)
4 (5%)
0
2 (3%)
Fungi
3 (1%)
2 (2%)
0
0
Negative blood culture
16 (6%)
4 (5%)
4 (27%)
5 (7%)
(HACEK = Haemophilus aphrophilus – now known as Aggregatibacter aphrophilus–Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans; Cardiobacterium hominis; Eikenella corrodens; and Kingella kingae)
Adapted from Moreillon P, Que YA. Infective endocarditis. Lancet 2004; 363:139–149.
16.95  Diagnosis of infective endocarditis*
Major criteria
Positive blood culture
 Typical organism from two cultures
 Persistent positive blood cultures taken > 12hrs apart
 Three or more positive cultures taken over > 1 hr
Endocardial involvement
 Positive echocardiographic ndings of vegetations
 New valvular regurgitation
Minor criteria
 Predisposing valvular or cardiac abnormality
 Intravenous drug misuse
 Pyrexia ≥  38°C
 Embolic phenomenon
 Vasculitic phenomenon
 Blood cultures suggestive: organism grown but not achieving major criteria
 Suggestive echocardiographic ndings
*Modied Duke criteria. Patients with two major, or one major and three minor, or ve minor 
have denite endocarditis. Patients with one major and one minor, or three minor have possible 
endocarditis.

[[p509]]
Congenital heart disease  465
16
valve; the sensitivity of transthoracic echo is approximately 65% but that 
of TOE is more than 90%. Failure to detect vegetations does not exclude 
the diagnosis.
Elevation of the ESR, a normocytic normochromic anaemia, and leu-
cocytosis are common but not invariable. Measurement of serum CRP is 
more reliable than the ESR in monitoring progress. Proteinuria may occur 
and non-visible haematuria is usually present.
The ECG may show the development of AV block (due to aortic root 
abscess formation) and occasionally infarction due to emboli. The chest 
X-ray may show evidence of cardiac failure and cardiomegaly.
Management
A multidisciplinary approach, with cooperation between the physician, 
surgeon and microbiologist, increases the chance of a successful out-
come. Any source of infection should be removed as soon as possible; 
for example, a tooth with an apical abscess should be extracted, or an 
in-dwelling catheter or device removed.
Empirical treatment depends on the mode of presentation, the sus-
pected organism and the presence of a prosthetic valve or penicillin 
allergy. If the presentation is subacute, antibiotic treatment should ideally 
be withheld until the results of blood cultures are available. However, 
if empirical antibiotic treatment is considered necessary, amoxicillin (2 g 
IV 6 times daily) should be considered (with or without gentamicin). If 
the presentation is acute, empirical therapy should be started with van-
comycin (1 g IV twice daily) and gentamicin (1 mg/kg IV twice daily), 
with dose adjustment based on antibiotic levels. The same regimen is 
used in true penicillin allergy. Patients with suspected prosthetic valve 
endocarditis should be treated with vancomycin and gentamicin at the 
above-mentioned doses, plus rifampicin orally in a dose of 300–600 mg 
twice daily. Following identication of the causal organism, determination 
of the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the organism helps 
guide antibiotic therapy. Recommended regimens for some of the most 
common scenarios are shown in Box 16.96. More detailed information 
can be found in the 2012 British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 
guidelines (see ‘Further reading’).
A 2-week treatment regimen may be sufcient for fully sensitive strains 
of streptococci, provided specic conditions are met (Box 16.97).
Cardiac surgery with débridement of infected material and valve 
replacement may be required in a substantial proportion of patients, 
particularly those with Staph. aureus and fungal infections (Box 16.98). 
Antimicrobial therapy must be started before surgery.
Prevention
Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer routinely given to people at risk of 
infective endocarditis undergoing interventional procedures. It can be 
considered in those at the highest risk of endocarditis.
Congenital heart disease
Congenital heart disease can be the result of defects in the formation of 
the heart or great vessels or can arise because the anatomical changes 
that occur during transition between the fetus and the newborn child 
fail to proceed normally. Congenital heart disease usually presents in 
Osler's nodes
(5%)
Petechial rash
(40–50%, may be transient)
Haematuria
(60–70%)
Loss of
pulses
Subconjunctival haemorrhages
(2–5%)
Poor dentition
Systemic emboli
(7%)
Nail-fold infarct
Petechial haemorrhages on
mucous membranes and fundi
(20–30%)
'Varying' murmurs
(90% new or changed murmur)
Conduction disorder
(10–20%)
Cardiac failure
(40–50%)
Cerebral emboli
(15%)
Roth's spots in fundi
(rare, <  5%)
Splenomegaly
(30–40%, long-standing
endocarditis only)
Digital clubbing
(10%, long-standing
endocarditis only)
Splinter haemorrhages
(10%)
Fig. 16.87 Clinical features that may be present in endocarditis. Insets (Petechial rash, nail-fold infarct) From Newby D, Grubb N. Cardiology: an illustrated colour text. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2005.

[[p510]]
466  CARDIOLOGY
childhood but some patients do not present until adult life. It has been 
estimated that the incidence of haemodynamically signicant congenital 
cardiac abnormalities is about 0.8% of live births (Box 16.99). Defects 
that are well tolerated, such as atrial septal defect, may cause no symp-
toms until adult life or may be detected incidentally on routine exami-
nation or chest X-ray. Congenital defects that were previously fatal in 
childhood can now be corrected, or at least partially, so that survival to 
adult life is the norm. Such patients remain well for many years but sub-
sequently re-present in later life with related problems, such as arrhyth-
mia or heart failure (Box 16.100).
Pathophysiology
Understanding the fetal circulation helps clarify how some forms of 
congenital heart disease occur. Fig. 16.88 shows the fetal circulation 
and the changes that normally occur immediately after birth. In the 
fetus there is little blood ow through the lungs, which are collapsed 
because they are not required for gas exchange. Instead, oxygenated 
blood from the placenta passes directly from the right atrium to the 
left side of the heart through the foramen ovale without having to ow 
through the lungs, and also from the pulmonary artery into the aorta via 
the ductus arteriosus.
During early embryonic life, the heart develops as a single tube that 
folds back on itself and then divides into two separate circulations. Failure 
of septation can cause some forms of atrial and ventricular septal defect, 
whereas failure of alignment of the great vessels with the ventricles con-
tributes to transposition of the great arteries, tetralogy of Fallot and trun-
cus arteriosus. Atrial septal defects occur because the foramen ovale fails 
to close at birth, as is normal. Similarly, a persistent ductus arteriosus will 
16.96  Antimicrobial treatment of common causative organisms in infective endocarditis
Antimicrobial susceptibility
Antimicrobial
Dose
Duration
Native valve
Prosthetic valve
Streptococci
Penicillin MIC ≤  0.125 mg/L
Benzylpenicillin IV
1.2 g 6 times daily
4 weeks1
6 weeks
Penicillin MIC >  0.125, ≤  0.5 mg/L
Benzylpenicillin IV and gentamicin IV
2.4 g 6 times daily
4 weeks
6 weeks
1 mg/kg twice daily2
2 weeks
2 weeks
Penicillin MIC >  0.5  mg/L
Vancomycin IV and gentamicin IV
1 g twice daily3
4 weeks
6 weeks
1  mg/kg twice daily2
4 weeks
6 weeks
Enterococci
Amoxicillin MIC ≤ 4  mg/L and 
gentamicin MIC ≤  128 mg/L
Amoxicillin IV and gentamicin IV2
2 g 6 times daily
4 weeks
6 weeks
1  mg/kg twice daily2
4 weeks
6 weeks
Amoxicillin MIC > 4 mg/L and 
gentamicin MIC ≤ 128 mg/L
Vancomycin IV and gentamicin IV2
1 g twice daily3
4 weeks
6 weeks
1  mg/kg twice daily2
4 weeks
6 weeks
Staphylococci – native valve
Meticillin-sensitive
Flucloxacillin IV
2 g 4–6 times daily4
4 weeks
–
Meticillin-resistant, vancomycin MIC 
≤ 2 mg/L, rifampicin-sensitive
Vancomycin IV
1 g twice daily3
4 weeks
–
Rifampicin orally
300–600 mg twice daily
4 weeks
–
Staphylococci – prosthetic valve
Meticillin-sensitive
Flucloxacillin IV
2 g 4–6 times daily
–
6 weeks
and gentamicin IV
1  mg/kg twice daily2
–
6 weeks
and rifampicin orally
300–600 mg twice daily
–
6 weeks
Meticillin-resistant, vancomycin MIC 
≤ 2 mg/L, rifampicin-sensitive
Vancomycin IV
1 g twice daily3
–
6 weeks
and rifampicin orally
300–600 mg twice daily
–
6 weeks
1When conditions in Box 16.97 are met, 2 weeks of benzylpenicillin and gentamicin (1 mg/kg twice daily) may be sufcient. Ceftriaxone 2 g once daily IV/IM can be used instead of benzylpenicillin for 
those with non-severe penicillin allergy. 2Pre-dose gentamicin level should be ≤ 1 mg/L, post-dose 3–5 mg/L. Adjust dose according to levels and renal function. 3Pre-dose vancomycin level should be 
15–20 mg/L. Adjust dose according to levels and renal function. 4Use 6 times daily if weight > 85 kg.
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; MIC = minimum inhibitory concentration)
Adapted from Gould FK, Denning DW, Elliott TS, etal. Guidelines for the diagnosis and antibiotic treatment of endocarditis in adults: a report of the working party of the British Society for Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy. J Antimicrob Chemother 2012; 67:269–289.
16.97  Conditions for the short-course treatment of 
endocarditis caused by fully sensitive streptococci
 Native valve infection
 Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) ≤  0.125 mg/L
 No adverse prognostic factors (heart failure, aortic regurgitation, conduction 
defect)
 No evidence of thromboembolic disease
 No vegetations > 5 mm diameter
Clinical response within 7 days
16.98  Indications for cardiac surgery in infective endocarditis*
 Heart failure due to valve damage
 Failure of antibiotic therapy (persistent/uncontrolled infection)
 Large vegetations on left-sided heart valves with echo appearance suggesting 
high risk of emboli
 Previous evidence of systemic emboli
 Abscess formation
*Patients with prosthetic valve endocarditis or fungal endocarditis often require cardiac surgery.

[[p511]]
Congenital heart disease  467
16
remain if it fails to close after birth. Failure of the aorta to develop at the 
point of the aortic isthmus and where the ductus arteriosus attaches can 
lead to coarctation of the aorta. Maternal infection and exposure to drugs 
or toxins are important causes of congenital heart disease. Maternal 
rubella infection is associated with persistent ductus arteriosus, pulmo-
nary valvular and/or artery stenosis, and atrial septal defect. Maternal 
alcohol misuse is associated with septal defects, and maternal lupus 
erythematosus with congenital complete heart block. Genetic or chromo-
somal abnormalities, such as Down syndrome, may cause septal defects, 
and gene defects have also been identied as leading to specic abnor-
malities, such as Marfan syndrome and Turner syndrome (karyotype XO).
Clinical features
Symptoms may be absent, or the child may be breathless or fail to attain 
normal growth and development. Some defects are not compatible with 
extrauterine life and lead to neonatal death. Clinical signs vary with the 
anatomical lesion. Murmurs, thrills or signs of cardiomegaly may be 
present. In coarctation of the aorta, radio-femoral delay may be noted 
(Fig. 16.89) and some female patients have the features of Turner syn-
drome (p. 674). Features of other congenital conditions, such as Marfan 
syndrome or Down syndrome, may also be apparent. Cerebrovascular 
events and cerebral abscesses may complicate severe cyanotic con-
genital disease.
Early diagnosis is important because many types of congenital heart 
disease are amenable to surgery, but this opportunity is lost if secondary 
changes, such as irreversible pulmonary hypertension, occur.
Central cyanosis and digital clubbing
Central cyanosis of cardiac origin occurs when desaturated blood enters 
the systemic circulation without passing through the lungs (right-to-left 
shunting). In the neonate, the most common cause is transposition of 
the great arteries, in which the aorta arises from the RV and the pulmo-
nary artery from the LV in association with a ventricular septal defect. In 
older children, cyanosis is usually the consequence of a ventricular septal 
defect combined with severe pulmonary stenosis (as in tetralogy of Fallot) 
or with pulmonary vascular disease (Eisenmenger syndrome). Chronic 
cyanosis is associated with nger and toe clubbing.
Growth retardation and learning difculties
These may occur with large left-to-right shunts at ventricular or great 
arterial level, and also with other defects, especially if they form part of 
a genetic syndrome. Major intellectual impairment is uncommon in chil-
dren with isolated congenital heart disease but minor learning difculties 
can occur. Cerebral function can also be affected after cardiac surgery if 
cerebral perfusion is compromised.
Syncope
In the presence of increased pulmonary vascular resistance or severe 
left or right ventricular outow obstruction, exercise may provoke syn-
cope as systemic vascular resistance falls but pulmonary vascular resist-
ance rises, worsening right-to-left shunting and cerebral oxygenation. 
Syncope can also occur because of associated arrhythmias.
Pulmonary hypertension
Persistently raised pulmonary ow with a left-to-right shunt causes 
increased pulmonary vascular resistance followed by pulmonary hyper-
tension. Progressive changes, including obliteration of distal arterioles, 
take place and are irreversible. At this stage, central cyanosis occurs 
and digital clubbing develops. The chest X-ray shows enlarged central 
pulmonary arteries and peripheral ‘pruning’ of the pulmonary vessels. 
The ECG shows features of right ventricular hypertrophy.
Eisenmenger syndrome
In patients with severe and prolonged pulmonary hypertension the left-
to-right shunt may reverse, resulting in right-to-left shunt and marked 
cyanosis. This is termed Eisenmenger syndrome. The cyanosis in 
Eisenmenger syndrome may be more apparent in the feet and toes than 
in the upper part of the body, resulting in so-called differential cyanosis. 
Eisenmenger syndrome is more common with large ventricular septal 
defects or persistent ductus arteriosus than with atrial septal defects. 
Patients with Eisenmenger syndrome are at particular risk from abrupt 
changes in afterload that exacerbate right-to-left shunting, such as 
vasodilatation, anaesthesia and pregnancy. The long-term prognosis is 
poor with around 50% of young adults surviving 10 years from diagnosis.
Congenital heart disease in pregnancy
During pregnancy, there is a 50% increase in plasma volume, a 40% 
increase in whole blood volume and a similar increase in cardiac out-
put, so problems may arise in women with congenital heart disease (Box 
16.101). Many with palliated or untreated disease will tolerate pregnancy 
well, however. Pregnancy is particularly hazardous in the presence of 
conditions associated with cyanosis or severe pulmonary hypertension; 
maternal mortality in patients with Eisenmenger syndrome is more than 
50%.
Persistent ductus arteriosus
Normally, the ductus arteriosus closes soon after birth but in this anomaly 
it fails to do so. Persistence of the ductus is often associated with other 
abnormalities and is more common in females.
Pathophysiology
During fetal life, before the lungs begin to function, most of the blood 
from the pulmonary artery passes through the ductus arteriosus into 
the aorta (see Fig. 16.88). Persistence of the ductus causes a contin-
uous AV shunt from the aorta to the pulmonary artery since pressure 
in the aorta is higher than that in the pulmonary artery. The volume of 
16.99  Incidence and relative frequency of congenital cardiac 
malformations
Lesion
% of all congenital  
heart defects
Ventricular septal defect
30
Atrial septal defect
10
Persistent ductus arteriosus
10
Pulmonary stenosis
7
Coarctation of aorta
7
Aortic stenosis
6
Tetralogy of Fallot
6
Complete transposition of great arteries
4
Others
20
16.100  Presentation of congenital heart disease 
throughout life
Birth and neonatal period
 Cyanosis
 Heart failure
Infancy and childhood
 Cyanosis
 Heart failure
 Arrhythmia
 Murmur
 Failure to thrive
Adolescence and adulthood
 Heart failure
 Murmur
 Arrhythmia
 Eisenmenger syndrome
 Hypertension (coarctation)
 Complications of previous cardiac surgery:
Arrhythmia related to scarring
Heart failure secondary to scarring

[[p512]]
468  CARDIOLOGY
the shunt depends on the size of the ductus but as much as 50% of 
the left ventricular output may be recirculated through the lungs, with a 
consequent increase in the work of the heart (Fig. 16.90). A large left-
to-right shunt in infancy may cause a considerable rise in pulmonary 
artery pressure and sometimes this leads to progressive pulmonary 
vascular damage.
Clinical features
With small shunts there may be no symptoms for years, but when the 
ductus is large, growth and development may be retarded. Usually, there 
is no disability in infancy but cardiac failure may eventually ensue, dysp-
noea being the rst symptom. A continuous ‘machinery’ murmur is heard 
with late systolic accentuation, maximal in the second left intercostal 
space below the clavicle (see Fig. 16.90). It is often accompanied by a 
thrill. Pulses are increased in volume.
Enlargement of the pulmonary artery may be detected radiologically. 
The ECG is usually normal. If pulmonary vascular resistance increases, 
pulmonary artery pressure may rise until it equals or exceeds aor-
tic pressure. The shunt through the defect may then reverse, causing 
Eisenmenger syndrome. The murmur becomes quieter, may be conned 
to systole or may disappear.
Investigations
Echocardiography is the investigation of choice although the persis-
tent ductus requires specic echocardiographic views, such as from 
the suprasternal notch, to reveal it. The ECG shows evidence of right 
 ventricular hypertrophy.
Management
A persistent ductus can be closed at cardiac catheterisation with an 
implantable occlusive device. Closure should be undertaken in infancy 
if the shunt is signicant and pulmonary resistance not elevated, but this 
Ascending aorta
LA
SVC
Open
foramen
ovale
RA
IVC
Ductus
venosus
Umbilical
vein
Umbilical
arteries
RV
Head and
neck vessels
Aortic isthmus
Ductus
arteriosus
Main
pulmonary
artery
Descending
aorta
LV
Renal artery
Iliac artery
Umbilical
arteries close
Intestinal
arteries
Involution
of isthmus
Ductus
venosus
closes
Closed
ductus
arteriosus
PA
PV
Closed
foramen
ovale
A
B
Fig. 16.88 Changes in the circulation at birth.
ductus venosus (red). The oxygenated blood streams from the right atrium (RA) through the open foramen ovale to the left atrium (LA) and via the left ventricle (LV) into the 
aorta. Venous blood from the superior vena cava (SVC, blue) crosses under the main blood stream into the RA and then, partly mixed with oxygenated blood (purple), into the 
right ventricle (RV) and pulmonary artery (PA). The pulmonary vasculature has a high resistance and so little blood passes to the lungs; most blood passes through the ductus 
arteriosus to the descending aorta. The aortic isthmus is a constriction in the aorta that lies in the aortic arch before the junction with the ductus arteriosus and limits the ow 
of oxygen-rich blood to the descending aorta. This conguration means that less oxygen-rich blood is supplied to organ systems that take up their function mainly after birth, 
The left atrial pressure rises above right atrial pressure and the ap valve of the foramen ovale closes. The umbilical arteries and the ductus venosus close. In the next few 
days, the ductus arteriosus closes under the inuence of hormonal changes (particularly prostaglandins) and the aortic isthmus expands. (PV = pulmonary vein) Adapted from 
Drews U. Colour atlas of embryology. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme; 1995
Radial
Femoral
Fig. 16.89 Radio-femoral delay. The difference in pulse pressures is shown.
16.101  Pregnancy in women with congenital heart disease
Obstructive lesions: poorly tolerated and associated with signicant maternal 
morbidity and mortality.
Cyanotic conditions: especially poorly tolerated. Specialised pre-conception 
counselling should explain the increased risks.
Surgically corrected disease: patients often tolerate pregnancy well.
Children of patients with congenital heart disease: 2%–5% will be born 
with cardiac abnormalities, especially if the mother is affected. The risk may be 
up to 20% in babies born of women with left-sided lesions.

[[p513]]
Congenital heart disease  469
16
may be delayed until later childhood in those with smaller shunts, for 
whom closure remains advisable to reduce the risk of endocarditis. When 
the ductus is structurally intact, a prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor (indo-
metacin or ibuprofen) may be used in the rst week of life to induce clo-
sure. However, in the presence of a congenital defect with impaired lung 
perfusion, such as occurs in severe pulmonary stenosis and left-to-right 
shunt through the ductus, it may be advisable to improve oxygenation 
by keeping the ductus open with prostaglandin treatment. Unfortunately, 
these treatments do not work if the ductus is intrinsically abnormal.
Coarctation of the aorta
This condition is twice as common in males and occurs in 1 in 4000 chil-
dren. It is associated with other abnormalities, most frequently bicuspid 
aortic valve and ‘berry’ aneurysms of the cerebral circulation. Acquired 
coarctation of the aorta is rare but may follow trauma or occur as a com-
plication of Takayasu’s disease.
Pathogenesis
Narrowing of the aorta occurs in the region where the ductus arteriosus 
joins the aorta, at the isthmus just below the origin of the left subcla-
vian artery (see Fig. 16.88). This causes raised BP affecting vessels of 
the head and neck proximal to the coarctation, and reduced BP and 
impaired circulation distally.
Clinical features
Aortic coarctation is an important cause of cardiac failure in the newborn 
but symptoms are often absent in older children or in adults. Headaches 
may occur from hypertension proximal to the coarctation, and occasion-
ally weakness or cramps in the legs may result from decreased circu-
lation in the lower part of the body. The BP is raised in the upper body 
but normal or low in the legs. The femoral pulses are weak and delayed 
in comparison with the radial pulse (see Fig. 16.89). A systolic murmur 
is usually heard posteriorly, over the coarctation. There may also be an 
ejection click and systolic murmur in the aortic area due to a bicuspid 
aortic valve. As a result of the aortic narrowing, collaterals form; they 
mainly involve the periscapular, internal mammary and intercostal arter-
ies, and may result in localised bruits.
Investigations
Imaging by MRI is the investigation of choice (Fig. 16.91). The chest 
X-ray in early childhood is often normal but later may show changes in 
the contour of the aorta (indentation of the descending aorta, ‘3 sign’) 
and notching of the under-surfaces of the ribs from collaterals. The ECG 
may show evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy, which can be con-
rmed by echocardiography.
Management
In untreated cases death may occur from left ventricular failure, dissection 
of the aorta or cerebral haemorrhage. Surgical correction is advisable in 
all but the mildest cases. If this is carried out sufciently early in childhood, 
persistent hypertension can be avoided. Patients repaired in late child-
hood or adult life often remain hypertensive or develop recurrent hyper-
tension later on. Recurrence of stenosis may occur as the child grows 
and this may be managed by balloon dilatation and sometimes stenting. 
The latter may be used as the primary treatment. Coexistent bicuspid 
aortic valve, which occurs in over 50% of cases, may lead to progressive 
aortic stenosis or regurgitation, and also requires long-term follow-up.
Atrial septal defect
Atrial septal defect is one of the most common congenital heart defects 
and occurs twice as frequently in females. Most are ‘ostium secundum’ 
defects, involving the fossa ovalis that, in utero, was the foramen ovale (see 
Fig.16.88). ‘Ostium primum’ defects result from a defect in the atrioventricu-
lar septum and are associated with a ‘cleft mitral valve’ (split anterior leaet).
Pathogenesis
Since the normal RV is more compliant than the LV, a patent foramen 
ovale is associated with shunting of blood from the LA to the RA, and 
then to the RV and pulmonary arteries (Fig. 16.92). As a result, there is 
gradual enlargement of the right side of the heart and of the pulmonary 
arteries. Pulmonary hypertension and shunt reversal sometimes compli-
cate atrial septal defect, but are less common and tend to occur later in 
life than with other types of left-to-right shunt.
Clinical features
Most children are asymptomatic for many years and the condition is often 
detected at routine examination or following a chest X-ray. Symptoms 
include dyspnoea, cardiac failure and arrhythmias, especially AF. The char-
acteristic physical signs are the result of the volume overload of theRV:
RA
RV
LV
(dilated)
LA
(dilated)
Ductus
arteriosus
PA
(dilated)
Aorta
Fig. 16.90 Persistent ductus arteriosus. There is a connection between the aorta 
and the pulmonary artery with left-to-right shunting. (LA = left atrium; LV = left 
ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)
A
B
C
D
Fig. 16.91 MRI scan of coarctation of the aorta. The aorta is severely narrowed 
just beyond the arch at the start of the descending aorta (arrow A). Extensive 
collaterals have developed; a large internal mammary artery (arrow B) and several 
intercostal arteries (arrows C) are shown. Unusually, in this case, there is also a 
coarctation of the abdominal aorta (arrow D).

[[p514]]
470  CARDIOLOGY
 wide, xed splitting of the second heart sound: wide because of 
delay in right ventricular ejection (increased stroke volume and 
RBBB), and xed because the septal defect equalises left and right 
atrial pressures throughout the respiratory cycle
 a systolic ow murmur over the pulmonary valve.
In children with a large shunt, there may be a diastolic ow murmur 
over the tricuspid valve. Unlike a mitral ow murmur, this is usually 
high-pitched.
Investigations
Echocardiography is diagnostic. It directly demonstrates the defect 
and typically shows right ventricular dilatation, right ventricular hyper-
trophy and pulmonary artery dilatation. The precise size and location 
of the defect are best dened by TOE (Fig. 16.93). The chest X-ray 
typically shows enlargement of the heart and the pulmonary artery, as 
well as pulmonary plethora. The ECG usually demonstrates incomplete 
RBBB because right ventricular depolarisation is delayed as a result 
of ventricular dilatation (with a ‘primum’ defect, there is also left axis 
deviation).
Management
Atrial septal defects in which pulmonary ow is increased 50% above 
systemic ow (i.e. a ow ratio of 1.5:1) are often large enough to be 
clinically recognisable and should be closed surgically. Smaller defects 
may be managed conservatively and patients monitored periodically with 
echocardiography. Closure can also be accomplished at cardiac cathe-
terisation using implantable closure devices (Fig. 16.94). The long-term 
prognosis thereafter is excellent, unless pulmonary hypertension has 
developed. Severe pulmonary hypertension and shunt reversal are both 
contraindications to surgery.
Ventricular septal defect
Ventricular septal defect is the most common congenital cardiac defect, 
occurring once in 500 live births. The defect may be isolated or part of 
complex congenital heart disease.
Pathogenesis
Congenital ventricular septal defect occurs as a result of incomplete sep-
tation of the ventricles. Embryologically, the interventricular septum has 
a membranous and a muscular portion, and the latter is further divided 
into inow, trabecular and outow portions. Most congenital defects are 
‘perimembranous’, occurring at the junction of the membranous and 
muscular portions of the septum.
Clinical features
Flow from the high-pressure LV to the low-pressure RV during systole 
produces a pansystolic murmur, usually heard best at the left sternal 
border but radiating all over the precordium (Fig. 16.95). A small defect 
often produces a loud murmur (maladie de Roger) in the absence of 
other haemodynamic disturbance. Conversely, a large defect produces 
a quieter murmur, particularly if pressure in the RV is elevated. This may 
be found immediately after birth, while pulmonary vascular resistance 
remains high, or when the shunt is reversed in Eisenmenger syndrome. 
Congenital ventricular septal defect may present with cardiac failure in 
infants, as a murmur with only minor haemodynamic disturbance in older 
children or adults, or, rarely, as Eisenmenger syndrome. In some infants, 
the murmur becomes quieter or disappears due to spontaneous closure 
of the defect.
If cardiac failure complicates a large defect, it is usually absent in 
the immediate postnatal period and becomes apparent only in the 
rst 4–6 weeks of life. In addition to the murmur, there is prominent 
parasternal pulsation, tachypnoea and indrawing of the lower ribs on 
inspiration.
PA
(dilated)
RV
(dilated)
LV
RA
Aorta
Fig. 16.92 Atrial septal defect. Blood ows across the atrial septum (arrow) from 
left to right. The murmur is produced by increased ow velocity across the pulmonary 
valve, as a result of left-to-right shunting and a large stroke volume. The density of 
shading is proportional to velocity of blood ow. (LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary 
artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)
Fig. 16.93 Transoesophageal echocardiogram of an atrial septal defect. The 
defect is clearly seen (arrow) between the left atrium above and right atrium below. 
Doppler colour-ow imaging shows ow (blue) across the defect.
LV
RV
RA
Percutaneous
sheath across
atrial septal
defect
IVC
Fig. 16.94 Percutaneous closure of atrial septal defect. The closure device is 
delivered across the interatrial septum and a disc deployed on either side to seal the 
defect. (IVC = inferior vena cava; LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = 
right atrium; RV = right ventricle)

[[p515]]
Congenital heart disease  471
16
Investigations
Echocardiography should be performed since it helps to identify the small 
septal defects that are not haemodynamically signicant and are likely to 
close spontaneously. Patients with larger defects should be monitored 
by serial echocardiography to check for signs of pulmonary hyperten-
sion. With larger defects, the chest X-ray shows pulmonary congestion 
and the ECG shows bilateral ventricular hypertrophy.
Management
Small ventricular septal defects require no specic treatment. If there is 
cardiac failure in infancy, this should initially be treated with digoxin, diur-
etics and sometimes ACE inhibitors. Persisting failure is an indication for 
surgical repair of the defect. Percutaneous closure devices are under 
development.
If serial ECG and echocardiography suggest that pulmonary hyperten-
sion is developing, surgical repair should be performed. Surgical closure 
is contraindicated in Eisenmenger syndrome, and heart–lung transplan-
tation is the only effective treatment. The long-term prognosis is generally 
very good unless Eisenmenger syndrome develops, when death occurs 
in the second or third decade of life, but a few individuals survive to the 
fth decade without transplantation.
Tetralogy of Fallot
This is a complex defect consisting of right ventricular outow tract 
obstruction and right ventricular hypertrophy, a large ventricular sep-
tal defect and an overriding aorta that, when combined with the septal 
defect, allows blood to be pumped directly from the RV into the aorta. 
It occurs in about 1 in 2000 births and is the most common cause of 
cyanosis in infancy after the rst year of life.
Pathogenesis
Tetralogy of Fallot occurs as the result of abnormal development of the 
bulbar septum that separates the ascending aorta from the pulmonary 
artery, and which normally aligns and fuses with the outow part of the 
interventricular septum. The right ventricular outow obstruction is most 
often subvalvular (muscular) but may be valvular, supravalvular or a com-
bination of these (Fig. 16.96). The subvalvular component of the right 
ventricular outow obstruction is dynamic and may increase suddenly 
with sympathetic stimulation. The ventricular septal defect is usually large 
and similar in aperture to the aortic orice. The combination results in 
elevated right ventricular pressure and right-to-left shunting of cyanotic 
blood across the ventricular septal defect into the aorta.
Clinical features
Children are usually cyanosed but this may not be the case in the neo-
nate because it is only when right ventricular pressure rises to equal or 
exceed left ventricular pressure that a large right-to-left shunt develops. 
The affected child may suddenly become increasingly cyanosed, often 
after feeding or a crying attack, and may become apnoeic and uncon-
scious. In older children, cyanotic spells are uncommon but cyanosis 
becomes increasingly apparent, with stunting of growth, digital club-
bing and polycythaemia. Some children characteristically obtain relief by 
squatting after exertion, which increases the afterload of the left heart 
and reduces the right-to-left shunting. This is called Fallot’s sign. The 
natural history before the development of surgical correction was variable 
but most patients died in infancy or childhood.
On examination, the most characteristic feature is the combination of 
cyanosis with a loud ejection systolic murmur in the pulmonary area (as 
for pulmonary stenosis). Cyanosis may be absent in the newborn or in 
patients with only mild right ventricular outow obstruction, however. This 
is called acyanotic tetralogy of Fallot.
Investigations
Echocardiography is diagnostic and demonstrates that the aorta is not 
continuous with the anterior ventricular septum. The ECG shows right 
ventricular hypertrophy and the chest X-ray shows an abnormally small 
pulmonary artery and a ‘boot-shaped’ heart.
Management
The denitive management is total correction of the defect by surgical 
relief of the pulmonary stenosis and closure of the ventricular septal 
defect. Primary surgical correction may be undertaken prior to the age of 
5 years. If the pulmonary arteries are too hypoplastic for surgical repair, 
then palliation in the form of a Blalock–Taussig shunt may be performed, 
where an anastomosis is created between the pulmonary artery and 
Aorta
PA
(dilated)
LA
(dilated)
LV
(dilated)
RA
Fig. 16.95 Ventricular septal defect. In this example, a large left-to-right shunt 
(arrows) has resulted in chamber enlargement. (LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; 
PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium)
(4) Right
ventricular
hypertrophy
(3) Ventricular
septal defect
(1) Pulmonary
stenosis
(valvular)
(2) Overriding
aorta
Aorta
RA
PA
LA
LV
RV
Pulmonary stenosis
(infundibular)
Fig. 16.96 Tetralogy of Fallot. The tetralogy comprises (1) pulmonary stenosis, (2) 
overriding of the ventricular septal defect by the aorta, (3) a ventricular septal defect 
and (4) right ventricular hypertrophy. (LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; PA = 
pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)

[[p516]]
472  CARDIOLOGY
subclavian artery. This improves pulmonary blood ow and pulmonary 
artery development, and may facilitate later denitive correction.
The prognosis after total correction is good, especially if the opera-
tion is performed in childhood. Follow-up is needed to identify residual 
shunting, recurrent pulmonary stenosis and arrhythmias. An implantable 
debrillator is sometimes recommended in adulthood.
Other causes of cyanotic congenital heart disease
Other types of cyanotic congenital heart disease are summarised in 
Box16.102
Grown-up congenital heart disease
There are increasing numbers of children who have had surgical cor-
rection of congenital defects and who may have further problems as 
adults. The transition period between paediatric and adult care needs 
to be managed in a carefully planned manner, addressing many diverse 
aspects of care (Box 16.103). Those who have undergone correction of 
coarctation of the aorta may develop hypertension in adult life. Those 
with transposition of the great arteries who have had a ‘Mustard’ repair, 
in which blood is redirected at atrial level leaving the RV connected to the 
aorta, may develop right ventricular failure in adult life. This is because 
the RV is unsuited for function at systemic pressures and may begin to 
dilate and fail when patients are in their twenties or thirties.
Those who have had surgery involving the atria may develop atrial 
arrhythmias, and those who have VSD repair (and consequent ventricu-
lar scar) may develop ventricular arrhythmias. Anti-arrhythmic drugs and 
an ICD may be required. Such patients require careful follow-up from 
adolescence throughout adult life, so that problems can be identied 
early and appropriate medical or surgical treatment instituted. The man-
agement of patients with grown-up congenital heart disease (GUCH) is 
complex and has developed as a cardiological subspecialty.
Diseases of the myocardium
The myocardium can be injured secondary to ischaemia in CAD and 
to pressure or volume overload in hypertension or valvular heart dis-
ease. The heart muscle can be directly affected by primary heart muscle 
diseases.
Myocarditis
This is an acute inammatory condition that can have an infectious, 
toxic or autoimmune aetiology (Box 16.104). Myocarditis can complicate 
many infections in which inammation may be due directly to infection 
of the myocardium or the effects of circulating toxins. Viral infections 
are the most common causes, such as Coxsackie (35 cases per 1000 
infections), inuenza A and B (25 cases per 1000 infections) and, more 
recently, SARS-CoV-2 infection. Myocarditis may occur several weeks 
after the initial viral symptoms, and susceptibility is increased by gluco-
corticoid treatment, immunosuppression, radiation, previous myocardial 
damage and exercise. Some bacterial and protozoal infections may be 
complicated by myocarditis; for example, approximately 5% of patients 
with Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi) develop myopericarditis, which 
is often associated with AV block. Toxins such as alcohol and drugs such 
as cocaine, lithium and doxorubicin may directly injure the myocardium. 
Other drugs, including penicillins and sulphonamides, and poisons such 
as lead and carbon monoxide, may cause a hypersensitivity reaction and 
associated myocarditis. Occasionally, autoimmune conditions, such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, are associated 
with myocarditis.
Clinical features
Myocarditis may present in one of four ways:
 Fulminant myocarditis follows a viral prodrome or inuenza-like 
illness and results in severe heart failure or cardiogenic shock.
 Acute myocarditis presents over a longer period with heart failure; it 
can lead to dilated cardiomyopathy.
16.102  Other causes of cyanotic congenital heart disease
Defect
Features
Tricuspid atresia
Absent tricuspid orice, hypoplastic RV, RA-to-LA 
shunt, ventricular septal defect shunt, other 
anomalies
Surgical correction may be possible
Transposition of the 
great arteries
Aorta arises from the morphological RV, 
pulmonary artery from LV
Shunt via atria, ductus and possibly ventricular 
septal defect
Palliation by balloon atrial septostomy/
enlargement
Surgical correction possible
Pulmonary atresia
Pulmonary valve atretic and pulmonary artery 
hypoplastic
RA-to-LA shunt, pulmonary ow via ductus
Palliation by balloon atrial septostomy
Surgical correction may be possible
Ebstein’s anomaly
Tricuspid valve is dysplastic and displaced into 
RV, RV ‘atrialised’
Tricuspid regurgitation and RA-to-LA shunt
Wide spectrum of severity
Arrhythmias
Surgical repair possible but signicant risk
(LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle)
16.103  Congenital heart disease in adolescence
 Patients: a heterogeneous population with residual disease and sequelae that 
vary according to the underlying lesion and in severity; each patient must be 
assessed individually.
 Management plan: should be agreed with the patient and include short- and 
long-term goals and timing of transition to adult care.
 Risks of surgery: non-cardiac surgery for associated congenital abnormalities 
carries increased risks and needs to be planned, with careful pre-operative 
assessment. Risks include thrombosis, embolism from synthetic shunts 
or patches, and volume overload from uid shifts. Operative approaches 
should address cosmetic concerns, such as site of implantation of abdominal 
generator.
 Exercise: patients with mild or repaired defects can undertake moderately 
vigorous exercise but those with complex defects, cyanosis, ventricular 
dysfunction or arrhythmias require specialist evaluation and individualised 
advice regarding exercise.
 Genetics: Between 10% and 15% have a genetic basis and this should be 
assessed to understand the impact it may have for the patient’s own future 
children. A family history, genetic evaluation of syndromic versus non-syndromic 
disorders and, sometimes, cytogenetics are required.
 Education and employment: may be adversely affected and occupational 
activity levels need to be assessed.
 End of life: some adolescents with complex disorders may misperceive and 
think they have been cured; transition to adult services may be the rst time 
they receive information about mortality. Expectations on life expectancy need 
to be managed and adolescents are often willing to engage with this and play a 
role in decision-making.

[[p517]]
Diseases of the myocardium  473
16
 Chronic active myocarditis is rare and associated with chronic myo-
cardial inammation.
 Chronic persistent myocarditis is characterised by focal myocardial 
inltrates and can cause chest pain and arrhythmia without neces-
sarily causing ventricular dysfunction.
Myocarditis is self-limiting in most patients and the immediate progno-
sis is good. Death may, however, occur due to a ventricular arrhythmia 
or rapidly progressive heart failure. Myocarditis has been reported as a 
cause of sudden and unexpected death in young athletes. Some forms 
of myocarditis may lead to chronic low-grade myocarditis or dilated car-
diomyopathy (see below). For example, in Chagas’ disease, the patient 
frequently recovers from the acute infection but goes on to develop a 
chronic dilated cardiomyopathy 10 or 20 years later.
Investigations
The diagnosis of myocarditis is often made after other more common 
causes of cardiac dysfunction have been excluded. Echocardiography 
should be performed and may reveal left ventricular dysfunction that is 
sometimes regional (due to focal myocarditis). Cardiac MRI is also use-
ful since it may show diagnostic patterns of myocardial inammation or 
inltration. The ECG is frequently abnormal but the changes are non-spe-
cic. Blood should be taken to assess for cardiac troponin I or T which 
can be used to monitor severity and progression of cardiac injury and 
myocarditis. Occasionally, endomyocardial biopsy may be required to 
conrm the diagnosis.
Management
Treatment of myocarditis is primarily supportive. Treatment for cardiac 
failure or arrhythmias should be given and patients should be advised to 
avoid intense physical exertion because there is some evidence that this 
can induce potentially fatal ventricular arrhythmias. There is no evidence 
of benet from treatment with glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive 
agents.
Specic antimicrobial therapy may be used if a causative organism 
has been identied but this is rare. Patients who do not respond ade-
quately to medical treatment may temporarily require circulatory support 
with a mechanical ventricular assist device. Rarely, cardiac transplanta-
tion may be required.
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathies are primary diseases of the myocardium, which are 
classied according to their effects on cardiac structure and function 
(Fig.16.97). They can be inherited or be caused by infections or expo-
sure to toxins. In some cases no cause is identied.
16.104  Some causes of myocarditis
Infections
Viral
 Coxsackie
 Adenovirus
 Inuenza A
 Human immunodeciency virus (HIV)
 Inuenza B
 SARS-CoV-2
Bacterial
 Borrelia burgdorferi
(Lyme disease)
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Protozoal
 Trypanosoma cruzi
(Chagas’ disease)
 Toxoplasma gondii
Fungal
 Aspergillus
Parasitic
 Shistosoma
Drugs/Toxins
 Alcohol
 Anthracyclines
 Clozapine
 Cocaine
 Lithium
Autoimmune
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Systemic sclerosis
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Sarcoidosis
 Hypersensitivity reaction to penicillins, 
sulphonamides, lead, carbon 
monoxide
SAM
ASH
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Fig. 16.97 Types of cardiomyopathy.

[[p518]]
474  CARDIOLOGY
Dilated cardiomyopathy
In North America and Europe, symptomatic dilated cardiomyopathy has 
an incidence of 20 per 100 000 and a prevalence of 38 per 100 000. Men 
are affected more than twice as often as women.
Pathogenesis
Cardiomyopathy is characterised by dilatation and impaired contrac-
tion of the LV and often the RV. Left ventricular mass is increased but 
wall thickness is normal or reduced (see Fig. 16.97). Dilatation of the 
valve rings can lead to functional mitral and tricuspid incompetence. 
Histological changes are variable but include myobrillary loss, interstitial 
brosis and T-cell inltrates. The term ‘dilated cardiomyopathy’ encom-
passes a heterogeneous group of conditions. Alcohol may be an impor-
tant cause in some patients. At least 25% of cases are inherited as an 
autosomal dominant trait and a variety of single-gene mutations have 
been identied. Most of these mutations affect proteins in the cytoskel-
eton of the myocytes, such as dystrophin, lamin A and C, titan, emerin 
and metavinculin. Many are also associated with abnormalities of skeletal 
muscle. The X-linked inherited skeletal muscular dystrophies, such as 
Becker and Duchenne, are also associated with cardiomyopathy. Finally, 
a late autoimmune reaction to viral myocarditis is thought to be the 
cause in a substantial subgroup of patients with dilated cardiomyopa-
thy; a similar mechanism is believed to be responsible for the myocardial 
involvement that occurs in up to 10% of patients with advanced human 
immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection.
Clinical features
Most patients present with heart failure or are found to have the condition 
during routine investigation. Arrhythmia, thromboembolism and sudden 
death may occur at any stage but these are more common in advanced 
disease; non-exertional chest pain is surprisingly common. The differen-
tial diagnosis includes ventricular dysfunction due to CAD, and a diagno-
sis of dilated cardiomyopathy should be made only when this has been 
excluded.
Investigations
Echocardiography and cardiac MRI are the most useful investigations. 
Although ECG changes are common, they are non-specic. Genetic 
testing is indicated if more than one family member is diagnosed with 
the condition.
Management
The focus of management is to control heart failure using the strategies 
described earlier in this chapter. Although some patients remain well for 
many years, the prognosis is variable and cardiac transplantation may 
be indicated. Patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and moderate or 
severe heart failure are at risk of sudden arrhythmic death and this can 
be reduced by rigorous medical therapy with β-blockers and either ACE 
inhibitors or ARBs. Some patients may be considered for implantation of 
a cardiac debrillator and/or cardiac resynchronisation therapy.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
This is the most common form of cardiomyopathy, with a prevalence 
of approximately 100 per 100 000. It is characterised by inappropriate 
left ventricular hypertrophy with malalignment of the myocardial bres 
and myocardial brosis. The hypertrophy may be generalised or conned 
largely to the interventricular septum (asymmetric septal hypertrophy, see 
Fig. 16.97) or other regions of the heart. A specic variant termed apical 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is common in the Far East.
Pathogenesis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetic disorder, usually with autosomal 
dominant transmission, a high degree of penetrance and variable expres-
sion. In most patients, it is due to a single-point mutation in one of the genes 
that encode sarcomeric contractile proteins. There are three common 
groups of mutation with different phenotypes. Beta-myosin heavy-chain 
mutations are associated with marked ventricular hypertrophy. In con-
trast, troponin mutations are associated with little, if any, hypertrophy but 
are characterised by marked myocardial bre disarray, exercise-induced 
hypotension and a high risk of sudden death. Myosin-binding protein C 
mutations tend to present late in life and are often associated with hyper-
tension and arrhythmia. In all subtypes, heart failure may develop because 
the stiff, non-compliant LV impedes diastolic lling. Septal hypertrophy may 
also cause dynamic left ventricular outow tract obstruction (hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy, HOCM) and mitral regurgitation due to abnor-
mal systolic anterior motion of the anterior mitral valve leaet.
Clinical features
Effort-related symptoms, such as angina, breathlessness, arrhythmia 
and sudden death, are the dominant clinical presentations. The symp-
toms and signs are similar to those of aortic stenosis, except that, in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the character of the arterial pulse is jerky 
(Box 16.105). The annual mortality from sudden death is 2%–3% among 
adults and 4%–6% in children and adolescents (Box 16.106). Sudden 
death typically occurs during or just after vigorous physical activity and 
is thought to be due to ventricular arrhythmias. Hypertrophic cardiomyo-
pathy is the most common cause of sudden death in young athletes. In 
patients who do not suffer fatal arrhythmias, the natural history is variable 
but clinical deterioration is often slow.
Investigations
Echocardiography is the investigation of choice and is usually diagnostic. 
Sometimes the diagnosis is more difcult when another cause of left 
ventricular hypertrophy is present but the degree of hypertrophy in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy is usually greater than in physiological hypertro-
phy and the pattern is asymmetrical. The ECG is abnormal and shows 
features of left ventricular hypertrophy with a wide variety of often bizarre 
abnormalities, including deep T-wave inversion. Genetic testing can be 
performed and is helpful in screening relatives of affected individuals.
Management
Beta-blockers, rate-limiting calcium antagonists and disopyramide can 
help to relieve symptoms and prevent syncopal attacks. Arrhythmias 
often respond to treatment with amiodarone. No pharmacological 
16.105  Clinical features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Symptoms
 Angina on effort
 Dyspnoea on effort
 Syncope on effort
 Sudden death
Signs
 Jerky pulse*
 Palpable left ventricular hypertrophy
 Double impulse at the apex (palpable fourth heart sound due to left atrial 
hypertrophy)
 Mid-systolic murmur at the base*
 Pansystolic murmur (due to mitral regurgitation) at the apex
*Signs of left ventricular outow tract obstruction may be augmented by standing up (reduced 
venous return), inotropes and vasodilators
16.106  Risk factors for sudden death in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy
 A history of previous cardiac arrest or sustained ventricular tachycardia
 Recurrent syncope
 An adverse genotype and/or family history
 Exercise-induced hypotension
 Non-sustained ventricular tachycardia on ambulatory ECG monitoring
 Marked increase in left ventricular wall thickness

[[p519]]
Diseases of the myocardium  475
16
treatment has been identied that can improve prognosis, however. 
Outow tract obstruction can be improved by partial surgical resection 
(myectomy) or by iatrogenic infarction of the basal septum (septal abla-
tion) using a catheter-delivered alcohol solution. An ICD should be con-
sidered in patients with clinical risk factors for sudden death (see Box 
16.106). Digoxin and vasodilators may increase outow tract obstruction 
and should be avoided.
Arrhythmogenic ventricular cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic ventricular cardiomyopathy (AVC) predominantly affects the 
myocardium of the right ventricle. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner and has a prevalence of approximately 10 per 100 000. The genetic 
defect involves desmosomal protein genes, most commonly plakophilin 2 
(PKP-2), although current genetic testing protocols will not identify the culprit 
gene in many cases. It is characterised by replacement of patches of the 
right ventricular myocardium with brous and fatty tissue (see Fig. 16.97). 
In some cases, the LV is also involved and this is associated with a poorer 
prognosis. The diagnosis is based on a complex set of criteria that take 
account of the ECG, structural assessment, genetics and arrhythmias. The 
dominant clinical problems are ventricular arrhythmias, sudden death and 
right-sided cardiac failure. The ECG typically shows a slightly broadened 
QRS complex and inverted T waves in the right precordial leads. MRI is a 
helpful diagnostic tool and is used, along with the 12-lead ECG and ambu-
latory ECG monitoring, to screen the rst-degree relatives of affected indi-
viduals. Management is based on treating right-sided cardiac failure with 
diuretics and cardiac arrhythmias with β-blockers or, in patients at high risk 
of sudden death, an implantable debrillator can be offered.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
In this rare condition, ventricular lling is impaired because the ventricles 
are ‘stiff’ (see Fig. 16.97). This leads to high atrial pressures with atrial 
hypertrophy, dilatation and, later, AF. Amyloidosis is the most common 
cause in the UK, although other forms of inltration due to glycogen 
storage diseases, idiopathic perimyocyte brosis and a familial form of 
restrictive cardiomyopathy can also occur. The diagnosis can be difcult 
and requires assessment with Doppler echocardiography, CT or MRI, 
and endomyocardial biopsy. Treatment is symptomatic but the prognosis 
is usually poor and cardiac transplantation may be indicated.
Obliterative cardiomyopathy
This is a rare form of restrictive cardiomyopathy, involving the endocar-
dium of one or both ventricles; it is characterised by thrombosis and 
brosis, with gradual obliteration of the ventricular cavities by brous tis-
sue (see Fig. 16.97). The mitral and tricuspid valves become regurgitant. 
Heart failure and pulmonary and systemic embolism are prominent fea-
tures. It can sometimes be associated with eosinophilia and can occur in 
eosinophilic leukaemia and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(formerly known as Churg–Strauss syndrome). In tropical countries, the 
disease may be responsible for up to 10% of cardiac deaths. Prognosis 
is poor, with a 50% mortality within 2 years of diagnosis. Anticoagulation 
and antiplatelet therapy are used to reduce the risk of embolism, and 
diuretics to treat heart failure. Surgery (tricuspid and/or mitral valve 
replacement with decortication of the endocardium) may be helpful in 
selected cases.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo syndrome) is a form of acute left 
ventricular dysfunction characterised by dilatation of the left ventricular 
apex and adjacent myocardium, with associated left ventricular impair-
ment. The mechanism is poorly understood. It is often associated with 
acute environmental or emotional stress (such as a bereavement) and 
presents with chest pain, breathlessness and sometimes cardiac fail-
ure. It occurs more frequently in women than in men and there is a high 
prevalence of neurological and psychiatric disorders. The symptoms 
and ECG often mimic acute ST elevation acute coronary syndrome. The 
diagnosis is usually made at coronary angiography, when CAD is found 
to be absent or minimal. Echocardiography or left ventriculography then 
shows characteristic ‘apical ballooning’ of the LV. The dilated apex and 
narrow outow of the LV resemble a Japanese octopus trap, or takot-
subo (Fig. 16.98).
Left ventricular ejection fraction returns to normal within days to 
weeks. Although commonly thought to be a benign condition, it is asso-
ciated with a recurrence rate of 10% and a mortality of 20% at 5 years. 
There are no known treatments that have been shown to inuence clin-
ical outcome.
Secondary causes of cardiomyopathy
Many systemic conditions can produce a picture that is indistin-
guishable from dilated cardiomyopathy, including connective tissue 
disorders, sarcoidosis, haemochromatosis and alcoholic heart mus-
cle disease (Box16.107). In contrast, amyloidosis and eosinophilic 
heart disease produce symptoms and signs similar to those found 
in restrictive or obliterative cardiomyopathy, whereas the heart dis-
ease associated with Friedreich’s ataxia can mimic hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.
Diastole
Systole
A
B
Fig. 16.98 Left ventriculograms in diastole 
 and systole 
 in a patient with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Note the ballooning of the left ventricular apex in systole 
which is characteristic of this condition (compare with Fig. 16.16).

[[p520]]
476  CARDIOLOGY
Treatment and prognosis are determined by the underlying disorder. 
Abstention from alcohol may lead to a dramatic improvement in patients 
with alcoholic heart muscle disease.
Cardiac tumours
Primary cardiac tumours are rare (< 0.2% of autopsies) but the heart and 
mediastinum may be the sites of metastases. Most primary tumours are 
benign (75%) and, of these, the majority are myxomas. The remainder 
are bromas, lipomas, broelastomas and haemangiomas.
Atrial myxoma
Myxomas most commonly arise in the LA as single or multiple polypoid 
tumours, attached by a pedicle to the interatrial septum. They are usu-
ally gelatinous but may be solid and even calcied, with superimposed 
thrombus.
On examination, the rst heart sound is usually loud, and there may be 
a murmur of mitral stenosis with a variable diastolic sound (tumour ‘plop’) 
due to prolapse of the mass through the mitral valve. The tumour can 
be detected incidentally on echocardiography, or following investigation 
of pyrexia, syncope, arrhythmias or emboli. Occasionally, the condition 
presents with malaise and features suggestive of a connective tissue 
disorder, including a raised ESR.
Treatment is by surgical excision. If the pedicle is removed, fewer than 
5% of tumours recur.
Diseases of the pericardium
The normal pericardial sac contains about 50 mL of uid, similar to 
lymph, which lubricates the surface of the heart. The pericardium limits 
distension of the heart, contributes to the haemodynamic interdepend-
ence of the ventricles, and acts as a barrier to infection. Nevertheless, 
congenital absence of the pericardium does not result in signicant clin-
ical or functional limitations.
Acute pericarditis
This is due to an acute inammatory process affecting the pericardium, 
which may coexist with myocarditis.
Pathogenesis
A number of causes are recognised (Box 16.108), but in some cases 
the cause is unclear. All forms of pericarditis may produce a pericardial 
effusion that, depending on the aetiology, may be brinous, serous, 
haemorrhagic or purulent. A brinous exudate may eventually lead to 
varying degrees of adhesion formation, whereas serous pericarditis 
often produces a large effusion of turbid, straw-coloured uid with a 
high protein content. A haemorrhagic effusion is often due to malignant 
disease, particularly carcinoma of the breast or bronchus, and lym-
phoma. Purulent pericarditis is rare and may occur as a complication 
of sepsis, by direct spread from an intrathoracic infection, or from a 
penetrating injury.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with chest pain that is retrosternal, radiates to 
the shoulders and neck, and is typically aggravated by deep breathing, 
movement, a change of position, exercise and swallowing. A low-grade 
fever is common. A pericardial friction rub is a high-pitched, supercial 
scratching or crunching noise, produced by movement of the inamed 
pericardium, and is diagnostic of pericarditis; it is usually heard in systole 
but may also be audible in diastole and frequently has a ‘to-and-fro’ 
quality.
Investigations
The diagnosis can often be made on the basis of clinical features and the 
ECG; the latter shows ST elevation with upward concavity (Fig.16.99) 
over the affected area, which may be widespread. PR interval depres-
sion is a very specic indicator of acute pericarditis. Later, there may 
be T-wave inversion, particularly if there is a degree of myocarditis. 
Echocardiography may be normal or may reveal pericardial effusion, in 
which case regular echocardiographic monitoring is recommended.
Management
The pain usually responds to aspirin (600 mg 6 times daily) but a more 
potent anti-inammatory agent, such as indometacin (500 mg 3 times 
daily), may be required. Colchicine is very effective at relieving symp-
toms and also prevents relapsing episodes if taken for 3 months from 
symptom onset. Glucocorticoids are no longer recommended for this 
condition. In viral pericarditis, recovery usually occurs within a few days 
or weeks but there may be recurrences (chronic relapsing pericarditis). 
Purulent pericarditis requires treatment with antimicrobial therapy, peri-
cardiocentesis and, if necessary, surgical drainage.
Pericardial effusion
Pericardial effusion often accompanies pericarditis and can have a num-
ber of causes, as shown in Box 16.108
16.107  Specic diseases of heart muscle
Infections
Viral
 Coxsackie A and B
 Inuenza
 HIV
 SARS-CoV-2
Bacterial
 Diphtheria
 Borrelia burgdorferi
Protozoal
 Trypanosomiasis
 Toxoplasma gondii
Endocrine and metabolic disorders
 Diabetes
 Hypo- and hyperthyroidism
 Acromegaly
 Carcinoid syndrome
 Phaeochromocytoma
 Inherited storage diseases
Connective tissue diseases
 Systemic sclerosis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Polyarteritis nodosa
Inltrative disorders
 Haemochromatosis
 Haemosiderosis
 Sarcoidosis
 Amyloidosis
Toxins
 Doxorubicin
 Alcohol
 Cocaine
 Irradiation
Neuromuscular disorders
 Dystrophia myotonica
 Friedreich’s ataxia
16.108  Causes of acute pericarditis and pericardial effusion
Infection
 Viral
 Bacterial
Tuberculosis
Inammatory
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatic fever
Other
 Post-myocardial infarction
 Uraemia
 Malignancy
 Trauma

[[p521]]
Diseases of the pericardium  477
16
Clinical features
With the onset of an effusion the heart sounds may become quieter, 
and a friction rub, if present, may diminish in intensity but is not always 
abolished. Larger effusions may be accompanied by a sensation of retro-
sternal oppression. While most effusions do not have signicant haemo-
dynamic effects, large or rapidly developing effusions may cause cardiac 
tamponade. This term is used to describe acute heart failure due to com-
pression of the heart and is described in detail below. Typical physical 
ndings are a markedly raised JVP, hypotension, pulsus paradoxus and 
oliguria. Atypical presentations may occur when the effusion is loculated 
as a result of previous pericarditis or cardiac surgery.
Investigations
Echocardiography is the denitive investigation and is helpful in monitor-
ing the size of the effusion and its effect on cardiac function (Fig. 16.100). 
The QRS voltages on the ECG are often reduced in the presence of a 
large effusion. The QRS complexes may alternate in amplitude due to a 
to-and-fro motion of the heart within the uid-lled pericardial sac (elec-
trical alternans). The chest X-ray may show an increase in the size of the 
cardiac silhouette and, when there is a large effusion, this has a globular 
appearance. Aspiration of the effusion may be required for diagnostic 
purposes and, if necessary, for treatment of large effusions, as described 
below.
Management
Patients with large effusions that are causing haemodynamic compro-
mise or cardiac tamponade should undergo aspiration of the effusion. 
This involves inserting a needle under echocardiographic guidance 
medial to the cardiac apex or below the xiphoid process, directed 
upwards towards the left shoulder. The route of choice will depend on 
the experience of the operator, the shape of the patient and the position 
of the effusion. A pericardial drain may be placed to provide symptomatic 
relief. Complications of pericardiocentesis include arrhythmias, damage 
to a coronary artery and bleeding, with exacerbation of tamponade as 
a result of injury to the RV. When tamponade is due to cardiac rupture 
or aortic dissection, pericardial aspiration may precipitate further poten-
tially fatal bleeding and, in these situations, emergency surgery is the 
treatment of choice. A viscous, loculated or recurrent effusion may also 
require formal surgical drainage.
Tuberculous pericarditis
Tuberculous pericarditis may complicate pulmonary tuberculosis but 
may also be the rst manifestation of the infection. In Africa, a tubercu-
lous pericardial effusion is a common feature of AIDS. The condition typ-
ically presents with chronic malaise, weight loss and a low-grade fever. 
An effusion usually develops and the pericardium may become thick and 
unyielding, leading to pericardial constriction or tamponade. An associ-
ated pleural effusion is often present.
The diagnosis may be conrmed by aspiration of the uid and direct 
examination or culture for tubercle bacilli. Treatment requires specic 
antituberculous chemotherapy (p. 522); in addition, a 3-month course of 
prednisolone (initial dose 60 mg a day, tapering down rapidly) improves 
outcome.
Chronic constrictive pericarditis
Constrictive pericarditis is due to progressive thickening, brosis and 
calcication of the pericardium. In effect, the heart is encased in a 
solid shell and cannot ll properly. The calcication may extend into the 
myocardium, so there may also be impaired myocardial contraction. 
The condition often follows an attack of tuberculous pericarditis but 
can also complicate haemopericardium, viral pericarditis, rheumatoid 
arthritis and purulent pericarditis. It is often impossible to identify the 
original insult.
Clinical features
The symptoms and signs of systemic venous congestion are the hall-
marks of constrictive pericarditis. AF is common and there is often dra-
matic ascites and hepatomegaly (Box 16.109). Breathlessness is not a 
prominent symptom because the lungs are seldom congested. The con-
dition is sometimes overlooked but should be suspected in any patient 
aVR
V1
V4
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
II
I
Fig. 16.99 ECG in viral pericarditis. Widespread ST elevation (leads I, II, aVL and 
V1–V6) is shown. The upward concave shape of the ST segments (see leads II and V6) 
and the unusual distribution of changes (involving anterior and inferior leads) help to 
distinguish pericarditis from acute myocardial infarction.
LV
Fig. 16.100 Pericardial effusion: echocardiogram (apical view). Short-axis view 
of the heart showing a large circumferential pericardial effusion (arrows). (LV = left 
ventricle)

[[p522]]
478  CARDIOLOGY
with unexplained right heart failure and apparently normal heart size and 
function on echocardiography.
Investigations
A chest X-ray, which may show pericardial calcication (Fig. 16.101), and 
echocardiography often help to establish the diagnosis. CT scanning is use-
ful for imaging the pericardial calcication. Constrictive pericarditis is often 
difcult to distinguish from restrictive cardiomyopathy and in such cases 
complex echo–Doppler studies and cardiac catheterisation may be required.
Management
The resulting diastolic heart failure is treated using loop diuretics and 
aldosterone antagonists, such as spironolactone. Surgical resection of 
the diseased pericardium can lead to a dramatic improvement but car-
ries a high morbidity, especially if performed late in the disease course, as 
the pericardium becomes heavily bound to the myocardium.
Cardiac tamponade
This term is used to describe acute heart failure due to compression of 
the heart as the result of a large pericardial effusion. Tamponade may 
complicate any form of pericarditis but can be caused by malignant dis-
ease, by blood in the pericardial space following trauma, or by rupture of 
the free wall of the myocardium following MI.
Clinical features
Patients with tamponade are unwell, with hypotension, tachycardia 
and a markedly raised JVP. Other clinical features are summarised in 
Box16.110
Investigations
The pivotal investigation is echocardiography, which can conrm the 
diagnosis and also helps to identify the optimum site for aspiration of 
the uid. The ECG may show features of the underlying disease, such 
as pericarditis or acute MI. When there is a large pericardial effusion, 
the ECG complexes are small and there may be electrical alternans: a 
changing axis with alternate beats caused by the heart swinging from 
side to side in the pericardial uid. A chest X-ray shows an enlarged 
globular heart but can look normal.
Management
Cardiac tamponade is a medical emergency. When the diagnosis is con-
rmed, percutaneous pericardiocentesis should be performed as soon 
as possible, which usually results in a dramatic improvement. In some 
cases, surgical drainage may be required.
Further information
Journal article
Gould FK, Denning DW, Elliott TS, etal. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
antibiotic treatment of endocarditis in adults: a report of the working party of 
the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2012;67:269–289.
Websites
acc.org American College of Cardiology (ACC): free access to guidelines for the 
evaluation and management of many cardiac conditions
americanheart.org American Heart Association (AHA): free access to all the ACC/
AHA/ESC guidelines, AHA scientic statements and fact sheets for patients
americanheart.org European Society of Cardiology (ESC): free access to 
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of many cardiac conditions, and 
to educational modules
jbs3risk.com Joint British Societies for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease: 
risk calculator
16.109  Clinical features of constrictive pericarditis
 Fatigue
 Rapid, low-volume pulse
 Elevated JVP with a rapid y descent
 Loud early third heart sound  
or ‘pericardial knock’
 Kussmaul’s sign
 Hepatomegaly
 Ascites
 Peripheral oedema
 Pulsus paradoxus
(JVP = jugular venous pressure)
16.110  Clinical features of cardiac tamponade
 Dyspnoea
 Collapse
 Tachycardia
 Hypotension
 Gross elevation of the JVP
 Soft heart sounds with an early third heart sound
 Pulsus paradoxus (a large fall in BP during inspiration, when the pulse may be 
impalpable)
 Kussmaul’s sign (a paradoxical rise in JVP during inspiration)
(JVP = jugular venous pressure)
Fig. 16.101 Lateral chest X-ray from a patient with severe heart failure due to 
chronic constrictive pericarditis. There is heavy calcication of the pericardium.

[[p523]]
Multiple Choice Questions
16.1.  A 24-year-old woman presents at the emergency department 
with an episode of sudden-onset rapid regular palpitation 
of one hour’s duration. She has no previous cardiovascular 
history. On examination, heart rate is 180 beats/min and 
regular, blood pressure 104/68 mmHg. Examination is otherwise 
unremarkable. The ECG shows a regular, narrow QRS 
tachycardia (see gure).
Which of the following is the most appropriate initial management for 
this rhythm?
 A. Intravenous adenosine
 B. Oral beta-blocker
 C. Valsalva manoeuvre with or without leg raising
 D. Bilateral carotid sinus pressure
 E. Intravenous atropine
Answer: C.
The diagnosis is supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), based on the 
sudden onset, the regular nature of the tachycardia, and the absence 
of obvious P waves on the ECG. SVT is usually caused by a re-entrant 
mechanism involving the atrioventricular node (see p. 415). Treatments 
that cause transient AV nodal block interrupt the tachycardia and restore 
sinus rhythm. Intravenous adenosine is usually effective but is not nor-
mally given until after vagal manoeuvres have been tried. The Valsalva 
manoeuvre is often effective and can be enhanced by leg raising after 
breath-holding is released (the ‘REVERT’ manoeuvre). Carotid sinus 
pressure may also be effective but should never be applied to both 
carotid arteries simultaneously. Atropine is an anticholinergic drug which 
is used to treat symptomatic bradycardia, not tachycardia.
 16.2.  A 77-year-old diabetic woman presents to her general 
practitioner because of fatigue and breathlessness. She is found 
to have an irregular pulse at 74 beats/min. An ECG conrms 
atrial brillation with good heart rate control. An echocardiogram 
is performed showing left atrial enlargement but no other 
abnormality. What is the most appropriate strategy to reduce 
this patient’s risk of a future stroke?
A. Oral aspirin, 75 mg once daily
B. Oral clopidogrel, 75 mg once daily
C. Immediate DC cardioversion
D. Oral digoxin
E.  Oral anticoagulation with warfarin or a direct oral 
anticoagulant
Answer: E.
This woman has atrial brillation and a relatively high CHA2DS2-VASc 
score of 4 points (1 point each for gender and diabetes mellitus, and 
2 points for age greater than 75 years). She has an annual stroke risk 
of around 4% which would be reduced to 1% with oral anticoagula-
tion using a direct oral anticoagulant such as apixaban or edoxaban, or 
with warfarin (target International Normalised Ratio 2–3). Oral antiplatelet 
drugs such as aspirin or clopidogrel are ineffective for stroke prevention 
in atrial brillation. Immediate cardioversion would increase stroke risk 
because a prior period of oral anticoagulation is required to make the 
procedure safe. Digoxin is used for heart rate control but has no impact 
on stroke risk. (For more on stroke prevention in atrial brillation see page 
414.)
 16.3. A t 25-year-old man presents to the emergency department 
with an episode of syncope while running a half-marathon. He 
had a few seconds warning with lightheadedness, was syncopal 
for around 15 seconds, and made a rapid recovery. His father 
had died suddenly age 54 years with no cause determined. On 
examination the patient appeared well, pulse 50 and regular, BP 
110/62 mmHg. Precordial examination revealed a forceful apical 
impulse and an ejection systolic murmur loudest in the aortic 
area. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
B. Aortic stenosis
C. Mitral regurgitation
D. Long QT syndrome
E. Dilated cardiomyopathy
Answer: A.
This patient presents with symptoms and signs of hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy. Syncope is a common symptom and is 
caused either by left ventricular outow tract obstruction during exercise, 
or by ventricular arrhythmia. The patient presents with typical cardiac 
syncope – a short prodrome, brief syncope and a rapid recovery. The 
family history of sudden death raises suspicion of an inherited cardiac 
condition. While aortic stenosis is a possibility, it is not likely in such a 
young patient and is rarely inherited. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is 
inherited with an autosomal dominant pattern and the murmur is caused 
by left ventricular outow obstruction. Mitral regurgitation does cause a 
systolic murmur but it is usually pansystolic, and there is no association 
with syncope. Long QT syndrome can cause sudden death and is inher-
ited, but is not associated with any structural abnormality or murmur. 
Dilated cardiomyopathy is sometimes inherited but does not commonly 
cause syncope or a murmur.
 16.4. A 30-year-old woman presents with a 2-week history of fever 
and malaise, and develops sharp left-sided chest pain, worse on 
inspiration and on leaning forward. The pain radiates to her left 
shoulder. On examination pulse is 100 beats/min and regular, 
blood pressure 104/66 mmHg. The jugular venous pulse is not 
elevated. The apex beat is not displaced and feels normal. First 
and second are both present, with a harsh to-and-fro sound 
audible in systole and diastole. An echocardiogram shows a 
small pericardial effusion and no other abnormality. The 12-lead 
ECG is shown in the gure.

[[p524]]
Which of the following treatments is most appropriate?
 A. Oral ibuprofen, 400 mg three times daily
 B. Oral prednisolone, initially 40 mg daily and reducing dose over 
2weeks
 C. Pericardiocentesis
 D. Oral colchicine 500 μg twice daily for 3 months
 E. Percutaneous coronary intervention
Answer: D.
The diagnosis is acute pericarditis, probably of viral aetiology because 
of the prodromal symptoms. Examination reveals a pericardial rub, 
and the ECG shows widespread saddle-shaped ST segment elevation 
without reciprocal ST segment depression. The most effective treatment 
for symptoms and to prevent recurrence is colchicine. Non-steroidal 
anti-inammatory drugs such as ibuprofen may also help acute symp-
toms, but oral corticosteroids are not effective. Pericardiocentesis would 
only be indicated if there was a large pericardial effusion and compro-
mise (hypotension, pulsus paradoxus, elevated jugular venous pulse, 
oliguria). Percutaneous coronary intervention is not appropriate as the 
pattern of ST segment elevation suggests pericarditis and not ST eleva-
tion myocardial infarction.

[[p525]]
17
IJ Clifton
DAB Ellames
Respiratory medicine
Clinical examination of the respiratory system 480
Functional anatomy and physiology 482
Investigation of respiratory disease 484
Imaging 484
Endoscopic examination 486
Microbiological investigations 487
Immunological and serological tests 487
Cytology and histopathology 487
Respiratory function testing 487
Presenting problems in respiratory disease 489
Cough 489
Breathlessness 489
Chest pain 492
Finger clubbing 492
Haemoptysis 492
‘Incidental’ pulmonary nodule 493
Pleural effusion 494
Respiratory failure 496
Obstructive pulmonary diseases 499
Asthma 499
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 505
Bronchiectasis 509
Cystic brosis 510
Infections of the respiratory system 512
Upper respiratory tract infection 512
Pneumonia 512
Tuberculosis 518
Respiratory diseases caused by fungi 525
Tumours of the bronchus and lung 528
Primary tumours of the lung 528
Secondary tumours of the lung 532
Tumours of the mediastinum 532
Interstitial and inltrative pulmonary diseases 533
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease 533
Lung diseases due to systemic inammatory disease 538
Pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides 539
Lung diseases due to irradiation and drugs 540
Rare interstitial lung diseases 541
Occupational and environmental lung disease 541
Occupational airway disease 541
Pneumoconiosis 542
Lung diseases due to organic dusts 544
Asbestos-related lung and pleural diseases 545
Occupational lung cancer 546
Pulmonary vascular disease 546
Pulmonary embolism 546
Pulmonary hypertension 549
Diseases of the upper airway 550
Diseases of the nasopharynx 550
Sleep-disordered breathing 550
Laryngeal disorders 552
Tracheal disorders 553
Pleural disease 553
Diseases of the diaphragm and chest wall 555
Disorders of the diaphragm 555
Deformities of the chest wall 555

[[p526]]
480    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Clinical examination of the respiratory system
Insets (idiopathic kyphoscoliosis) Courtesy of Dr I. Smith, Papworth Hospital, Cambridge; (serous, mucopurulent and purulent sputum) Courtesy of Dr J. Foweraker, Papworth 
Hospital, Cambridge.
Hands
Digital clubbing
Tar staining
Peripheral cyanosis
Signs of occupation
CO2 retention flap
Radial pulse
Rate
Rhythm
Jugular venous pulse
Elevated
Pulsatile
Face, mouth and eyes
Pursed lips
Central cyanosis
Anaemia
Horner syndrome
(Ch. 28)
Thorax
(see opposite)
–
Palpation
From the front:
  Trachea central
  Cricosternal distance
  Cardiac apex displaced
  Expansion
From behind:
  Cervical lymphadenopathy
  Expansion
Leg oedema
Salt and water retention
Cor pulmonale
Venous thrombosis
 Respiratory rate
 Cachexia, fever, rash
 Sputum (see below)
 Fetor
Observation
Finger clubbing
Blood pressure
Arterial paradox
Auscultation
Breath sounds:
normal, bronchial, louder or softer
Added sounds:
wheezes, crackles, rubs
Spoken voice (vocal resonance):
absent (effusion), increased
(consolidation)
Whispered voice:
whispering pectoriloquy
Percussion
Resonant or dull
‘Stony dull’ (effusion)
Idiopathic kyphoscoliosis
 Locale:
    Oxygen delivery
    (mask, cannulae)
    Nebulisers
    Inhalers
Serous/frothy/pink
 Pulmonary oedema
Mucopurulent
 Bronchial or pneumonic
 infection
Purulent
 Bronchial or pneumonic
 infection
Blood-stained
 Cancer, tuberculosis,
 bronchiectasis,
 pulmonary embolism
Sputum
10
9
8
7
6
Inspection
Deformity
(e.g. pectus excavatum)
Scars
Intercostal indrawing
Symmetry of expansion
Hyperinflation
Paradoxical rib movement
(low flat diaphragm)
6
5
6
9
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
7
8
9
10

[[p527]]
Clinical examination of the respiratory system    481
17
 Insets (upper lobe collapse) From http://3.bp.blogspot.com; (pneumothorax) http://chestatlas.com; (pleural effusion) www.ispub.com.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Use of accessory
muscles
Hyperinflated
‘barrel’ chest
Auscultation
  Reduced breath
  sounds – wheeze
Pursed lip breathing
Central cyanosis
Prolonged expiration
Reduced cricosternal
distance
Intercostal
indrawing
during
inspiration
Cardiac apex not
palpable
Loss of cardiac
dullness on
percussion
Inward movement
of lower ribs
on inspiration
(low flat diaphragm)
Also: raised jugular venous pressure (JVP),
peripheral oedema from salt and 
water retention and/or cor pulmonale
Heart sounds
loudest in
epigastrium
Pulmonary fibrosis
Small lungs
Reduced
expansion
Dull percussion at bases
(high diaphragm)
Central cyanosis
Tachypnoea
Auscultation
  Fine inspiratory
  crackles at
  bases
See also Fig. 17.55
Also: finger clubbing common in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; raised JVP
and peripheral oedema if cor pulmonale
Right middle lobe pneumonia
Right upper lobe collapse
Right pneumothorax
Large right pleural effusion
Inspection
   Tachypnoea
   Central cyanosis (if severe)
Palpation
Expansion on R
Percussion
   Dull R mid-zone and axilla
Auscultation
   Bronchial breath sounds
   and vocal resonance over
   consolidation and whispering
 pectoriloquy
   Pleural rub if pleurisy
Inspection
Volume R upper zone
Palpation
  Trachea deviated to R
Expansion R upper zone
Percussion
  Dull R upper zone
Auscultation
Breath sounds with
 central obstruction
Inspection
  Tachypnoea (pain, deflation
  reflex)
Palpation
Expansion R side
Percussion
  Resonant or hyper-resonant
  on R
Auscultation
  Absent breath sounds on R
Tension pneumothorax also
causes
 
Deviation of trachea to
 
opposite side
   Tachycardia and
 
hypotension 
Inspection
   Tachypnoea
Palpation
Expansion on R
   Trachea and apex may be
   moved to L
Percussion
   Stony dull
   R mid- and lower zones
Auscultation
   Absent breath sounds and
   vocal resonance R base
   Bronchial breathing or
    crackles above effusion
Obscures R heart border
on X-ray
X-ray
  Deviated trachea (to R)
  Elevated horizontal fissure
Volume R hemithorax
  Central (hilar) mass may
 be seen

[[p528]]
482    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Respiratory infections such as tuberculosis, pneumonia and virus infec-
tions (e.g. inuenza, COVID-19) represent a major burden of morbidity 
and mortality globally. The increasing prevalence of allergy, asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) contributes to the burden 
of chronic disease in the community. By 2025, the number of cigarette 
smokers worldwide is anticipated to increase to 1.5 billion, ensuring a 
growing burden of tobacco-related respiratory conditions.
Respiratory disease covers many pathologies, including infectious, 
inammatory, neoplastic and degenerative processes. The practice of 
respiratory medicine thus requires collaboration with a range of disci-
plines. Recent advances have improved the lives of many patients with 
obstructive lung disease, cystic brosis, obstructive sleep apnoea and 
pulmonary hypertension, but the outlook remains poor for lung and other 
respiratory cancers and for some of the interstitial lung diseases.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The lungs occupy the upper two-thirds of the bony thorax, bounded 
medially by the spine, the heart and the mediastinum and inferiorly by the 
diaphragm. During breathing, free movement of the lung surface relative 
to the chest wall is facilitated by sliding contact between the parietal and 
visceral pleura, which cover the inner surface of the chest wall and the 
lung respectively, and are normally closely apposed. Inspiration involves 
downward contraction of the diaphragm (innervated by the phrenic 
nerves originating from C3, 4 and 5) and upward, outward movement of 
the ribs, caused by contraction of the external intercostal muscles (inner-
vated by intercostal nerves originating from the thoracic spinal cord). 
Expiration is largely passive, driven by elastic recoil of the lungs.
The conducting airways from the nose to the alveoli connect the 
external environment with the alveolar surface. As air is inhaled through 
the upper airways it is ltered in the nose, heated to body temperature 
and fully saturated with water vapour; partial recovery of this heat and 
moisture occurs on expiration. Total airway cross-section is smallest in 
the glottis and trachea, making the central airway particularly vulnerable 
to obstruction. Normal breath sounds originate mainly from the rapid 
turbulent airow in the larynx, trachea and main bronchi.
The multitude of small airways within the lung parenchyma has 
a very large combined cross-sectional area (over 300 cm 2 in the 
third-generation respiratory bronchioles), resulting in very slow ow 
rates. Airow is virtually silent here and gas transport occurs largely 
by diffusion in the nal generations. Major bronchial and pulmonary 
divisions are shown in Figure 17.1
The acinus (Fig. 17.2) is the gas exchange unit of the lung and com-
prises branching respiratory bronchioles and clusters of alveoli. Here 
the air makes close contact with the blood in the pulmonary capillaries 
(gas-to-blood distance < 0.4 µm), and oxygen uptake and CO2 excretion 
occur. The alveoli are lined with attened epithelial cells (type I pneumo-
cytes) and a few, more cuboidal, type II pneumocytes. The latter produce 
surfactant, which is a phospholipid mixture that reduces surface tension 
and thereby counteracts the tendency of alveoli to collapse. Type II pneu-
mocytes can divide to reconstitute type I pneumocytes after lung injury.
Lung mechanics
Healthy alveolar walls contain a ne network of elastin and collagen bres 
(see Fig. 17.2). The volume of the lungs at the end of a tidal (‘normal’) 
breath out is called the functional residual capacity (FRC). At this volume, 
the inward elastic recoil of the lungs (resulting from elastin bres and 
surface tension in the alveolar lining uid) is balanced by the resistance 
of the chest wall to inward distortion from its resting shape, causing neg-
ative pressure in the pleural space. Elastin bres allow the lung to be 
easily distended at physiological lung volumes, but collagen bres cause 
increasing stiffness as full ination is approached, so that, in health, the 
maximum inspiratory volume is limited by the lung (rather than the chest 
wall). The weight of lung tissue compresses the dependent regions and 
Upper
lobe
Middle
lobe
2
1
3
2
1
4
3
2
5
1
Lower
lobe
Upper
lobe
Lower
lobe
Middle
lobe
3
2
1
2
1
1
4
2
3
T
r
a
n
sv
erse
fissur
e
RIGHT
LEFT
Upper
lobe
Lower
lobe
2
1
1
4
2
3
3
4
Ob
liqu
e fissur
e
Upper
lobe
2
1
3
4
3
2
Lower
lobe
4
1
Anterior
5
Lateral aspects of lungs
Spine
Spine
Major bronchial subdivisions
Fig. 17.1 The major bronchial divisions and the ssures, 
lobes and segments of the lungs. The angle of the oblique 
ssure means that the left upper lobe is largely anterior to the 
lower lobe. On the right, the transverse ssure separates the upper 
from the anteriorly placed middle lobe, which is matched by the 
lingular segment on the left side. The site of a lobe determines 
whether physical signs are mainly anterior or posterior. Each 
lobe is composed of two or more bronchopulmonary segments 
that are supplied by the main branches of each lobar bronchus. 
Bronchopulmonary segments: Right Upper lobe: (1) Anterior, 
(2) Posterior, (3) Apical. Middle lobe: (1) Lateral, (2) Medial. Lower 
lobe: (1) Apical, (2) Posterior basal, (3) Lateral basal, (4) Anterior 
basal, (5) Medial basal. Left Upper lobe: (1) Anterior, (2) Apical, 
(3) Posterior, (4) Lingular. Lower lobe: (1) Apical, (2) Posterior basal, 
(3) Lateral basal, (4) Anterior basal.

[[p529]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    483
17
distends the uppermost parts, so a greater portion of an inhaled breath 
passes to the basal regions, which also receive the greatest blood ow 
as a result of gravity. Elastin bres in alveolar walls maintain small airway 
patency by radial traction on the airway walls. Even in health, however, 
these small airways narrow during expiration because they are sur-
rounded by alveoli at higher pressure, but are prevented from collapsing 
by radial elastic traction. The volume that can be exhaled is thus limited 
purely by the capacity of the expiratory muscles to distort the chest wall 
inwards. In emphysema, loss of alveolar walls leaves the small airways 
unsupported, and their collapse on expiration causes air trapping and 
limits expiration at a high end-expiratory volume.
Control of breathing
The respiratory motor neurons in the posterior medulla oblongata are 
the origin of the respiratory cycle. Their activity is modulated by multiple 
external inputs in health and in disease (see Fig. 17.9):
 Central chemoreceptors in the ventrolateral medulla sense the pH of 
the cerebrospinal uid (CSF) and are indirectly stimulated by a rise in 
arterial PCO2
 The carotid bodies sense hypoxaemia but are mainly activated by 
arterial PO2 values below 8 kPa (60 mmHg). They are also sensitised 
to hypoxia by raised arterial PCO2
 Muscle spindles in the respiratory muscles sense changes in 
mechanical load.
 Vagal sensory bres in the lung may be stimulated by stretch, 
inhaled toxins or disease processes in the interstitium.
 Cortical (volitional) and limbic (emotional) inuences can override the 
automatic control of breathing.
Ventilation/perfusion matching and the pulmonary 
circulation
The regional distribution of ventilation and perfusion must be matched for 
optimal gas exchange within the lungs. At segmental and subsegmen-
tal level, hypoxia constricts pulmonary arterioles and airway CO2 dilates 
bronchi, helping to maintain good regional matching of ventilation and 
perfusion. Lung disease may create regions of relative under-ventilation 
or under-perfusion, which disturb this regional matching, causing res-
piratory failure. In addition to causing ventilation–perfusion mismatch, 
diseases that destroy capillaries or thicken the alveolar capillary mem-
brane (e.g. emphysema or brosis) can impair gas diffusion directly.
The pulmonary circulation in health operates at low pressure (approx-
imately 24/9 mmHg) and can accommodate large increases in ow with 
minimal rise in pressure, e.g. during exercise. Pulmonary hypertension 
occurs when vessels are destroyed by emphysema, obstructed by 
thrombus, involved in interstitial inammation or thickened by pulmonary 
vascular disease. The right ventricle responds by hypertrophy, with right 
axis deviation and P pulmonale (tall, peaked p waves) on the electrocar-
diogram (ECG), and clinical features of right heart failure; the term ‘cor 
pulmonale’ is often used for these ndings.
Changes in respiratory function associated with old age are shown in 
Box 17.1
Lung defences
Upper airway defences
Large airborne particles are trapped by nasal hairs, and smaller par-
ticles settling on the mucosa are cleared towards the oropharynx by 
the columnar ciliated epithelium that covers the turbinates and septum 
Cartilage
plates
Smooth
muscle
Terminal
bronchiole
Bronchial
artery
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary
vein
Interlobular
septum
Alveolar
capillaries
Respiratory
bronchiole
Alveoli
Pores of Kohn
Elastin
fibres
Bronchus
Bronchiole
Terminal
bronchiole
Respiratory
bronchiole
Alveoli
A
B
C
Fig. 17.2 Functional anatomy of the lung. 
and elastin bres. The latter also run through the alveolar walls. Gas exchange occurs in the alveoli, which are connected to each other by the pores of Kohn.  
anatomy of an acinus. Both the pulmonary artery (carrying desaturated blood) and the bronchial artery (systemic supply to airway tissue) run along the bronchus. The venous 
drainage to the left atrium follows the interlobular septa. From www.Netter.com: Illustrations 155 (bronchus, acinus) and 191 (circulation), Elsevier.

[[p530]]
484    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
(Fig. 17.3). During cough, expiratory muscle effort against a closed 
glottis results in high intrathoracic pressure, which is then released 
explosively. The exible posterior tracheal wall is pushed inwards by 
the high surrounding pressure, which reduces tracheal cross-section 
and thus maximises the airspeed to achieve effective expectoration. 
The larynx also acts as a sphincter, closing to protect the airway during 
swallowing and vomiting.
Lower airway defences
The structure and function of the lower airways are maintained by close 
cooperation between the innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Traditionally, the healthy lower respiratory tract was considered to be 
sterile. However, molecular analysis has established that it harbours a 
diverse resident microbial population (the lung microbiome); understand-
ing of the interactions between the immune system and the lung micro-
biome, and its role in health and disease, is in its infancy.
The innate response in the lungs is characterised by a number of 
non-specic defence mechanisms. Inhaled particulate matter is trapped 
in airway mucus and cleared by the mucociliary escalator. Tobacco 
smoke increases mucus secretion but reduces mucociliary clearance 
and predisposes towards lower respiratory tract infections, including 
pneumonia. Defective mucociliary transport is also a feature of several 
rare diseases including cystic brosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia and 
Young syndrome, which are characterised by repeated sino-pulmonary 
infections and bronchiectasis.
Airway secretions contain an array of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs, 
such as defensins and lysozyme), immunoglobulin A (IgA), antiprotein-
ases and antioxidants. Many assist with the opsonisation and killing 
of bacteria and the regulation of the proteolytic enzymes secreted 
by inammatory cells. In particular, α1-antitrypsin regulates neutrophil 
elastase, and deciency of this may be associated with premature 
emphysema.
Macrophages engulf microbes, organic dusts and other particulate 
matter. They cannot digest inorganic agents such as asbestos or silica, 
which cause their death and lead to the release of powerful proteolytic 
enzymes that damage the lung. Neutrophil numbers in the airway are low 
but the pulmonary circulation contains a marginated pool that may be 
recruited rapidly in response to bacterial infection.
Adaptive immunity is characterised by a specic response and immu-
nological memory. Lung dendritic cells facilitate antigen presentation to 
T and B lymphocytes.
Investigation of respiratory disease
A detailed history, thorough examination and basic haematological and 
biochemical tests usually indicate the likely diagnosis and differential. A 
number of other investigations are normally required to conrm the diag-
nosis and/or monitor disease activity.
Imaging
The ‘plain’ chest X-ray
The chest X-ray (CXR) is one of the initial investigations performed on 
the majority of patients suspected of having respiratory disease. A pos-
teroanterior (PA) lm provides information on the lung elds, heart, medi-
astinum, vascular structures and thoracic cage (Fig. 17.4). A lateral lm 
may provide additional information, particularly if pathology is suspected 
behind the heart or deep in the diaphragmatic sulci. An approach to 
interpreting the chest X-ray is given in Box 17.2; common abnormalities 
are listed in Box 17.3
Increased shadowing may represent accumulation of uid, lobar 
collapse or consolidation. Uncomplicated consolidation should not 
change the position of the mediastinum and the presence of an air 
bronchogram means that proximal bronchi are patent. Collapse (imply-
ing obstruction of the lobar bronchus) is accompanied by loss of vol-
ume and displacement of the mediastinum towards the affected side 
(Fig. 17.5).
The presence of ring shadows (thickened bronchi seen end-on), tram-
line shadows (thickened bronchi side-on) or tubular shadows (bronchi 
lled with secretions) suggests bronchiectasis. The presence of pleural 
uid is suggested by a dense basal shadow, which, in the erect patient, 
ascends towards the axilla. In a large pulmonary embolism, relative olig-
aemia may cause a lung eld to appear abnormally dark.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) provides detailed images of the pulmonary 
parenchyma, mediastinum, pleura and bony structures. The displayed 
range of densities can be adjusted to highlight different structures 
such as the lung parenchyma, the mediastinal vascular structures or 
bone. Cross-sectional formatting allows recognition of the axial distri-
bution of the disease, while coronal reformation displays the cranio-
caudal distribution. In cases of suspected lung cancer, CT is central 
to both diagnosis and staging, and facilitates percutaneous needle 
biopsy. CT identies the extent and appearance of pleural thickening 
(see Fig.17.64) and reliably differentiates pleural and pericardial fat 
from pathology. High-resolution thin-section scanning provides detailed 
17.1  Respiratory function in old age
 Reserve capacity: a signicant reduction in function can occur with ageing 
with only minimal effect on normal breathing, but the ability to combat acute 
disease is reduced.
 Decline in FEV1: the FEV1/FVC (forced expiratory volume/forced vital capacity) 
ratio falls by around 0.2% per year from 70% at the age of 40–45 years, due 
to a decline in elastic recoil in the small airways with age. Smoking accelerates 
this decline threefold on average. Symptoms usually occur only when FEV1
drops below 50% of predicted.
 Increasing ventilation perfusion mismatch: the reduction in elastic 
recoil causes a tendency for the small airways to collapse during expiration, 
particularly in dependent areas of the lungs, thus reducing ventilation.
 Reduced ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia: older people 
may be less tachypnoeic for any given fall in PaO2 or rise in PaCO2
 Impaired defences against infection: due to reduced numbers of glandular 
epithelial cells, which lead to a reduction in protective mucus.
 Decline in maximum oxygen uptake: due to a combination of impairments 
in muscle, and the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. This leads to a 
reduction in cardiorespiratory reserve and exercise capacity.
 Loss of chest wall compliance: due to reduced intervertebral disc spaces and 
ossication of the costal cartilages; respiratory muscle strength and endurance 
also decline. These changes become important only in the presence of other 
respiratory disease.
M
C
Fig. 17.3 The mucociliary escalator. Scanning electron micrograph of the respiratory 
epithelium showing large numbers of cilia (C) overlaid by the mucus ‘raft’ (M).

[[p531]]
Investigation of respiratory disease    485
17
images of the pulmonary parenchyma and is superior to chest X-ray for 
assessment of diffuse parenchymal lung disease (see Fig. 17.55), identi-
fying airway thickening, bronchiectasis (see Fig. 17.29) and emphysema 
(see Fig. 17.27). The relative contribution of competing pathologies to 
a breathless patient may be assessed. Prone imaging may be used to 
differentiate the gravity-induced posterobasal attenuation seen in supine 
scans. CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) has become the investiga-
tion of choice in the diagnosis of pulmonary thromboembolism (see 
Fig. 17.67), when it may either conrm the suspected embolism or high-
light an alternative diagnosis. CTPA has largely replaced the radioiso-
tope-based ventilation–perfusion (V /Q˙ ) scan for this purpose. CT may 
assist in identifying cavitation and other features of infection (e.g. air 
creascent and halo signs in aspergillosis). Finally, CT may be used to 
monitor disease progression in established disease and for screening in 
certain high-risk populations.
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanners employ the radiotracer 
18F-uorodeoxyglucose (FDG) to quantify the rate of glucose metabolism 
by cells. The 18FDG is rapidly taken up by metabolically active tissue, 
where it is phosphorylated and ‘trapped’ in the cell. The assessment of 
18FDG uptake may be qualitative (visual analysis) or semi-quantitative, 
using the standardised uptake value (SUV) (Fig. 17.6). FDG-PET is useful 
in the staging of mediastinal lymph nodes and distal metastatic disease 
in patients with lung cancer and in the investigation of pulmonary nod-
ules. Co-registration of PET and CT (PET-CT) enhances localisation and 
characterisation of metabolically active deposits (see Fig. 17.6). FDG-
PET may also differentiate benign from malignant pleural disease and 
can be used to assess the extent of extrapulmonary disease in sarcoido-
sis. However, 18FDG uptake by a lesion is affected by a large number 
of parameters, including equipment used, the physics, and biological 
factors such as amount of body fat and brown fat uptake and the blood 
glucose level.
Lung apex
Right hilum
Right atrial
border
Right
costophrenic
angle
Right hemidiaphragm
Right cardiophrenic angle
Gastric air bubble
Left hemidiaphragm
(normally lower than right)
Medial border
of scapula
Aortic arch
Left hilum
Left ventricular
border
Cardiac apex
Trachea
Clavicular heads symmetrical
either side of spine – no rotation
Fig. 17.4 The normal chest X-ray. The lung markings consist of branching and tapering lines radiating out from the hila. Where airways and vessels turn towards the lm, 
they can appear as open or lled circles (see upper pole of right hilum). The scapulae may overlie the lung elds; trace the edge of bony structures to avoid mistaking them for 
pleural or pulmonary shadows. To check for hyperination, count the ribs; if more than 10 are visible posteriorly above the diaphragm, the lungs are hyperinated. From Innes 
JA. Davidson’s Essentials of medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2009.
17.2  How to interpret a chest X-ray
Name, date, orientation
Films are posteroanterior (PA) unless marked 
AP to denote that they are anteroposterior
Lung elds
Equal translucency?
Check horizontal ssure from right hilum to 
sixth rib at the anterior axillary line
Masses? Consolidation? Cavitation?
Lung apices
Check behind the clavicles. Masses? 
Consolidation? Cavitation?
Trachea
Central (midway between the clavicular 
heads)?
Paratracheal mass? Goitre?
Heart
Normal shape?
Cardiothoracic ratio (should be < half the 
intrathoracic diameter)
Retrocardiac mass?
Hila
Left should be higher than right
Shape (should be concave laterally; if convex, 
consider mass or lymphadenopathy)?
Density?
Diaphragm
Right should be higher than left
Hyperination (no more than 10 ribs should be 
visible posteriorly above the diaphragm)?
Costophrenic angles
Acute and well dened (pleural uid or 
thickening, if not)?
Soft tissues
Breast shadows in females
Chest wall for masses or subcutaneous 
emphysema
Bones
Ribs, vertebrae, scapulae and clavicles
Any fracture visible at bone margins or 
lucencies?

[[p532]]
486    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Magnetic resonance imaging
Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lung parenchyma 
is seldom useful, although the technique is being used increasingly in 
distinguishing benign from malignant pleural disease and in delineating 
invasion of the chest wall or diaphragm by tumour.
The use of hyperpolarized 3He MRI is a developing method of assess-
ing the distribution of ventilation within the lung.
Ultrasound
Transthoracic ultrasound is a point-of-care investigation used to 
assess the pleural space (see Fig. 17.15). In the hands of an experi-
enced operator it can distinguish pleural uid from pleural thickening, 
identify a pneumothorax and, by directly visualising the diaphragm and 
solid organs such as the liver, spleen and kidneys, may be used to 
guide pleural aspiration, biopsy and intercostal chest drain insertion. It 
is also used to guide needle biopsy of supercial lymph node or chest 
wall masses and provides useful information on the shape and move-
ment of the diaphragm.
Endoscopic examination
Laryngoscopy
The larynx may be inspected directly with a breoptic laryngoscope in 
cases of suspected intermittent laryngeal obstruction (ILO), when par-
adoxical movement of the vocal cords may mimic asthma. Left-sided 
lung tumours may involve the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, paralysing 
the left vocal cord and leading to a hoarse voice and a ‘bovine’ cough. 
Continuous laryngoscopy during exercise tests allows the identication 
of exercise-induced ILO.
Bronchoscopy
The trachea and the rst 3–4 generations of bronchi may be inspected 
using a exible breoptic bronchoscope. This is usually performed under 
local anaesthesia with sedation, on an outpatient basis. Abnormal tissue 
in the bronchial lumen or wall can be biopsied, and bronchial brushings, 
washings or aspirates can be taken for cytological or bacteriological 
examination. Small biopsy specimens of lung tissue, taken by forceps 
passed through the bronchial wall (transbronchial biopsies), may be 
17.3  Common chest X-ray abnormalities
Pulmonary and pleural shadowing
 Consolidation: infection, infarction, inammation and, rarely, bronchoalveolar cell 
carcinoma
 Lobar collapse: mucus plugging, tumour, compression by lymph nodes
 Solitary nodule
 Multiple nodules: miliary tuberculosis (TB), dust inhalation, metastatic 
malignancy, healed varicella pneumonia, rheumatoid disease
 Ring shadows, tramlines and tubular shadows: bronchiectasis
 Cavitating lesions: tumour, abscess, infarct, pneumonia (Staphylococcus/
Klebsiella), granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)
 Reticular, nodular and reticulonodular shadows: diffuse parenchymal lung 
disease, infection
 Pleural abnormalities: uid, plaques, tumour
Increased translucency
 Bullae
 Pneumothorax
 Oligaemia
Hilar abnormalities
 Unilateral hilar enlargement: TB, lung cancer, lymphoma
 Bilateral hilar enlargement: sarcoidosis, lymphoma, TB, silicosis
Other abnormalities
 Hiatus hernia
 Surgical emphysema
Left 
upper 
lobe
Lingula
Left 
lower 
lobe
Right 
upper 
lobe
Right 
middle
lobe
Right 
lower 
lobe
Fig. 17.5 Radiological features of lobar collapse caused by bronchial 
obstruction. The dotted line in the drawings represents the normal position of the 
diaphragm. The dark pink area represents the extent of shadowing seen on the X-ray.

[[p533]]
Investigation of respiratory disease    487
17
helpful in the diagnosis of bronchocentric disorders such as sarcoidosis 
and diffuse malignancy but are generally too small to be of diagnostic 
value in other diffuse parenchymal pulmonary disease.
Rigid bronchoscopy requires general anaesthesia and is reserved for spe-
cic situations, such as massive haemoptysis or removal of a foreign body 
(see Fig. 9.2), and can facilitate endobronchial laser therapy and stenting.
Endobronchial ultrasound
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) allows directed needle aspiration 
from peribronchial nodes and is used increasingly to stage lung cancer. 
It may also be useful in non-malignant conditions, such as mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy caused by tuberculosis or sarcoidosis. Lymph nodes 
down to the main carina can also be sampled using a mediastinoscope 
passed through a small incision at the suprasternal notch under general 
anaesthetic. Lymph nodes in the lower mediastinum may be biopsied 
via the oesophagus using an oesophageal endoscope equipped with an 
ultrasound transducer and biopsy needle (endoscopic ultrasound).
Thoracoscopy
Thoracoscopy, which involves the insertion of an endoscope through the 
chest wall, facilitates biopsy under direct vision and is the gold standard 
for the evaluation of the pleural surfaces, characterisation of complex 
pleural effusion, and identication of exudate and haemorrhage. It is also 
used for accurate staging of apical tumours.
Microbiological investigations
Sputum, pleural uid, throat swabs, blood, and bronchial washings and 
aspirates can be examined for bacteria, fungi and viruses. The use of 
hypertonic saline to induce expectoration of sputum may obviate the 
need for more invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy. Molecular 
tests (nucleic acid amplication tests, NAATs) are being used increasingly 
as rst-line diagnostic tests for respiratory viruses (including inuenza 
and coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV-2), as well as bacterial patho-
gens (e.g. Legionella, Mycoplasma), for which they have largely replaced 
paired serology and antigen-based tests. NAATs are also gaining an 
increased role as rst-line diagnostic tests for tuberculosis and for rapid 
identication of antimicrobial drug resistance.
Immunological and serological tests
The presence of atopy can be detected by demonstrating an elevated 
level of immunoglobulin E (IgE), and the measurement of IgE directed 
against specic antigens. This can be useful to support the diagnosis 
of asthma and in identifying triggers. Many autoimmune diseases pres-
ent with pulmonary involvement and autoantibodies may be identied in 
the serum. IgG enzyme immunoassay or identication of serum precip-
itins (antibodies that form visible lines of precipitated glycoprotein when 
they encounter their specic antigen in an agarose gel) can be used to 
identify a reaction to fungi such as Aspergillus or to antigens involved in 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, such as farmer’s lung or bird fancier’s lung. 
The presence of pneumococcal antigen in sputum, blood or urine may 
be of diagnostic importance in pneumonia. Respiratory viruses can be 
detected in nose/throat swabs by immunouorescence and Legionella
infection may diagnosed by detection of a Legionella antigen in urine. 
ß-1,3-D-glucan detection (in blood) is a marker of fungal infection (see 
Chapter 13) and Aspergillus galactomannan (in blood and bronchial lav-
age uid) is used to diagnose invasive aspergillosis. Interferon-gamma 
release assays are useful in the detection of latent tuberculosis.
Cytology and histopathology
Cytological examination of exfoliated cells in pleural uid or bronchial 
brushings and washings, or of ne needle aspirates from lymph nodes 
or pulmonary lesions, can support a diagnosis of malignancy. A larger 
tissue biopsy is often necessary, however, as this allows immunohis-
tochemistry and genetic testing to characterise the tumor and guide 
variant-specic therapy. Histopathology may also allow identication 
of microorganisms using conventional staining or NAATs. Differential 
cell counts in bronchial lavage uid may help to distinguish pulmonary 
changes due to sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary brosis or hypersen-
sitivity pneumonitis.
Respiratory function testing
Respiratory function tests are used to aid diagnosis, quantify functional 
impairment and monitor treatment or progression of disease. Airway 
narrowing, lung volume and gas exchange capacity are quantied and 
compared with normal values adjusted for age, gender, height and ethnic 
origin. In diseases characterised by airway narrowing (e.g. asthma, bron-
chitis and emphysema), maximum expiratory ow is limited by dynamic 
compression of small intrathoracic airways, some of which may close 
completely during expiration, limiting the volume that can be expired 
(‘obstructive’ defect). This causes hyperination of the chest, which can 
become extreme if elastic recoil is also lost due to parenchymal destruc-
tion, as in emphysema. In contrast, diseases that cause interstitial inam-
mation and/or brosis lead to progressive loss of lung volume (‘restrictive’ 
defect) with normal expiratory ow rates. Typical laboratory traces are 
illustrated in Figure 17.7
Measurement of airway obstruction
Airway narrowing is assessed by asking patients to breathe in fully, 
then blow out as hard and fast as they can into a peak ow meter or 
B
A
C
Fig. 17.6 Computed tomography and positron emission tomography combined to reveal intrathoracic metastases. 
(CT = computed tomography; FDG = 18F-uorodeoxyglucose; PET = positron emission tomography) (A–C) From http://radiology.rsnajnls.org

[[p534]]
488    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
a spirometer. Peak ow meters are useful for home monitoring of peak 
expiratory ow (PEF) in the detection and monitoring of asthma but 
results are effort-dependent. More accurate and reproducible meas-
ures are obtained by maximum forced expiration into a spirometer. The 
forced expired volume in 1 second (FEV1) is the volume exhaled in the rst 
second, and the forced vital capacity (FVC) is the total volume exhaled. 
Airow obstruction is dened as a FEV1/FVC ratio of less than 70%. In 
this situation, spirometry should be repeated following inhaled short-
acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists (e.g. salbutamol); an increase of > 12% 
and > 200 mL in FEV1 or FVC indicates signicant reversibility. A large 
improvement in FEV1 (> 400 mL) and variability in peak ow over time are 
features of asthma.
Large airway narrowing (e.g. tracheal stenosis or compression; see 
Fig.20.12) can be distinguished from small airway narrowing through plot-
ting spirometry data as ow/volume loops. These display ow in relation to 
lung volume (rather than time) during maximum expiration and inspiration, 
and the pattern of ow reveals the site of airow obstruction (Fig. 17.7B).
Lung volumes
Spirometry can measure only the volume of gas that can be exhaled; 
it cannot measure the gas remaining in the lungs after a maximal expi-
ration. All the gas in the lungs can be measured by rebreathing an inert 
non-absorbed gas (usually helium) and recording how much the test 
gas is diluted by lung gas at equilibrium. This measures the volume of 
intrathoracic gas that mixes freely with tidal breaths. Alternatively, lung 
volume may be measured by body plethysmography (see Chapter 9), 
which determines the pressure/volume relationship of the thorax. This 
method measures total intrathoracic gas volume, including poorly venti-
lated areas such as bullae. The terms used to describe lung volume are 
shown in Figure 17.7C
Transfer factor
To measure the capacity of the lungs to exchange gas, patients inhale 
a test mixture of 0.3% carbon monoxide, which is taken up avidly by 
haemoglobin in pulmonary capillaries. After a short breath-hold, the rate 
of disappearance of CO into the circulation is calculated from a sample 
of expirate, and expressed as the TLCO or carbon monoxide transfer fac-
tor. Helium is also included in the test breath to allow calculation of the 
volume of lung examined by the test breath. Transfer factor expressed 
per unit lung volume is termed KCO. Common respiratory function abnor-
malities are summarised in Box 17.4
Arterial blood gases and oximetry
The measurement of hydrogen ion concentration, PaO2 and PaCO2, and 
derived bicarbonate concentration in an arterial blood sample is essential 
for assessing the degree and type of respiratory failure and for measuring 
acid–base status. This is discussed in detail on pages 496 and 630 (see 
Box 17.16). Interpretation of results is facilitated by blood gas diagrams 
(Fig. 17.8), which indicate whether any acidosis or alkalosis is due to acute 
or chronic respiratory derangements of PaCO2 or to metabolic causes.
Pulse oximeters provide a continuous estimation of arterial oxygen sat-
uration (SaO2, or SpO2 if measured by pulse oximetry) (see p.177), thus 
allowing a real-time assessment of a patient’s response to oxygen therapy.
Exercise tests
Resting measurements may be unhelpful in early disease or in patients 
complaining only of exercise-induced symptoms. Spirometry testing 
before and after exercise can help to reveal exercise-induced asthma. 
Walk tests include the self-paced 6-minute walk and the externally 
A
B
C
Volume
Inspiratory capacity
Functional residual capacity
Residual volume
Time
Total lung capacity
Volume
Time
1 sec
Expiration
Inspiration
Volume
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Normal
COPD
Fibrosis
Tracheal
obstruction
Flow
FEV1
Vital capacity
5
5
FVC
Fig. 17.7 Respiratory function tests in health and disease. 
brosis. COPD causes slow, prolonged and limited exhalation. In brosis, forced expiration results in rapid expulsion of a reduced forced vital capacity (FVC). Forced expiratory 
volume (FEV1
volume measurement. Volume/time graphs during quiet breathing with a single maximal breath in and out. COPD causes hyperination with increased residual volume. Fibrosis 
causes a proportional reduction in all lung volumes.

[[p535]]
Presenting problems in respiratory disease    489
17
paced incremental ‘shuttle’ test, where patients walk at increasing 
pace between two cones 10 m apart. These provide simple, repeatable 
assessments of disability and response to treatment. Cardiopulmonary 
bicycle exercise testing, with measurement of metabolic gas exchange, 
ventilation and ECG changes, is useful for quantifying exercise limitation 
and detecting occult cardiovascular or respiratory limitation in a breath-
less patient.
Presenting problems in respiratory disease
Cough
Cough is the most frequent symptom of respiratory disease and is 
caused by stimulation of sensory nerves in the mucosa of the pharynx, 
larynx, trachea and bronchi. Acute sensitisation of the normal cough 
reex occurs in a number of conditions and it is typically induced by 
changes in air temperature or exposure to irritants, such as cigarette 
smoke or perfumes. Distinguishing characteristics of various causes of 
cough are detailed in Box 17.5
The explosive quality of a normal cough is lost in patients with respira-
tory muscle paralysis or vocal cord palsy. Paralysis of a single vocal cord 
gives rise to a prolonged, low-pitched, inefcient ‘bovine’ cough accom-
panied by hoarseness. Coexistence of an inspiratory noise (stridor) 
indicates partial obstruction of a major airway (e.g. laryngeal oedema, 
tracheal tumour, scarring, compression or inhaled foreign body) and 
requires urgent investigation and treatment. Sputum production is com-
mon in patients with acute or chronic cough, and its nature and appear-
ance can provide clues to the aetiology.
Aetiology
Acute transient cough is most commonly caused by viral tracheo-
bronchial infection, post-nasal drip resulting from rhinitis or sinusitis, 
aspiration of a foreign body, or throat-clearing secondary to laryngitis or 
pharyngitis. When cough occurs in the context of more serious diseases, 
such as pneumonia, aspiration, congestive heart failure or pulmonary 
embolism, it is usually easy to diagnose from other clinical features.
Patients with chronic cough present more of a challenge and should 
be assessed with history, physical examination, chest X-ray and lung 
function studies.
Adults with chronic cough and a history of tobacco exposure should 
be considered for CT scanning if they have either an abnormal chest 
X-ray or a normal X-ray and other symptoms that might suggest lung 
cancer.
In the context of normal respiratory examination and investigations, 
extra-thoracic causes of cough need to be considered such as post-
nasal drip secondary to nasal or sinus disease, gastro-oesophageal 
reux disease or cough hypersensitivity. Use of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can result in a chronic dry cough, taking up to 
6 months to resolve following cessation. Bordetella pertussis infection in 
adults can result in cough lasting up to 3 months.
The prescence of ne inspiratory crackles and a dry cough should 
prompt investigation for the possibility of an interstitial lung disease.
Breathlessness
Breathlessness or dyspnoea is dened as the feeling of an uncom-
fortable need to breathe. It is unusual among sensations, as it has no 
dened receptors, no localised representation in the brain, and multiple 
causes both in health (e.g. exercise) and in diseases of the lungs, heart 
or muscles.
Pathophysiology
Stimuli to breathing resulting from disease processes are shown in Figure 
17.9. Respiratory diseases can stimulate breathing and dyspnoea by:
 stimulating intrapulmonary sensory nerves (e.g. pneumothorax, 
interstitial inammation and pulmonary embolus)
 increasing the mechanical load on the respiratory muscles (e.g. 
airow obstruction or pulmonary brosis)
 causing hypoxia, hypercapnia or acidosis, which stimulate 
chemoreceptors.
In cardiac failure, pulmonary congestion reduces lung compliance 
and can also obstruct the small airways. Reduced cardiac output also 
limits oxygen supply to the skeletal muscles during exercise, causing 
early lactic acidaemia and further stimulating breathing via the central 
chemoreceptors.
Breathlessness and the effects of treatment can be quantied using 
a symptom scale. Patients tend to report breathlessness in propor-
tion to the sum of the above stimuli to breathing. Individual patients 
differ greatly in the intensity of breathlessness reported for a given set 
of circumstances, but breathlessness scores during exercise within 
individuals are reproducible and can be used to monitor the effects 
of therapy.
17.4  How to interpret respiratory function abnormalities
Asthma
Chronic 
bronchitis
Emphysema
Pulmonary 
brosis
FEV1
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓
FVC
↓
↓
↓
↓↓
FEV1/FVC
↓
↓
↓
→/↑
TLCO
→
→
↓↓
↓↓
KCO
→/↑
→
↓
→/↓
TLC
→/↑
↑
↑↑
↓
RV
→/↑
↑
↑↑
↓
(RV = residual volume; TLC = total lung capacity; see text for other abbreviations)
Arterial PaCO2
Reference range
95% Confidence limits
Acute respiratory acidosis 
10
8
6
4
2
12
0
75
60
45
30
15
90
0
Resp. alkalosis
pH
[HCO3
–] mmol/L
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
7.5
7.6
[H+] nmol/L
kPa
mmHg
Metabolic
acidosis
Chronic respiratory acidosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
Fig. 17.8 Changes in blood [H+], PaCO2 and plasma [HCO3−] in acid–base 
disorders. The rectangle indicates normal limits for [H+] and PaCO2. The bands 
represent 95% condence limits of single disturbances in human blood. To determine 
the likely cause of an acid–base disorder, plot the values of [H+] and PaCO2 from 
an arterial blood gas measurement.. The diagram indicates whether any acidosis or 
alkalosis results primarily from a respiratory disorder of PaCO2 or from a metabolic 
derangement. From Flenley D. Lancet 1971; 1:1921, with permission from Elsevier.

[[p536]]
490    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
17.5  Cough
Origin
Common causes
Clinical features
Pharynx
Post-nasal drip
History of chronic rhinitis
Larynx
Laryngitis, tumour, whooping cough, croup
Voice or swallowing altered, harsh or painful cough
Paroxysms of cough, often associated with stridor
Trachea
Tracheitis
Raw retrosternal pain with cough
Bronchi
Bronchitis (acute) and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)
Dry or productive, worse in mornings
Asthma
Usually dry, worse at night
Eosinophilic bronchitis
Features similar to asthma but airway hyper-reactivity absent
Lung cancer
Persistent (often with haemoptysis)
Lung parenchyma
Tuberculosis
Productive (often with haemoptysis)
Pneumonia
Dry initially, productive later
Atypical pneumonias including COVID-19 often present with a dry cough
Bronchiectasis
Productive, changes in posture induce sputum production
Pulmonary oedema
Often at night (may be productive of pink, frothy sputum)
Interstitial brosis
Dry and distressing
Drug side-effect
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Dry cough
Aspiration
Gastro-oesophageal reux disease (GORD)
History of acid reux, heartburn, hiatus hernia
Obesity
Adapted from Munro JF, Campbell IW. Macleod’s Clinical examination, 10th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2000.
Fig. 17.9 Respiratory stimuli contributing to breathlessness. Mechanisms by which disease can stimulate the respiratory motor neurons in the medulla. Breathlessness 
is usually felt in proportion to the sum of these stimuli. Further explanation is given on page 181. (CSF = cerebrospinal uid; V/Q = ventilation/perfusion ratio; IX = glosso-
pharyngeal nerve)
Breathlessness
Limbic drives
(emotion)
Cortical drive
Carotid body
( PaO2, PaCO2)
IX
Central
chemoreceptors
( CSF pH)
Spinal
afferents
Vagal lung
afferents
Type II respiratory
failure, 
PaCO2 + acidosis
Airway obstruction
 Asthma
 Emphysema
Pulmonary
fibrosis
Increased
mechanical
load
Altered V/Q
Hypoxaemia
Pulmonary
embolus
Interstitial disease
 Inflammation
 Infection
 Fibrosis
Deflation
 Pneumothorax
 Collapse
 Effusion

[[p537]]
Presenting problems in respiratory disease    491
17
17.6  Causes of breathlessness
System
Acute dyspnoea
Chronic exertional dyspnoea
Cardiovascular
Acute pulmonary oedema*
Chronic heart failure
Myocardial ischaemia (angina equivalent)
Respiratory
Acute severe asthma*
Acute exacerbation of COPD*
Pneumothorax*
Bacterial and viral pneumonias*
Pulmonary embolus*
ARDS
Inhaled foreign body (especially in children)
Lobar collapse
Laryngeal oedema (e.g. anaphylaxis)
COPD*
Chronic asthma*
Lung cancer
Interstitial lung disease (sarcoidosis, 
brosing alveolitis, extrinsic allergic alveolitis, 
pneumoconiosis)
Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
Lymphangitis carcinomatosis (may cause 
intolerable breathlessness)
Large pleural effusion(s)
Others
Metabolic acidosis (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic 
acidosis, uraemia, overdose of salicylates, ethylene 
glycol poisoning)
Psychogenic hyperventilation (anxiety- or panic-
related)
Severe anaemia
Obesity
Deconditioning
*Denotes a common cause.
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Differential diagnosis
Patients may present with either chronic exertional breathlessness or 
as an emergency with acute breathlessness, with prominent symptoms 
even at rest. The causes are classied in Box 17.6
Chronic exertional breathlessness
The cause of breathlessness is often apparent from the clinical history. 
Key questions are detailed below.
How is your breathing at rest and overnight?
In COPD, there is a xed, structural limit to maximum ventilation, and a 
tendency for progressive hyperination during exercise. Breathlessness 
is apparent mainly when walking and patients usually report minimal 
symptoms at rest and overnight. In contrast, patients with signicant 
asthma are often woken from their sleep by breathlessness with chest 
tightness and wheeze.
Orthopnoea is common in COPD, as well as in heart disease, because 
airow obstruction is made worse by cranial displacement of the dia-
phragm by the abdominal contents when recumbent, so many patients 
choose to sleep propped up. Thus it is not a useful differentiating symp-
tom unless there is a clear history of previous angina or infarction to 
suggest cardiac disease.
How much can you do on a good day?
Noting ‘breathless on exertion’ is not enough; the approximate distance 
the patient can walk on the level should be documented, along with 
capacity to climb inclines or stairs. Variability within and between days is 
a hallmark of asthma; in mild asthma, the patient may be free of symp-
toms and signs when well. Gradual, progressive loss of exercise capacity 
over months and years, with consistent disability over days, is typical 
of COPD. When asthma is suspected, the degree of variability can be 
detected by home peak ow monitoring.
Relentless, progressive breathlessness that is also present at rest, 
often accompanied by a dry cough, suggests interstitial lung disease. 
Impaired left ventricular function can also cause chronic exertional 
breathlessness, cough and wheeze. A history of angina, hypertension 
or myocardial infarction raises the possibility of a cardiac cause. This 
may be conrmed by a displaced apex beat, a raised JVP and cardiac 
murmurs (although these signs can occur in severe hypoxic lung disease 
with uid retention). The chest X-ray may show cardiomegaly and an 
ECG and echocardiogram may provide evidence of left ventricular dis-
ease. Measurement of arterial blood gases may help, as, in the absence 
of an intracardiac shunt or pulmonary oedema, the PaO2 in cardiac dis-
ease is normal and the PaCO2 is low or normal.
Did you have breathing problems in childhood or at school?
When present, a history of childhood wheeze increases the likelihood 
of asthma, although this history may be absent in late-onset asthma. A 
history of atopic disease also increases the likelihood of asthma.
Do you have other symptoms along with your breathlessness?
Digital or perioral paraesthesiae and a feeling that ‘I cannot get a deep 
enough breath in’ are typical features of breathing pattern disorders 
but this cannot be diagnosed until other potential causes have been 
excluded. Additional symptoms include lightheadedness, central chest 
discomfort and occasionally carpopedal spasm due to acute respiratory 
alkalosis. These alarming symptoms may provoke further anxiety and 
exacerbate hyperventilation. Breathing pattern disorders rarely disturb 
sleep, can occur at rest, and may be provoked by stress. The Nijmegen 
questionnaire can be used to score some of the typical symptoms of 
breathing pattern disorders (Box 17.7). Arterial blood gases show normal 
(or high) PO2, low PCO2 and alkalosis.
Pleuritic chest pain in a patient with chronic breathlessness, particu-
larly if it occurs in more than one site over time, should raise suspicion 
of thromboembolic disease, which can occasionally present as chronic 
breathlessness with no other specic features and should always be 
considered before a diagnosis of breathing pattern disorder is made.
Morning headache is an important symptom in patients with breathless-
ness, as it may signal the onset of carbon dioxide retention and respiratory 
failure. This is particularly signicant in patients with musculoskeletal disease 
impairing respiratory function (e.g. kyphoscoliosis or muscular dystrophy).
Acute severe breathlessness
This is one of the most common and dramatic medical emergencies. 
Although respiratory causes are common, it can result from cardiac 
disease, metabolic disease or poisoning causing acidosis, or from psy-
chogenic causes. The approach to patients with acute severe breath-
lessness is covered on page 181.

[[p538]]
492    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Chest pain
Chest pain can result from cardiac, respiratory, oesophageal or muscu-
loskeletal disorders. The approach to this common symptom is covered 
on page 179.
Finger clubbing
Finger clubbing describes painless swelling of the soft tissues of the 
terminal phalanges, causing increased longitudinal and lateral convexity 
of the nail (Fig. 17.10). Upward displacement of the proximal nail mar-
gin causes the anteroposterior diameter of the nger at that point to 
exceed that at the distal interphalangeal joint. It also removes the normal 
hyponychial angle between the proximal part of the nail and the adjoining 
skin. Clubbing usually affects the ngers symmetrically and commonly 
also involves the toes, but can be unilateral if caused by a proximal vas-
cular condition, e.g. arteriovenous shunts for dialysis. Although clubbing 
is usually idiopathic, it can be associated with suppurative or malignant 
lung conditions (Box 17.8). Clubbing may recede if the underlying condi-
tion resolves, e.g. following lung transplantation for cystic brosis.
Haemoptysis
Coughing up blood is an alarming symptom and patients nearly always seek 
medical advice. Care should be taken to establish that it is true haemoptysis 
and not haematemesis, or gum or nose bleeding. Haemoptysis must always 
be assumed to have a serious cause until this is excluded (Box 17.9).
Many episodes of haemoptysis remain unexplained, even after full inves-
tigation, and are likely to be due to simple bronchial infection. A history of 
repeated small haemoptysis, or blood-streaking of sputum, is highly sug-
gestive of lung cancer. Fever, night sweats and weight loss suggest tuber-
culosis. Pneumococcal pneumonia often causes ‘rusty’-coloured sputum 
but can cause frank haemoptysis, as can all suppurative respiratory infec-
tions. Lung abscess, bronchiectasis and intracavitary mycetoma can cause 
catastrophic bronchial haemorrhage. Finally, pulmonary thromboembolism 
is a common cause of haemoptysis and should always be considered.
Physical examination may reveal additional clues. Finger clubbing sug-
gests lung cancer or bronchiectasis; other signs of malignancy, such as 
cachexia, hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy, should also be sought. 
Fever, pleural rub and signs of consolidation occur in pneumonia or pul-
monary infarction; a minority of patients with pulmonary infarction also 
have unilateral leg swelling or pain suggestive of deep venous thrombo-
sis. Rashes, haematuria and digital infarcts point to an underlying sys-
temic disease such as a vasculitis, which may cause haemoptysis.
Management
In severe acute haemoptysis the patient should be nursed upright (or 
on the side of the bleeding, if this is known), given high-ow oxygen and 
resuscitated as required. Bronchoscopy in the acute phase is difcult and 
often merely shows blood throughout the bronchial tree. Infusions of the 
antibrinolytic agent tranexamic acid or the vasopressin precursor terli-
pressin may help to limit bleeding but evidence of efcacy is limited. If 
radiology shows an obvious central cause, then rigid bronchoscopy under 
general anaesthesia may allow intervention to stop bleeding; however, the 
source often cannot be visualised. Intubation with a divided endotracheal 
tube may allow protected ventilation of the unaffected lung to stabilise the 
patient. Bronchial arteriography and embolisation (Fig. 17.11), or even 
emergency surgery, can be life-saving in the acute situation.
In the vast majority of cases, however, the haemoptysis itself is not 
life-threatening and a logical sequence of investigations can be followed:
 Chest X-ray may provide evidence of a localised lesion such as 
tumour, pneumonia, mycetoma or tuberculosis
 Full blood count (FBC) and clotting screen
 CTPA may show underlying pulmonary thromboembolic disease or 
alternative causes not seen on the chest X-ray (e.g. pulmonary art-
eriovenous malformation or small or hidden tumours)
 Bronchoscopic biopsy (after acute bleeding has settled) if the CT 
scan suggests an abnormality that needs biopsy.
17.7  Factors suggesting psychogenic hyperventilation
 ‘Inability to take a deep breath’
 Frequent sighing/erratic ventilation at rest
 Short breath-holding time in the absence of severe respiratory disease
 Difculty in performing and/or inconsistent spirometry measures
 High score (over 26) on Nijmegen questionnaire
 Induction of symptoms during submaximal hyperventilation
 Resting end-tidal CO2 <4.5%
 Associated digital and/or perioral paraesthesiae
B
A
Fig. 17.10 Finger clubbing. 
From Douglas G, 
Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical examination, 13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2013.
17.8  Differential diagnosis of nger clubbing
Congenital or familial (5%–10%)
Acquired
Thoracic (~80%)
 Chronic suppurative conditions:
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Bronchiectasis
Lung abscess
Empyema
Cystic brosis
 Tumours:
Lung cancer
Mesothelioma
Fibroma
 Pulmonary brosis
Cardiovascular
 Cyanotic congenital heart disease
 Infective endocarditis
 Arteriovenous shunts and 
aneurysms
Gastrointestinal
 Cirrhosis
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Coeliac disease
Others
 Thyrotoxicosis (thyroid acropachy)
 Primary hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy

[[p539]]
Presenting problems in respiratory disease    493
17
‘Incidental’ pulmonary nodule
A pulmonary nodule may be dened as a well or poorly circumscribed, 
approximately rounded structure that appears on imaging as a focal 
opacity less than 3 cm in diameter that is surrounded by aerated lung. 
‘Incidental’ pulmonary nodules have become increasingly common with 
the increased use of CT scanning (Fig. 17.12). Nodules must not be 
dismissed as ‘incidental’, however, until either a treatable condition has 
been excluded or stability has been demonstrated for at least 2 years.
The list of potential causes of pulmonary nodules is extensive and 
most are benign (Box 17.10). Features on a CT scan consistent with 
a benign lesion include being less than 5 mm in diameter or less than 
80 mm3 in volume; diffuse, central, laminated or popcorn calcication; 
or the presence of macroscopic fat. In addition, perissural lymph nodes 
and subpleural nodules with a lentiform or triangular shape do not require 
any further investigation.
In cases where a benign lesion cannot be condently assumed, further 
assessment depends on both the appearance of the nodule and the clin-
ical context. These assessments may be aided by the use of computer 
prediction models (Box 17.11).
A variety of diagnostic approaches may be considered, including bron-
choscopy, percutaneous needle biopsy, FDG-PET, interval CT scanning or 
surgical resection of the lesion. Pulmonary nodules are invariably beyond 
the vision of the bronchoscope and, with the notable exception of pulmo-
nary infection (e.g. tuberculosis), the yield from blind washings is low. If the 
nodule is favourably located and of sufcient size, percutaneous needle 
biopsy under ultrasound or CT guidance may be employed. The risk of 
pneumothorax is approximately 15% and around 7% require intercostal 
drainage, so this should be contemplated only in individuals with an FEV1
of more than 35% predicted. Haemorrhage into the lung or pleural space, 
air embolism and tumour seeding are rare but recognised complications.
PET-CT scanning provides useful information about nodules of at least 
1 cm in diameter. The presence of high metabolic activity is strongly sug-
gestive of malignancy, while an inactive ‘cold’ nodule suggests benign 
disease. However, a high SUV is a marker of glucose metabolism, not 
malignancy, and PET-CT has signicant limitations in regions with high 
endemic rates of infectious or granulomatous disease. False-negative 
results may occur with neuro-endocrine tumours and minimally invasive 
lepidic adenocarcinoma. Detection of neuro-endocrine tumours may be 
improved by the use of 68Ga-DOTATOC in place of FDG.
17.9  Causes of haemoptysis
Bronchial disease
 Cancer*
 Bronchiectasis*
 Acute bronchitis*
 Bronchial adenoma
 Foreign body
Parenchymal disease
 Tuberculosis*
 Suppurative pneumonia
 Parasites (e.g. hydatid disease, 
ukes)
 Lung abscess
 Trauma
 Actinomycosis
 Mycetoma
Lung vascular disease
 Pulmonary infarction*
 Goodpastur’s disease
 Polyarteritis nodosa
 Idiopathic pulmonary 
haemosiderosis
Cardiovascular disease
 Acute left ventricular failure*
 Mitral stenosis
 Aortic aneurysm
Blood disorders
 Leukaemia
 Haemophilia
 Anticoagulants
*More common causes.
Fig. 17.11 Bronchial artery angiography. An angiography catheter has been 
passed via the femoral artery and aorta into an abnormally dilated right bronchial 
artery (arrows). Contrast is seen owing into the lung. This patient had post-
tuberculous bronchiectasis and presented with massive haemoptysis. Bronchial artery 
embolisation was successfully performed.
Fig. 17.12 Thoracic CT scan showing a solitary pulmonary nodule identied 
in the right upper lobe (arrow).
17.10  Causes of pulmonary nodules
Common causes
 Lung cancer
 Single metastasis
 Localised pneumonia
 Lung abscess
 Tuberculoma
 Pulmonary infarct
Uncommon causes
 Benign tumour
 Lymphoma
 Arteriovenous malformation
 Hydatid cyst
 Bronchogenic cyst
 Rheumatoid nodule
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(GPA)
 Pulmonary sequestration
 Pulmonary haematoma
 ‘Pseudotumour’ – uid collection in 
a ssure
 Aspergilloma (usually surrounded by 
air crescent)
 Cryptococcus
 Aspergillus nodule

[[p540]]
494    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
If the nodule is small and inaccessible, interval CT scanning may be 
employed. A repeat CT scan at 3 months will reliably detect growth in 
larger nodules and may also demonstrate resolution. Further interval 
scans may be arranged depending on the clinical context (Fig. 17.13). 
Particular care must be taken with subsolid nodules, particularly if fur-
ther imaging demonstrates the development of a new solid component, 
as these may represent a pre-malignant or an early invasive form of 
adenocarcinoma.
Nodules with a high clinical suspicion for malignancy despite benign or 
indeterminate biopsies may merit proceeding straight to surgical resec-
tion, as this represents the best chance of curative therapy for lung can-
cer. It is important for the logic underlying this approach to be discussed 
with the patient, consideration of frozen intra-operative histology, and the 
consequences of resection of a benign lesion explained.
Where the probability of cancer is low, the potential risk of further 
scanning must be considered. Subsequent scans often detect fur-
ther nodules, increase the risk of false-positive ndings and lead to 
unnecessary patient anxiety while exposing the individual to increased 
radiation.
Pleural effusion
The accumulation of serous uid within the pleural space is termed pleural 
effusion. Accumulations of pus, blood and chyle are termed empyema, 
haemothorax and chylothorax respectively. In general, pleural uid accu-
mulates because of either increased hydrostatic pressure or decreased 
osmotic pressure (‘transudative’ effusion, as seen in cardiac, liver or renal 
failure), or from increased microvascular pressure due to disease of the 
pleura or injury in the adjacent lung (‘exudative’ effusion). The causes of 
the majority of pleural effusions (Boxes 17.12 and 17.13) are identied by 
a thorough history, examination and relevant investigations.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms (pain on inspiration and coughing) and signs of pleurisy (a 
pleural rub) often precede the development of an effusion, especially in 
patients with underlying pneumonia, pulmonary infarction or connective 
tissue disease. When breathlessness is the only symptom, however, the 
onset may be insidious, depending on the size and rate of accumulation. 
The physical signs are detailed on page 481.
Investigations
Radiological investigations
The classical appearance of pleural uid on the erect PA chest X-ray is of 
a curved shadow at the lung base, blunting the costophrenic angle and 
ascending towards the axilla. Fluid appears to track up the lateral chest 
wall. In fact, uid surrounds the whole lung at this level but casts a radi-
ological shadow only where the X-ray beam passes tangentially across 
the uid against the lateral chest wall. Around 200 mL of uid is required 
in order for it to be detectable on a PA chest X-ray. Previous scarring or 
adhesions in the pleural space can cause localised effusions. Pleural uid 
localised below the lower lobe (‘subpulmonary effusion’) simulates an 
elevated hemidiaphragm. Pleural uid localised within an oblique ssure 
may produce a rounded opacity that may be mistaken for a tumour.
Ultrasound is more accurate than plain chest X-ray for determining the 
presence of uid. A clear hypoechoic space is consistent with a transu-
date and the presence of moving, oating densities suggests an exudate. 
The presence of septation most likely indicates an evolving empyema or 
resolving haemothorax. CT scanning is indicated where there is concern 
for malignant disease or loculation is suspected.
Pleural aspiration and biopsy
In some conditions (e.g. left ventricular failure), it should not be neces-
sary to sample uid unless atypical features are present; appropriate 
treatment should be administered and the effusion re-evaluated. In 
most other circumstances, however, diagnostic sampling is required. 
Simple aspiration provides information on the colour and texture of uid 
and these alone may immediately suggest an empyema or chylotho-
rax. The presence of blood is consistent with pulmonary infarction or 
malignancy but may result from a traumatic tap. Biochemical analysis 
allows classication into transudate or exudate (Box 17.14). Cytological 
examination can characterize the presence of inammatory or malignant 
cells. Microbiological staining can dectect bacteria and mycobacteria. If 
a diagnosis of tuberculosis is being considered, adenosine deaminase 
(ADA) should be measured (see p. 520). A low pH suggests infection 
but may also be seen in rheumatoid arthritis, ruptured oesophagus or 
advanced malignancy.
Ultrasound- or CT-guided pleural biopsy provides tissue for patho-
logical and microbiological analysis. Where necessary, video-assisted 
thoracoscopy allows visualisation of the pleura and direct guidance of 
a biopsy.
Management
Therapeutic aspiration may be required to palliate breathlessness but 
removing more than 1.5 L at a time is associated with a small risk of re-
expansion pulmonary oedema. An effusion should never be drained to 
dryness before establishing a diagnosis, as biopsy may be precluded 
until further uid accumulates. Treatment of an underlying cause such as 
heart failure, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism or subphrenic abscess will 
often be followed by resolution of the effusion. The management of pleural 
effusion in pneumonia, tuberculosis and malignancy is dealt with below.
17.11  Clinical and radiographic features distinguishing benign from malignant nodules*
Feature
Risk of malignancy
Feature
Risk of malignancy
Characteristics of nodule
Characteristics of patient
Size
Margin
Calcication or fat
Location
Nearly all >3 cm but fewer than 1% <4 mm are 
malignant
Usually smooth in benign lesions
Spiculated suggests malignancy
Laminated or central deposition of calcication 
suggests granuloma
‘Popcorn’ pattern suggests hamartoma
Fat may suggest hamartoma or lipoid granuloma
70% of lung cancers occur in upper lobes
Benign lesions are equally distributed throughout upper 
and lower lobes
Age
Smoking history
Other
Increases with age and is uncommon below age of 40
Increases in proportion to duration and amount smoked
Increased by history of lung cancer in rst-degree 
relative and by exposure to asbestos, silica, uranium 
and radon
*Linear or sheet-like lung opacities are unlikely to represent neoplasms and do not require follow-up. Some nodular opacities may be sufciently typical of scarring for follow-up not to be warranted.
Adapted from MacMahon H, Austin JH, Gamsu G, et al. Guidelines for management of small pulmonary nodules detected on CT scans: a statement from the Fleischner Society. Radiology 2005; 
237:395–400.

[[p541]]
Presenting problems in respiratory disease    495
17
Empyema
An empyema is a collection of pus within the pleural space. Microscopically, 
neutrophil leucocytes are present in large numbers and bacteria may be 
identied on Gram’s stain. An empyema may involve the whole pleural 
space or only part of it (‘loculated’ or ‘encysted’ empyema) and is usu-
ally unilateral. It is usually secondary to infection in a neighbouring struc-
ture, usually the lung, most commonly due to the bacterial pneumonia or 
tuberculosis. Over 40% of patients with community-acquired pneumonia 
develop an associated pleural effusion (‘parapneumonic’ effusion) and 
about 15% of these become secondarily infected. Other causes are infec-
tion of a haemothorax following trauma or surgery, oesophageal rupture, 
and rupture of a subphrenic abscess through the diaphragm.
Macroscopically, the pleural surfaces are covered with an inamma-
tory exudate. The pus can be under considerable pressure. Inadequate 
treatment can result in rupture into a bronchus, causing a bronchopleural 
stula and pyopneumothorax, or tracking through the chest wall forming 
a subcutaneous abscess or sinus (‘empyema necessitans’).
Clinical assessment
An empyema should be suspected in patients with pulmonary infection 
if there is severe pleuritic chest pain or persisting or recurrent pyrexia 
despite appropriate antimicrobial treatment. In other cases, the primary 
infection may be so mild that it passes unrecognised and the rst denite 
clinical features are due to the empyema itself. Once an empyema has 
developed, systemic features are prominent (Box 17.15).
Investigations
Chest X-ray appearances may be indistinguishable from those of pleural 
effusion, although pleural adhesions may conne the empyema to form 
a ‘D’-shaped shadow against the inside of the chest wall (Fig. 17.14). 
When air is present as well as pus (pyopneumothorax), a horizontal ‘uid 
level’ marks the air/liquid interface. Ultrasound shows the position of 
the uid, the extent of pleural thickening and whether uid is in a sin-
gle collection or multiloculated, containing brin and debris (Fig. 17.15). 
CT provides information on the pleura, underlying lung parenchyma and 
patency of the major bronchi.
Ultrasound or CT is used to identify the optimal site for aspiration, 
which is best performed using a wide-bore needle. If the uid is thick 
and turbid pus, empyema is conrmed. Other features suggesting 
empyema are a uid glucose of less than 3.3 mmol/L (60 mg/dL), lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) of more than 1000 IU/L, or a uid pH of less than 
7.2. However, pH measurement should be avoided if pus is thick, as 
it damages blood gas machines. Bacterial culture may be negative if 
Solid non-calcified nodule(s) on CT
Previous imaging?
<10% risk of
malignancy*
10% risk of
malignancy
10–70% risk of
malignancy
<10% risk of
malignancy
>70% risk of
malignancy
Consider excision or
non-surgical treatment
(± image-guided biopsy)
CT surveillance
( Fig. 17.13B)
Discharge
Yes
Assess risk of lung cancer
according to Fig. 17.13B
Yes
Yes
No
Nodule <8mm diameter or <300mm3 volume?
No
Assess risk using Brock model
No
Clear features of benign disease (e.g. hamartoma,
typical perifissural nodule), or nodule <5mm diameter
(or <80mm3) or patient unfit for any treatment
PET-CT with risk assessment using Herder model
(provided size is greater than local PET-CT threshold)
Consider image-guided biopsy; other options
are excision biopsy or CT surveillance guided
by individual risk and patient preference
A
Fig. 17.13 Recommendations on the assessment of a solid pulmonary nodule. 
that can also be downloaded as an app (https://brocku.ca/lung-cancer-risk-calculator). The model integrates data on age, sex, family history of cancer, the presence of 
emphysema, nodule size, nodule type, nodule position, nodule count and speculation, and calculates the probability that a nodule will become malignant within a 2- to 4-year 
follow-up period. Herder is a similar model. *Consider positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) for larger nodules in young patients with low risk by Brock 
score, as this score was developed in a screening cohort (50–75 years) and so performance in younger patients is unproven. Continues overleaf

[[p542]]
496    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
antibiotics have already been given. The distinction between tubercu-
lous and non-tuberculous disease can be difcult and may require pleural 
biopsy, histology and microbiological tests.
Management
An empyema will heal only if infection is eradicated and the empyema 
space is obliterated, allowing apposition of the visceral and parietal 
pleural layers. This can only occur if all the pus is removed from the 
pleural space. When the pus is sufciently thin this is most easily 
achieved by the insertion of a wide-bore intercostal tube into the most 
dependent part of the empyema space. If the initial aspirate reveals 
turbid uid or frank pus, or if loculations are seen on ultrasound, the 
tube should be put on suction ( 5 to 
10 cmH2O) and ushed regu-
larly with 20 mL normal saline. Antibiotics should not be started until 
they are deemed clinically necessary, and ideally not until a sample has 
been taken and the causative organism identied. If an organism is 
identied, the narrowest spectrum antibiotic that will cover that organ-
ism should be used. If not, empirical antibiotic treatment (e.g. intrave-
nous co-amoxiclav 1.2 g 8-hourly or cefuroxime 1.5 g 12-hourly plus 
metronidazole 500 mg 8-hourly) should be used. Antibiotics should be 
continued until the infection has resolved and inammatory markers 
have normalised, usually about 2–4 weeks. There is no consensus on 
the optimum duration of intravenous vs. oral antibiotics. The use of 
intrapleural brinolytics in combination with DNAase has been shown 
to be benecial.
An empyema can be sucessfully treated with a combination of anti-
biotics and pleual drainage, but delays can result in a failure of these 
therapies, and a need for surgical intervention to clear the empyema 
cavity of pus and break down any adhesions. Surgical ‘decortication’ of 
the lung may also be required if gross thickening of the visceral pleura is 
preventing re-expansion of the lung. Surgery is also necessary if a bron-
chopleural stula or empyema necessitans develops.
Respiratory failure
The term ‘respiratory failure’ is used when pulmonary gas exchange fails 
to maintain normal arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide levels. Its clas-
sication into types I and II is dened by the absence or presence of 
hypercapnia (raised PaCO2).
Pathophysiology
When disease impairs ventilation of part of a lung (e.g. in asthma or 
pneumonia), perfusion of that region results in hypoxic and CO2-laden 
blood entering the pulmonary veins. Increased ventilation of neighbour-
ing regions of normal lung can increase CO2 excretion, correcting arterial 
CO2 to normal, but cannot augment oxygen uptake because the haem-
oglobin owing through these normal regions is already fully saturated. 
Baseline volumetric analysis (or diameter measurement
if volumetry not available/technically impossible)
80mm3 volume or
6mm diameter
5–6mm diameter
CT 1 year after
baseline
CT 3 months after
baseline
VDT 400 days or clear
evidence of growth?
VDT 400 days
or clear evidence
of growth
Stable on basis of
2D non-automated
diameter value
Stable on basis
of volumetry
VDT
>600 days
VDT
400–600 days
Further workup
and consideration
of definitive
management
CT 2 years
after baseline
VDT assessment
and manage as per
VDT categories
at 1 year
Discharge if stable
Discharge
Consider discharge
(only if based on
volumetry) or ongoing
surveillance depending
on patient preference
Consider biopsy
or further
CT surveillance
depending on
patient preference
Yes
No
B
17.12  Causes of pleural effusion
Common causes
 Pneumonia (‘parapneumonic 
effusion’)
 Tuberculosis
 Pulmonary infarction*
 Malignant disease
 Cardiac failure*
 Subdiaphragmatic disorders 
(subphrenic abscess, pancreatitis 
etc.)
Uncommon causes
 Hypoproteinaemia* (nephrotic 
syndrome, liver failure, malnutrition)
 Connective tissue diseases*
(particularly systemic lupus 
erythematosus and rheumatoid 
arthritis)
 Post-myocardial infarction syndrome
 Acute rheumatic fever
 Meigs syndrome (ovarian tumour 
plus pleural effusion)
 Myxoedema*
 Uraemia*
 Asbestos-related benign pleural 
effusion
*May cause bilateral effusions.
Fig. 17.13, cont’d 
= volume doubling time) From Callister ME, Baldwin DR, Akram AR, et al. British Thoracic Society 
Guidelines on the investigation and management of pulmonary nodules. Thorax 2015; Suppl. 2:ii1–ii54.

[[p543]]
Presenting problems in respiratory disease    497
17
17.13  Pleural effusion: main causes and features
Cause
Appearance of 
uid
Type of uid
Predominant cells in uid
Other diagnostic features
Tuberculosis
Serous, usually 
amber-coloured
Exudate
Lymphocytes (occasionally 
polymorphs)
Positive tuberculin test
Isolation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from pleural 
uid (20%)
Positive pleural biopsy (80%)
Raised adenosine deaminase
Malignant disease
Serous, often 
blood-stained
Exudate
Serosal cells and lymphocytes
Often clumps of malignant cells
Positive pleural biopsy (40%)
Evidence of malignancy elsewhere
Cardiac failure
Serous, straw-
coloured
Transudate
Few serosal cells
Other signs of cardiac failure
Response to diuretics
Pulmonary infarction
Serous or blood-
stained
Exudate (rarely 
transudate)
Red blood cells
Eosinophils
Evidence of pulmonary infarction
Obvious source of embolism
Factors predisposing to venous thrombosis
Rheumatoid disease
Serous
Turbid if chronic
Exudate
Lymphocytes (occasionally 
polymorphs)
Rheumatoid arthritis: rheumatoid factor and anti-
cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies
Cholesterol in chronic effusion; very low glucose in 
pleural uid
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE)
Serous
Exudate
Lymphocytes and serosal cells
Other signs of SLE
Antinuclear factor or anti-DNA positive
Acute pancreatitis
Serous or blood-
stained
Exudate
No cells predominate
Higher amylase in pleural uid than in serum
Obstruction of thoracic 
duct
Milky
Chyle
None
Chylomicrons
Admixture of blood from the under-ventilated and normal regions thus 
results in hypoxia with normocapnia, which is called ‘type I respiratory 
failure’. Diseases causing this include all those that impair ventilation 
locally with sparing of other regions (Box 17.16).
Arterial hypoxia with hypercapnia (type II respiratory failure) is seen 
in conditions that cause generalised, severe ventilation–perfusion mis-
match, leaving insufcient normal lung to correct PaCO2, or any disease 
that reduces total ventilation. The latter includes not just diseases of the 
lung but also disorders affecting any part of the neuromuscular mecha-
nism of ventilation (see Box 17.16). Acute type II respiratory failure is an 
emergency requiring immediate intervention. It is useful to distinguish 
between patients with high ventilatory drive (rapid respiratory rate and 
accessory muscle recruitment) who cannot move sufcient air, and those 
with reduced or inadequate respiratory effort.
Management of acute respiratory failure
Prompt diagnosis and management of the underlying cause is crucial. 
In type I respiratory failure, oxygen should be administed and titrated to 
maintain a normal arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2), which will usually 
relieve hypoxia by increasing the alveolar PO2 in poorly ventilated lung 
units. Occasionally, however (e.g. severe pneumonia affecting several 
lobes), mechanical ventilation may be needed to relieve hypoxia.
If inspiratory stridor is present then an upper or large airway issue 
should be considered. This can include acute upper airway obstruction, 
foreign body inhalation or laryngeal obstruction (angioedema, carcinoma 
or vocal cord paralysis). Depending on cause, the Heimlich manoeuvre, 
immediate intubation or emergency tracheostomy may be required.
More commonly, the problem is within the lungs, with severe gen-
eralised bronchial obstruction from COPD or asthma, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS), or tension pneumothorax. Oxygen should be 
17.15  Clinical features of empyema
Systemic features
 Pyrexia, usually high and remittent
 Rigors, sweating, malaise and weight loss
 Polymorphonuclear leucocytosis, high C-reactive protein
Local features
 Pleural pain; breathlessness; cough and sputum, usually because of underlying 
lung disease; copious purulent sputum if empyema ruptures into a bronchus 
(bronchopleural stula)
 Clinical signs of pleural effusion
Fig. 17.14 Chest X-ray showing a ‘D’-shaped shadow in the left mid-zone, 
consistent with an empyema. In this case, an intercostal chest drain has been 
inserted but the loculated collection of pus remains.
17.14  Light’s criteria for distinguishing pleural transudate 
from exudate
Exudate is likely if one or more of the following criteria are met:
 Pleural uid protein:serum protein ratio >0.5
 Pleural uid LDH:serum LDH ratio >0.6
 Pleural uid LDH > two-thirds of the upper limit of normal serum LDH
(LDH = lactate dehydrogenase)

[[p544]]
498    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
administered to maintain the SaO2 within the target range of 94%–98%, 
or 88%–92% for those patients at risk of type II respiratory failure, pend-
ing a rapid examination of the respiratory system and measurement of 
arterial blood gases. Patients with the trachea deviated away from a silent 
and resonant hemithorax are likely to have tension pneumothorax, and 
air should be aspirated from the pleural space and a chest drain inserted 
as soon as possible. Patients with generalised wheeze, scanty breath 
sounds bilaterally or a history of asthma or COPD should be treated with 
salbutamol 2.5 mg nebulised with oxygen, repeated until bronchospasm 
is relieved. Failure to respond to initial treatment, declining conscious 
level and worsening respiratory acidosis (pH <7.35), PaCO2 >6.6 kPa) 
on blood gases are all indications that supported ventilation is required.
A small proportion of patients with severe chronic lung disease and 
type II respiratory failure develop abnormal tolerance to raised PaCO2 and 
may become dependent on hypoxic drive to breathe. In these patients 
only, lower concentrations of oxygen (24%–28% by Venturi mask) should 
be used to avoid precipitating worsening respiratory depression (see 
below). In all cases, regular monitoring of arterial blood gases is impor-
tant to assess progress.
Patients with acute type II respiratory failure who have reduced drive 
or conscious level may be suffering from sedative poisoning, CO2 narco-
sis or a primary failure of neurological drive (e.g. following intracerebral 
haemorrhage or head injury). History from a witness may be invaluable, 
and reversal of specic drugs with (for example) opiate antagonists is 
occasionally successful, but should not delay intubation and supported 
mechanical ventilation in appropriate cases.
Chronic and ‘acute on chronic’ type II respiratory 
failure
The most common cause of chronic type II respiratory failure is severe 
COPD. Although PaCO2 may be persistently raised, there is no persisting 
acidaemia because the kidneys retain bicarbonate, correcting arterial pH 
to normal. This ‘compensated’ pattern, which may also occur in chronic 
neuromuscular disease, kyphoscoliosis or other end-stage respiratory 
diseases, is maintained until there is a further acute illness (see Box 
17.16), such as an exacerbation of COPD that precipitates an episode 
of ‘acute on chronic’ respiratory failure, with acidaemia and initial res-
piratory distress followed by drowsiness and eventually coma. These 
patients have lost their chemosensitivity to elevated PaCO2, and so they 
may paradoxically depend on hypoxia for respiratory drive and are at risk 
of respiratory depression if given high concentrations of oxygen, e.g. dur-
ing ambulance transfers or in emergency departments. Moreover, in con-
trast to acute severe asthma, some patients with ‘acute on chronic’ type 
II respiratory failure due to COPD may not appear distressed, despite 
being critically ill with severe hypoxaemia, hypercapnia and acidaemia. 
While the physical signs of CO2 retention (delirium, apping tremor, 
bounding pulses and so on) can be helpful if present, they may not be, 
so measurement of arterial blood gases is mandatory in the assessment 
of initial severity and response to treatment.
Management
The principal aims of treatment in acute on chronic type II respiratory 
failure are to achieve a safe PaO2 (>7.0 kPa (52 mmHg)) without increas-
ing PaCO2 and acidosis, while identifying and treating the precipitating 
condition. In these patients, it is not necessary to achieve a normal PaO2; 
even a small increase will greatly improve tissue oxygen delivery, since 
their PaO2 values are often on the steep part of the oxygen dissociation 
curve (see Fig. 9.10). The risks of worsening hypercapnia and coma must 
be balanced against those of severe hypoxaemia, which include poten-
tially fatal arrhythmias and hypoxic brain damage. Immediate treatment 
is shown in Box 17.17. Patients who are conscious and have adequate 
respiratory drive may benet from non-invasive ventilation (NIV), which 
has been shown to reduce mortality and the requirement for intubation, 
and shorten hospital stay in acidotic exacerbations of COPD. Patients 
who are drowsy and have low respiratory drive require an urgent deci-
sion regarding intubation and ventilation, as this is likely to be the only 
effective treatment, even though weaning off the ventilator may be dif-
cult in severe disease. The decision is challenging, and important factors 
to consider include patient wishes, presence of a potentially remediable 
precipitating condition, prior functional capacity and quality of life. The 
Fig. 17.15 Pleural ultrasound showing septation. Courtesy of Dr P. Sivasothy, 
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge.
17.16  How to interpret blood gas abnormalities in respiratory failure
Type I
Type II
Hypoxia (PaO2 <8.0 kPa (60 mmHg))
Normal or low PaCO2 (≤ 6 kPa (45 mmHg))
Hypoxia (PaO2 <8.0 kPa (60 mmHg))
Raised PaCO2 (>6 kPa (45 mmHg))
Acute
Chronic
Acute
Chronic
H+
→
→
↑
→ or ↑
Bicarbonate
→
→
→
↑
Causes
Acute asthma
Pulmonary oedema
Pneumonia
Lobar collapse
Pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolus
ARDS
COPD
Lung brosis
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis
Right-to-left shunts
Acute severe asthma
Acute exacerbation of COPD
Upper airway obstruction
Acute neuropathies/paralysis
Narcotic drugs
Primary alveolar 
hypoventilation
Flail chest injury
COPD
Sleep apnoea
Kyphoscoliosis
Myopathies/muscular 
dystrophy
Ankylosing spondylitis
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)

[[p545]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    499
17
various types of non-invasive (via a face or nasal mask) or invasive (via 
an endotracheal tube) ventilation are detailed on page 207. Respiratory 
stimulant drugs, such as doxapram, have been superseded by non-
invasive or invasive ventilation.
Home ventilation for chronic respiratory failure
NIV is of signicant benet in the long-term treatment of respiratory 
failure due to spinal deformity, neuromuscular disease and central alve-
olar hypoventilation. Some patients with advanced lung disease, e.g. 
COPD and cystic brosis, also benet from NIV for respiratory failure. 
In these conditions, type II respiratory failure can develop slowly and 
insidiously. Morning headache (due to elevated PaCO2) and fatigue are 
common symptoms but, in many cases, the diagnosis is revealed only 
by sleep studies or morning blood gas analysis. In the initial stages, 
ventilation is insufcient for metabolic needs only during sleep, when 
there is a physiological decline in ventilatory drive. Over time, however, 
CO2 retention becomes chronic, with renal compensation of acidosis. 
Treatment by home-based NIV overnight is often sufcient to restore 
the daytime PCO2 to normal, and to relieve fatigue and headache. In 
advanced disease (e.g. muscular dystrophies or cystic brosis), day-
time NIV may also be required.
Lung transplantation
Lung transplantation is an established treatment for carefully selected 
patients with advanced lung disease unresponsive to medical treat-
ment (Box 17.18). Single-lung transplantation may be used for selected 
patients with advanced emphysema or lung brosis. This is contrain-
dicated in patients with chronic bilateral pulmonary infection, such as 
cystic brosis and bronchiectasis, because the transplanted lung is vul-
nerable to cross-infection in the context of post-transplant immunosup-
pression, and for these individuals bilateral lung transplantation is the 
standard procedure. Combined heart–lung transplantation is still occa-
sionally needed for patients with advanced congenital heart disease, 
such as Eisenmenger syndrome, and is preferred by some surgeons for 
the treatment of primary pulmonary hypertension unresponsive to med-
ical therapy.
The prognosis following lung transplantation is improving steadily 
with modern immunosuppressive drugs: According to the International 
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation median survival for double 
lung transplantation is 7.8 years. Chronic rejection with obliterative bron-
chiolitis continues to afict some recipients, however. Glucocorticoids 
are used to manage acute rejection, but drugs that inhibit cell-mediated 
immunity specically, such as ciclosporin, mycophenolate and tacroli-
mus, are used to prevent chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD). 
Azithromycin, statins and total lymphoid irradiation are employed to treat 
progressive CLAD, but late organ failure remains a signicant problem.
The major factor limiting the availability of lung transplantation is the 
shortage of donor lungs.
Obstructive pulmonary diseases
Asthma
Asthma is a chronic inammatory disorder of the airways, in which many 
cells and cellular elements play a role. Chronic inammation is associ-
ated with airway hyper-responsiveness that leads to recurrent episodes 
of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness and coughing, particularly 
at night and in the early morning. These episodes are usually associated 
with widespread but variable airow obstruction within the lung that is 
often reversible, either spontaneously or with treatment.
The prevalence of asthma increased steadily over the latter part of last 
century. As asthma affects all age groups, it is one of the most common 
and important long-term respiratory conditions in terms of global years 
lived with disability (Fig. 17.16).
The development and course of asthma and the response to treat-
ment are inuenced by genetic determinants, while the rapid rise in 
prevalence implies that environmental factors are critically important in 
the development and expression of the disease. The potential role of 
indoor and outdoor allergens, microbial exposure, diet, vitamins, breast-
feeding, tobacco smoke, air pollution and obesity have been explored 
but no clear consensus has emerged.
Pathophysiology
Airway hyper-reactivity (AHR) – the tendency for airways to narrow exces-
sively in response to triggers that have little or no effect in normal individ-
uals – is integral to the diagnosis of asthma and appears to be related, 
although not exclusively, to airway inammation (Fig. 17.17). Other fac-
tors likely to be important in the behaviour of airway smooth muscle 
include the degree of airway narrowing and neurogenic mechanisms.
The relationship between atopy (the propensity to produce IgE) and 
asthma is well established and in many individuals there is a clear rela-
tionship between sensitisation and allergen exposure, as demonstrated 
by skin-prick reactivity or elevated serum-specic IgE. Common exam-
ples of allergens include house dust mites, pets, insect pests and fungi. 
Inhalation of an allergen into the airway is followed by early and late-
phase bronchoconstrictor responses (Fig. 17.18). Allergic mechanisms 
are also implicated in some cases of occupational asthma.
In cases of NSAID-induced asthma, the ingestion of salicylates results 
in inhibition of the cyclo-oxygenase enzymes, preferentially shunting 
the metabolism of arachidonic acid through the lipoxygenase pathway 
with resultant production of the asthmogenic cysteinyl leukotrienes. In 
exercise-induced asthma, hyperventilation results in water loss from the 
pericellular lining uid of the respiratory mucosa, which, in turn, triggers 
mediator release. Heat loss from the respiratory mucosa may also be 
important.
In persistent asthma, a chronic and complex inammatory response 
ensues, characterised by an inux of numerous inammatory cells, 
the transformation and participation of airway structural cells, and the 
secretion of an array of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors. 
Examination of the inammatory cell prole in induced sputum samples 
demonstrates that, although asthma is predominantly characterised by 
17.17  Assessment and management of ‘acute on chronic’ 
type II respiratory failure
Initial assessment
Patient may not appear distressed, despite being critically ill
 Conscious level (response to commands, ability to cough)
 CO2 retention (warm periphery, bounding pulses, apping tremor)
 Airways obstruction (wheeze, prolonged expiration, hyperination, intercostal 
indrawing, pursed lips)
 Cor pulmonale (peripheral oedema, raised jugular venous pressure, 
hepatomegaly, ascites)
 Background functional status and quality of life
 Signs of precipitating cause (see Box 17.16)
Investigations
 Arterial blood gases (severity of hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, acidaemia, 
bicarbonate)
 Chest X-ray
Management
 Maintenance of airway
 Treatment of specic precipitating cause
 Frequent physiotherapy ± pharyngeal suction
 Nebulised bronchodilators
 Controlled oxygen therapy:
Start with 24% Venturi mask
Aim for a PaO2 >7 kPa (52 mmHg) (a PaO2 <5 (37 mmHg) is dangerous)
 Antibiotics if evidence of infection
 Diuretics if evidence of uid overload
Progress
 If PaCO2 continues to rise or a safe PaO2 cannot be achieved without severe 
hypercapnia and acidaemia, mechanical ventilatory support may be required

[[p546]]
500    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
airway eosinophilia, neutrophilic inammation predominates in some 
patients while in others scant inammation is observed (‘pauci-granu-
locytic’ asthma).
With increasing severity and chronicity of the disease, remodelling of 
the airway may occur, leading to brosis of the airway wall, xed narrow-
ing of the airway and a reduced response to bronchodilator medication.
Clinical features
Typical symptoms include recurrent episodes of wheezing, chest tight-
ness, breathlessness and cough. Asthma is commonly mistaken for a 
cold or a persistent chest infection (e.g. longer than 10 days). Classical 
precipitants include exercise, particularly in cold weather, exposure to 
airborne allergens or pollutants, and viral upper respiratory tract infec-
tions. Wheeze apart, there is often very little to nd on examination. An 
inspection for nasal polyps and eczema should be performed. Rarely, a 
vasculitic rash may suggest eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(EGPA, formerly known as Churg–Strauss syndrome).
Patients with mild intermittent asthma are usually asymptomatic 
between exacerbations. Individuals with persistent asthma report ongo-
ing breathlessness and wheeze but these are variable, with symptoms 
uctuating over the course of one day, or from day to day or month to 
month.
Asthma characteristically displays a diurnal pattern, with symptoms 
and lung function being worse in the early morning. Particularly when 
poorly controlled, symptoms such as cough and wheeze disturb sleep. 
Cough may be the dominant symptom in some patients, and the lack of 
wheeze or breathlessness may lead to a delay in reaching the diagnosis 
of so-called ‘cough-variant asthma’.
Some patients with asthma have a similar inammatory response in the 
upper airway. Careful enquiry should be made as to a history of sinusitis, 
sinus headache, a blocked or runny nose and loss of sense of smell.
Although the aetiology of asthma is often elusive, an attempt should 
be made to identify any agents that may contribute to the appearance 
or aggravation of the condition. Particular enquiry should be made about 
potential allergens, such as exposure to pets or other animals, pest infes-
tation, exposure to moulds following water damage to a home or build-
ing, and any potential occupational agents.
In some circumstances, asthma is triggered by prescription drugs. 
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), even when administered 
topically as eye drops, may induce bronchospasm, as may aspirin and 
17.18  Indications for lung transplantation
Parenchymal lung disease
 Cystic brosis
 Emphysema
 Pulmonary brosis
 Obliterative bronchiolitis
 Langerhans cell histiocytosis
 Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Pulmonary vascular disease
 Primary pulmonary hypertension
 Thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension
 Veno-occlusive disease
 Eisenmenger syndrome
80+
70–74
75–79
65–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
40–44
35–39
30–34
25–29
20–24
15–19
10–14
5–9
1–4
DALYs (per 100000)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Females
Males
Years
Fig. 17.16 The burden of asthma, measured by disability life years (DALYs) 
per 100 000 population. The burden of asthma is greatest in children approaching 
adolescence and in old age. The burden is similar in males and females at ages 
below 30–34 but at older ages the burden is higher in males. From The Global 
Asthma Report 2014. Copyright 2014 The Global Asthma Network.
40
30
20
10
0
Reduction in FEV1 (%)
Increasing concentration of histamine
Severe asthma
Moderate asthma
Mild asthma
Normal
Fig. 17.17 Airway hyper-reactivity in asthma. This is demonstrated by bronchial 
challenge tests with sequentially increasing concentrations of either histamine, 
or methacholine or mannitol. The reactivity of the airways is expressed as the 
concentration or dose of either chemical required to produce a specic decrease 
(usually 20% or 15%) in the forced expired volume in 1 second (FEV1) (PC20
[histamine and methacholine challenges] or PD15 [mannitol challenges], respectively). 
(PC = concentration of drug; PD = dose of drug)
Time (hours)
Peak flow (L/min)
400
Early reaction
(type I)
Pre-formed mediator
release
Late reaction
(type Il)
Inflammatory cell
recruitment and
activation
300
200
100
0
500
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
24
Challenge,
e.g. allergen
Fig. 17.18 Changes in peak ow following allergen challenge. A similar 
biphasic response is observed following a variety of different challenges. Occasionally, 
an isolated late response is seen with no early reaction.

[[p547]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    501
17
other non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The classical 
NSAID-induced asthma patient is female and presents in middle age 
with asthma, rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps. Aspirin-sensitive patients 
may also report symptoms following alcohol and foods containing sali-
cylates. Other medications implicated include the oral contraceptive pill, 
cholinergic agents and prostaglandin F2α. Betel nuts contain arecoline, 
which is structurally similar to methacholine and can aggravate asthma. 
An important minority of patients develop a particularly severe form of 
asthma and this appears to be more common in women. Allergic triggers 
are less important and airway neutrophilia predominates.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of asthma is predominantly clinical and is based on the 
combination of history, lung function and ‘other’ tests, which allows high, 
intermediate or low probability of asthma to emerge. The approach may 
vary from patient to patient and may need to be re-evaluated following 
the introduction of treatment.
Supportive evidence is provided by the demonstration of variable air-
ow obstruction, preferably by using spirometry (Box 17.19) to measure 
FEV1 and FVC. This identies the obstructive defect, denes its sever-
ity, and provides a baseline for bronchodilator reversibility (Fig. 17.19). If 
spirometry is not available, a peak ow meter may be used. Symptomatic 
patients should be instructed to record peak ow readings after rising 
in the morning and before retiring in the evening. A diurnal variation in 
PEF of more than 20% (the lowest values typically being recorded in 
the morning) is considered diagnostic and the magnitude of variability 
provides some indication of disease severity (Fig. 17.20).
It is not uncommon for patients whose symptoms are suggestive 
of asthma to have normal lung function. In these circumstances, the 
demonstration of AHR by challenge tests may be useful to conrm the 
diagnosis (see Fig. 17.17). AHR has a high negative predictive value but 
positive results may be seen in other conditions such as COPD, bronchi-
ectasis and cystic brosis. Exercise tests are useful when symptoms are 
predominantly related to exercise (Fig. 17.21). Measurement of exhaled 
nitric oxide (FeNO) is a useful test for glucocorticoid-naïve patients as a 
measure of eosinophilic airways inammation. An elevated FeNO value 
(adults >50 ppb; children >35 ppb) supports the diagnosis of asthma 
and suggests that the patient’s symptoms are highly likely to respond 
to glucocorticoids.
The diagnosis may be supported by the presence of peripheral blood 
eosinophilia or atopy demonstrated by skin-prick tests or measurement 
of total and allergen-specic IgE. X-ray appearances are often normal, 
but lobar collapse may be seen if mucus occludes a large bronchus and, 
if accompanied by the presence of itting inltrates, may suggest that 
asthma has been complicated by allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Management
Setting goals
Asthma is a chronic condition but may be controlled with appropriate 
treatment in the majority of patients. The goal of treatment should be to 
obtain and maintain complete control (Box 17.20) but aims may be mod-
ied according to the circumstances and the patient. Unfortunately, sur-
veys consistently demonstrate that the majority of individuals with asthma 
report suboptimal control, perhaps reecting the poor expectations of 
patients and their clinicians. Pregnancy raises some issues in asthma 
management, which are shown in Box 17.21
Self-management
Patients should be encouraged to take responsibility for managing their 
own disease. A key aspect of self-management is education, ensuring 
that the patient understands the relationship between symptoms and 
inammation, key symptoms such as nocturnal waking and the indica-
tions for medication. The patient must also be able to use the prescribed 
inhalers and understand the importance of concordance with therapy. 
Written action plans can be helpful in developing self-management skills 
and they can be guided by symptoms or PEF.
17.19  How to make a diagnosis of asthma
Compatible clinical history plus either/or
 FEV1 ≥12% (and 200 mL) increase following administration of a bronchodilator/
trial of glucocorticoids. Greater condence is gained if the increase is >15% 
and >400 mL
 >20% diurnal variation on ≥3 days in a week for 2 weeks on PEF diary
 FEV1 ≥15% decrease after 6 mins of exercise
(FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; PEF = peak expiratory ow)
7
Time (seconds)
6
0
5
4
3
2
1
Volume
expired (L)
FEV1
FEV1
20 mins after
bronchodilator drug
administered
2.5
1
8
Before bronchodilator
drug administered
Fig. 17.19 Reversibility test. Forced expiratory manoeuvres before and 20 minutes 
after inhalation of a β2-adrenoceptor agonist. Note the increase in forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) from 1.0 to 2.5 L.
500
am
am
Peak flow (L/min)
300
200
100
pm
pm
am
am
pm
pm
am
am
pm
5
1
2
3
4
Time (days)
400
Glucocorticoids
commenced
Fig. 17.20 Serial recordings of peak expiratory ow (PEF) in a patient with 
asthma. Note the sharp overnight fall (morning dip) and subsequent rise during the 
day. Following the introduction of glucocorticoids, there is an improvement in PEF rate 
and reduction of morning dipping.

[[p548]]
502    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Avoidance of aggravating factors
This is particularly important in the management of occupational asthma 
but may also be relevant in atopic patients, for whom removing or reduc-
ing exposure to relevant antigens may effect improvement. House dust 
mite exposure may be reduced by replacing carpets with oorboards 
and using mite-impermeable bedding, but these measures have not 
demonstrated major improvements in asthma control. Many patients are 
sensitised to several ubiquitous aeroallergens, making avoidance strat-
egies impracticable. Measures to reduce fungal exposure may be appli-
cable in specic circumstances and medications known to precipitate 
or aggravate asthma should be avoided. Smoking cessation (p.90) is 
particularly important, as smoking not only encourages sensitisation but 
also induces a relative glucocorticoid resistance in the airway.
The stepwise approach to the management of asthma
Prior to any step up in a patient’s asthma therapy they should be reviewed 
to ensure that aggravating factors have been addressed, concordance 
assessed and inhaler technique checked.
Once asthma control is established, the dose of inhaled (or oral) 
glucocorticoid should be titrated to the lowest dose at which effective 
control is maintained. Decreasing the dose of glucocorticoid by around 
25%–50% every 3 months is a reasonable strategy for most patients.
The stepwise approach is summarized in Figure 17.22
Step 1: Regular preventer
The initial therapy for a patient diagnosed with asthma would be a low-
dose inhaled glucocorticoid (ICS). For adults, a starting dose equiva-
lent to beclometasone dipropionate (BDP) 400 µg per day is reasonable, 
although higher doses may be required in smokers.
A variety of different inhaled devices are available and the choice of 
device should be guided by patient preference and competence in its use. 
The metered-dose inhaler remains the most widely prescribed (Fig. 17.23).
Step 2: Initial add-on therapy
If the asthma remains poorly controlled despite regular preventer therapy, 
the next step should be addition of a long-acting beta agonist (LABA). 
This should be done via a combination ICS/LABA inhaler to prevent inad-
vertent administration of LABA monotherapy and risk of asthma death.
Combination ICS/LABA inhalers containing the fast-acting LABA for-
moterol can be used as a maintenance and reliever (MART) inhaler allow-
ing for auto-titration of therapy in response to symptoms.
Step 3: Additional add-on therapies
If asthma control remains poor despite initial add-on therapy, the patient 
should have a detailed asthma review. There are a number of options to 
consider at this stage:
3.5
Time (minutes)
30
0
25
20
15
10
5
FEV1 (L)
3.0
2.5
2.0
Exercise
Fig. 17.21 Exercise-induced asthma. Serial recordings of forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) in a patient with bronchial asthma before and after 
6 minutes of strenuous exercise. Note initial rise on completion of exercise, followed 
by sudden fall and gradual recovery. Adequate warm-up exercise or pre-treatment 
with a β2-adrenoceptor agonist, nedocromil sodium or a leukotriene antagonist can 
protect against exercise-induced symptoms.
17.20  Levels of asthma control
Characteristic
Controlled
Partly controlled (any present  
in any week)
Uncontrolled
Daytime symptoms
None (≤twice/week)
>twice/week
Limitations of activities
None
Any
Nocturnal symptoms/awakening
None
Any
≥3 features of partly controlled  
asthma present in any week
Need for rescue/’reliever’ treatment
None (≤twice/week)
>twice/week
Lung function (PEF or FEV1)
Normal
<80% predicted or personal best  
(if known) on any day
Exacerbation
None
≥1/year
1 in any week
(FEV = forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; PEF = peak expiratory ow)
17.21  Asthma in pregnancy
 Clinical course: women with well-controlled asthma usually have good 
pregnancy outcomes. Pregnancy in women with more severe asthma can 
precipitate worsening control and lead to increased maternal and neonatal 
morbidity.
 Labour and delivery: 90% have no symptoms.
 Safety data: good for β2-agonists, inhaled glucocorticoids, theophyllines, oral 
prednisolone and chromones.
 Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists: no evidence that these harm the fetus 
and they should not be stopped in women who have previously demonstrated 
signicant improvement in asthma control prior to pregnancy.
 Glucocorticoids: women on maintenance prednisolone >7.5 mg/day should 
receive hydrocortisone 100 mg 3–4 times daily during labour.
 Prostaglandin F2α: may induce bronchospasm and should be used with 
extreme caution.
 Breastfeeding: use medications as normal.
 Uncontrolled asthma: associated with maternal (hyperemesis, hypertension, 
pre-eclampsia, vaginal haemorrhage, complicated labour) and fetal (intrauterine 
growth restriction and low birth weight, preterm birth, increased perinatal 
mortality, neonatal hypoxia) complications.

[[p549]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    503
17
 If there has been no response to the LABA, then it should be 
stopped and an increase of the ICS to a medium dose (800 µg) 
considered.
 If there is benet from the LABA, but control is poor then the ICS 
should be increased to a medium dose, alternatively trial of a leuko-
triene antagonist (LTRA) or a slow-release theophylline preparation 
should be considered.
Step 4: High-dose therapies
In adults, the dose of inhaled glucocorticoid should be trialled up to a 
high dose (2000 µg BDP) (or equivalent) daily. Trials of LTRA, long-act-
ing antimuscarinic agents (LAMA), theophyllines or a slow-release oral 
β2-agonist may be considered. If the trial of add-on therapy is ineffective, 
it should be discontinued.
Step 5: Continuous or frequent use of oral glucocorticoids
At this stage, oral prednisolone (usually administered as a single daily 
dose in the morning) should be prescribed at the lowest dose necessary 
to control symptoms and the patients should be referred for specialist 
severe asthma assessment. Patients who are on long-term glucocorti-
coid tablets (>3 months) or are receiving more than three or four courses 
per year will be at risk of systemic side-effects (p. 684). The risk of osteo-
porosis in this group can be reduced by giving bisphosphonates. These 
patients should be considered for biologic therapy to minimise long-term 
harm from oral glucocorticoids.
Omalizumab (anti-IgE) therapy may be considered for those patients 
with severe IgE-driven atopic asthma. Benralizumab (anti-IL5r), mepoli-
zumab (anti-IL5), reslizumab (anti-IL5) or dupiliumab (anti-IL4/13) could 
be considered for patients with eosinophilic forms of asthma.
Exacerbations of asthma
The course of asthma may be punctuated by exacerbations with 
increased symptoms, deterioration in lung function, and an increase in 
airway inammation. Exacerbations are most commonly precipitated by 
viral infections but moulds, pollens (particularly following thunderstorms) 
and air pollution are also implicated. Most attacks are characterised by 
a gradual deterioration over several hours to days but some appear to 
occur with little or no warning: so-called brittle asthma. An important 
minority of patients appear to have a blunted perception of airway nar-
rowing and fail to appreciate the early signs of deterioration.
Management of mild to moderate exacerbations
Doubling the dose of inhaled glucocorticoids does not prevent an 
impending exacerbation. Short courses of at least 5 days of ‘rescue’ glu-
cocorticoids (prednisolone 40–50 mg/day) are therefore often required to 
regain control. Tapering of the glucocorticoid dose to withdraw treatment 
is not necessary, unless it has been given for more than 3 weeks.
Indications for ‘rescue’ courses include:
 symptoms and PEF progressively worsening day by day, with a fall 
of PEF below 75% of the patient's personal best recording
 onset or worsening of sleep disturbance by asthma
 persistence of morning symptoms until midday
Move down to find and maintain lowest controlling therapy Move up to improve control as needed
Short-acting 2 agonists as required (unless using MART) – consider moving up if using three doses a week or more
Evaluation:  assess symptoms, measure lung function, check inhaler technique and adherence
                     adjust dose  update self-management plan  move up and down as appropriate
Asthma – suspected
Adult asthma – diagnosed
Diagnosis and
assessment
Consider
monitored
initiation of
treatment with
low-dose ICS
Infrequent,
short-lived
wheeze
Low-dose ICS
Consider:
Increasing ICS to
medium dose
or
Adding LTRA
If no response
to LABA, consider
stopping LABA
Regular
preventer
Initial add-on
therapy
Additional
controller therapies
Specialist
therapies
Add inhaled LABA to
low-dose ICS (fixed
dose or MART)
Refer patient for
specialist care
Fig. 17.22 Management approach in adults based on asthma control. (ICS = inhaled corticosteroids (glucocorticoids); LABA = long-acting β2-agonist; MART = 
maintenance and reliever therapy; LTRA = leukotriene receptor antagonist; SR = sustained-release) From British Thoracic Society and Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network (SIGN). British Guideline on the Management of Asthma: SIGN 158. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2019. http://www.sign.ac.uk
 Remove the cap and shake the inhaler
 Breathe out gently and place the
   mouthpiece into the mouth
 Incline the head backwards to minimise
   oropharyngeal deposition
 Simultaneously, begin a slow deep
   inspiration, depress the canister and
   continue to inhale
 Hold the breath for 10 seconds
Fig. 17.23 How to use a metered-dose inhaler.

[[p550]]
504    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
 progressively diminishing response to an inhaled bronchodilator
 symptoms that are sufciently severe to require treatment with nebu-
lised bronchodilators
Management of acute severe asthma
Box 17.22 highlights the immediate assessment requirements in acute 
asthma. Measurement of PEF is mandatory, unless the patient is too ill to 
cooperate, and is most easily interpreted when expressed as a percent-
age of the predicted normal or of the previous best value obtained on 
optimal treatment (Fig. 17.24). Arterial blood gas analysis is essential for 
those patients with life-threatening or near-fatal asthma to determine the 
PaCO2, a normal or elevated level being particularly dangerous. A chest 
X-ray is not immediately necessary, unless pneumothorax is suspected.
Treatment includes the following measures:
 Oxygen. Controlled supplemental oxygen should be administered to 
maintain SaO2 94%–98%. The presence of a high PaCO2 should not 
be taken as an indication to reduce oxygen concentration but as a 
warning sign of a severe or life-threatening attack. Failure to achieve 
appropriate oxygenation is an indication for assisted ventilation.
 High doses of inhaled bronchodilators. Short-acting β2-agonists 
are the agent of choice. They can be administered either via mul-
tiple doses of a metered-dose inhaler via a spacer device, or via a 
nebuliser driven by oxygen. Ipratropium bromide provides further 
bronchodilator therapy and should be added to if there is a failure to 
respond to salbutamol or in life-threatening attacks.
 Systemic glucocorticoids. These reduce the inammatory response, 
reduce mortality, subsequent hospital admission and requirement 
for bronchodilators. They should be administered to all patients with 
an acute severe attack. They can usually be administered orally 
as prednisolone but intravenous hydrocortisone may be used in 
patients who are vomiting or unable to swallow.
There is no evidence base for the use of intravenous uids but many 
patients are dehydrated due to high insensible water loss and may ben-
et. Potassium supplements may be necessary to counteract hypokal-
aemia caused by repeated doses of beta-agonists.
If patients fail to improve, a number of further options may be consid-
ered, including intravenous magnesium for patients with life-threatening 
or near-fatal attacks and intravenous aminophylline, although cardiac 
and therapeutic drug level monitoring is recommended.
PEF should be recorded 15–30 minutes after starting therapy and 
thereafter according to response every 4–6 hours and pulse oxim etry 
should be monitored to ensure that SaO2 94%–98% is maintained. 
17.22  Immediate assessment of acute severe asthma
Acute severe asthma
 PEF 33%–50% predicted (<200 L/min)
 Heart rate ≥ 110 beats/min
 Respiratory rate ≥25 breaths/min
 Inability to complete sentences in 1 breath
Life-threatening features
 PEF <33% predicted  
(<100 L/min)
 SpO2 <92% or PaO2 <8 kPa 
(60 mmHg) (especially if being 
treated with oxygen)
 Normal or raised PaCO2
 Silent chest
 Cyanosis
 Feeble respiratory effort
 Bradycardia or arrhythmias
 Hypotension
 Exhaustion
 Delirium
 Coma
Near-fatal asthma
 Raised PaCO2 and/or requiring mechanical ventilation with raised ination 
pressures
(PEF = peak expiratory ow)
 Check with senior medical staff
 Prednisolone 40 mg daily for 5 days
 Start or double inhaled
  glucocorticoids
 Return immediately if worse
 Appointment with GP within
  48 hours
 Usual treatment
 Return immediately if worse
 Appointment with GP within
  48 hours
Usual inhaled
bronchodilator
Wait 60 mins
Wait 30 mins
 Administer repeat salbutamol
   5 mg + ipratropium bromide 500 g
  by oxygen-driven nebuliser
 Consider continuous salbutamol
  nebuliser 5–10 mg/hr
 Consider intravenous magnesium
  sulphate 1.2–2.0 g over 20 mins, or
  aminophylline 5 mg/kg loading dose
  over 20 mins followed by a
  continuous infusion at 1 mg/kg/hr
 Correct fluid and electrolytes
  (especially K+) 
Arterial blood gas
Nebulised salbutamol 5 mg or
terbutaline 2.5 mg
Oxygen–high-flow/60%
Prednisolone 40 mg orally
PEF < 60%
predicted
PEF > 60%
predicted
Life-threatening/acute
severe
MEASURE PEAK EXPIRATORY FLOW
Convert PEF to % best or % predicted
0%
50%
51%
75%
76%
100%
Mild
Moderate
Measure PEF
Home
Admit
Home
Intravenous access, chest X-ray,
plasma theophylline level, plasma K+
Arterial blood gas
Nebulised salbutamol 5 mg or
terbutaline 2.5 mg
6–12 times daily or as required
Oxygen–high-flow/60%
Prednisolone 40 mg orally
(or hydrocortisone 200 mg IV)
Did patient receive nebulised
therapy before PEF recorded?
Yes
No
Fig. 17.24 Immediate treatment of patients with acute severe asthma. (GP = general practitioner; IV = intravenous; PEF = peak expiratory ow)

[[p551]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    505
17
Repeat arterial blood gases are necessary if the initial PaCO2 measure-
ments were normal or raised, the PaO2 was below 8 kPa (60 mmHg) or 
the patient deteriorates. Box 17.23 lists the indications for endotracheal 
intubation and intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV).
Prognosis
The outcome from acute severe asthma is generally good but a consid-
erable number of deaths occur in young people and many are prevent-
able. Failure to recognise the severity of an attack, on the part of either 
the assessing physician or the patient, contributes to delay in delivering 
appropriate therapy and to under-treatment.
Prior to discharge, patients should be stable on discharge medi-
cation (nebulised therapy should have been discontinued for at least 
24hours) and the PEF should have reached 75% of predicted or per-
sonal best. The acute attack should prompt a look for and avoidance 
of any trigger factors, the delivery of asthma education and the provi-
sion of a written self-management plan. The patient should be offered 
an appointment with a general practitioner or asthma nurse within 2 
working days of discharge, and follow-up at a specialist hospital clinic 
within a month.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is dened as a pre-
ventable and treatable disease characterised by persistent respiratory 
symptoms and airow limitation that is due to airway and/or alveolar 
abnormalities, usually caused by signicant exposure to noxious par-
ticles or gases. The spectrum of COPD includes chronic bronchitis 
and emphysema. Chronic bronchitis is dened as cough and spu-
tum for at least 3 consecutive months in each of 2 consecutive years. 
Emphysema is abnormal permanent enlargement of the airspaces 
distal to the terminal bronchioles, accompanied by destruction of their 
walls. Exacerbations and comorbidities contribute to the overall sever-
ity in individual patients. Extrapulmonary effects include weight loss and 
skeletal muscle dysfunction (see Fig. 17.25). Commonly associated 
comorbid conditions include cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular 
disease, the metabolic syndrome, osteoporosis, depression and lung 
cancer.
COPD prevalence is directly related to the prevalence of risk factors in 
the community, such as tobacco smoking, coal dust exposure or the use 
of biomass fuels, and to the age of the population being studied.
Risk factors are shown in Box 17.24. Cigarette smoking represents 
the most signicant risk factor for COPD and the risk of developing the 
condition relates to both the amount and duration of smoking. It is unu-
sual to develop COPD with less than 10 pack years (1 pack year=20 
cigarettes daily per year) and not all smokers develop the condition, sug-
gesting that individual susceptibility factors are important.
Pathophysiology
COPD has both pulmonary and systemic components (Fig. 17.25). The 
presence of airow limitation combined with premature airway closure 
leads to gas trapping and hyperination, adversely affecting pulmonary 
and chest wall compliance. Pulmonary hyperination also results, which 
attens the diaphragmatic muscles and leads to an increasingly horizon-
tal alignment of the intercostal muscles, placing the respiratory muscles 
at a mechanical disadvantage. The work of breathing is therefore mark-
edly increased – rst on exercise, when the time for expiration is further 
shortened, but then, as the disease advances, at rest.
Emphysema (Fig. 17.26) may be classied by the pattern of the 
enlarged airspaces: centriacinar, panacinar and paraseptal. Some indi-
viduals develop bullae; permanent air-lled spaces within the lung that 
are more than 1 cm in diameter. This results in impaired gas exchange 
and respiratory failure.
Clinical features
COPD should be suspected in any patient over 40 years old who pre-
sents with symptoms of chronic bronchitis and/or breathlessness. 
Depending on the presentation, important differential diagnoses include 
asthma, tuberculosis, bronchiectasis and congestive cardiac failure.
Cough and associated sputum production are usually the rst symp-
toms, and are often referred to as a ‘smoker’s cough’. Haemoptysis 
may complicate exacerbations of COPD but should not be attributed to 
COPD without thorough investigation.
Breathlessness usually prompts presentation to a health profes-
sional. The level should be quantied for future reference, often by doc-
umenting what the patient can manage before stopping; scales such 
as the modied Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnoea scale 
may be useful (Box 17.25). In advanced disease, enquiry should be 
made as to the presence of oedema (which may be seen for the rst 
time during an exacerbation) and morning headaches (which may sug-
gest hypercapnia).
Physical signs are non-specic, correlate poorly with lung function, 
and are seldom obvious until the disease is advanced. Breath sounds 
are typically quiet; crackles may accompany infection but, if persistent, 
raise the possibility of bronchiectasis. Finger clubbing is not a feature of 
COPD and should trigger further investigation for lung cancer or bro-
sis. Right heart failure may develop in patients with advanced COPD, 
particularly if there is coexisting sleep apnoea or thromboembolic dis-
ease. However, even in the absence of right heart failure, COPD patients 
often have pitting oedema from salt and water retention caused by renal 
hypoxia and hypercapnia. This is known as ‘cor pulmonale’, but the term 
is a misnomer in such patients, as they do not have heart failure. Fatigue, 
anorexia and weight loss may point to the development of lung cancer 
or tuberculosis, but are common in patients with severe COPD. Body 
mass index (BMI) is of prognostic signicance. Depression and anxiety 
are also common.
Two classical phenotypes have been described: ‘pink puffers’ and 
‘blue bloaters’. The former are typically thin and breathless, and main-
tain a normal PaCO2 until the late stage of disease. The latter develop 
17.23  Indications for assisted ventilation in acute severe 
asthma
 Coma
 Respiratory arrest
 Deterioration of arterial blood gas tensions despite optimal therapy:
PaO2 <8 kPa (60 mmHg) and falling
PaCO2 >6 kPa (45 mmHg) and rising
pH low and falling (H+ high and rising)
 Exhaustion, delirium, drowsiness
17.24  Risk factors for development of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Environmental factors
 Tobacco smoke: accounts for 95% of cases in the UK
 Indoor air pollution: cooking with biomass fuels in conned areas in low-income 
countries
 Occupational exposures, such as coal dust, silica and cadmium
 Low birth weight: may reduce maximally attained lung function in young adult 
life
 Lung growth: childhood infections or maternal smoking may affect growth of 
lung during childhood, resulting in a lower maximally attained lung function in 
adult life
 Infections: recurrent infection may accelerate decline in FEV1; persistence of 
adenovirus in lung tissue may alter local inammatory response, predisposing to 
lung damage; HIV infection is associated with emphysema
 Low socioeconomic status
 Cannabis smoking
Host factors
 Genetic factors: alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency; other COPD susceptibility genes 
are likely to be identied
 Airway hyper-reactivity
(FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 sec)

[[p552]]
506    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
(or tolerate) hypercapnia earlier and may develop oedema and second-
ary polycythaemia. In practice, these phenotypes often overlap.
Investigations
Although there are no reliable radiographic signs that correlate with the 
severity of airow limitation, a chest X-ray is essential to identify alternative 
diagnoses such as cardiac failure, lung cancer and the presence of bullae. 
A blood count is useful to exclude anaemia or document polycythaemia, 
and all patients should be tested for alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency.
The diagnosis requires objective demonstration of airow obstruction 
by spirometry and is established when the post-bronchodilator FEV1/
FVC is <70%. The severity of COPD may be dened in relation to the 
post-bronchodilator FEV1 (Box 17.26).
Measurement of lung volumes provides an assessment of hyper-
ination. This is generally performed by helium dilution technique 
(p. 488); however, in patients with severe COPD, and in particular large 
bullae, body plethysmography is preferred because the use of helium 
may under-estimate lung volumes. The presence of emphysema is 
suggested by a low gas transfer. Exercise tests provide an objective 
assessment of exercise tolerance and provide a baseline on which 
to judge the response to bronchodilator therapy or rehabilitation pro-
grammes; they may also be valuable when assessing prognosis. Pulse 
oximetry may prompt referral for a domiciliary oxygen assessment if 
less than 93%.
The assessment of health status by the St George’s Respiratory 
Questionnaire (SGRQ) is commonly used for research. In practice, the 
COPD Assessment Test and the COPD Control Questionnaire are eas-
ier to administer. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) is likely 
to play an increasing role in the assessment of COPD, as it allows the 
detection, characterisation and quantication of emphysema (Fig. 17.27) 
and is more sensitive than the chest X-ray at detecting bullae. It is also 
used to guide lung volume reduction surgery.
Assessment of severity
The severity of COPD has traditionally been dened in relation to the 
FEV% predicted. However, assessing the impact of COPD on individual 
patients in terms of the symptoms and limitations in activity that they 
experience and whether they suffer frequent or signicant exacerba-
tions may provide a more clinically relevant assessment and help guide 
management.
A
B
Fig. 17.26 The pathology of emphysema. 
lung, showing gross loss of the normal surface area available for gas exchange. 
(B) Courtesy of the British Lung Foundation.
Altered fat
metabolism
contributing
to weight loss
Enlargement of mucus-secreting glands
and increase in number of goblet cells,
accompanied by an inflammatory cell
infiltrate, result in increased sputum
production leading to chronic bronchitis
Loss of elastic tissue, inflammation and
fibrosis in airway wall result in premature
airway closure, gas trapping and dynamic
hyperinflation leading to changes in 
pulmonary and chest wall compliance
Unopposed action of
proteases and oxidants
leading to destruction of
alveoli and appearance
of emphysema
Pulmonary vascular
remodelling and impaired
cardiac performance
Muscular weakness
reflecting deconditioning
and cellular changes
in skeletal muscles
Impaired salt and
water excretion
leading to
peripheral oedema
↑ Prevalence of
osteoporosis
Increased
circulating
inflammatory
markers
Pulmonary
Systemic
Fig. 17.25 The pulmonary and systemic features of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

[[p553]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    507
17
Management
The management of COPD focuses on improving breathlessness, reduc-
ing the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improving health 
status and prognosis.
Reducing exposure to noxious particles and gases
Sustained smoking cessation in mild to moderate COPD is accompa-
nied by a reduced decline in FEV1 compared to persistent smokers, 
and cessation remains the only strategy that impacts favourably on 
the natural history of COPD. Complete cessation is accompanied by 
an improvement in lung function and deceleration in the rate of FEV1
decline (Fig.17.28). In regions where the indoor burning of biomass fuels 
is important, the introduction of non-smoking cooking devices or alter-
native fuels should be encouraged.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Exercise should be encouraged at all stages and patients should be 
reassured that breathlessness, while distressing, is not dangerous. 
Multidisciplinary programmes that incorporate physical training, disease 
education and nutritional counselling reduce symptoms, improve health 
status and enhance condence. Most programmes include two to three 
sessions per week, last between 6 and 12 weeks, and are accompanied 
by demonstrable and sustained improvements in exercise tolerance and 
health status.
Bronchodilators
Bronchodilator therapy is central to the management of breathlessness. 
Choice should be informed by patient preference and inhaler assess-
ment. Short-acting bronchodilators are used as relievers and may be 
used as sole treatment for patients with very mild disease but combi-
nation longer-acting bronchodilators are preferred. Long-acting beta-
agonists (LABA) and long-acting muscarinic-antagonists (LAMA) are 
available in single agent or combination inhalers. Nebulised short-acting 
bronchodilators can be used in those unable to take inhalers. Signicant 
improvements in breathlessness may be reported despite minimal 
changes in FEV1, probably reecting improvements in lung emptying that 
reduce dynamic hyperination and ease the work of breathing. Oral bron-
chodilator therapy, such as theophylline, is only recommended when 
other long-acting bronchodilators are not available. Their use is limited 
by side-effects, unpredictable metabolism and drug interactions; hence 
the requirement to monitor plasma levels.
Combined inhaled glucocorticoids and bronchodilators
Those with frequent exacerbations and/or persistent breathless-
ness despite long-acting bronchodilators, may benet from inhaled 
17.25 Modied Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnoea 
scale
Grade
Degree of breathlessness related to 
activities
0
No breathlessness, except with 
strenuous exercise
1
Breathlessness when hurrying on the 
level or walking up a slight hill
2
Walks slower than contemporaries 
on level ground because of 
breathlessness or has to stop for 
breath when walking at own pace
3
Stops for breath after walking about 
100 m or after a few minutes on 
level ground
4
Too breathless to leave the house, 
or breathless when dressing or 
undressing
17.26  Spirometric classication of COPD severity based on 
post-bronchodilator FEV1
PD FEV1/
FVC
FEV1% 
predicted
Severity of airow obstruction  
post-bronchodilator
ATS/ERS 
(2004)
GOLD 
(2020)
NICE Clinical 
Guideline 
101 (2010)
<0.7
≥80%
Mild
Stage I – 
mild
Stage I – 
mild1
<0.7
50%–79%
Moderate
Stage II – 
moderate
Stage II – 
moderate
<0.7
30%–49%
Severe
Stage III – 
severe
Stage III – 
severe
<0.7
<30%
Very severe
Stage IV – 
very severe
Stage IV – 
very severe2
1Mild COPD should not be diagnosed on lung function alone if the patient is asymptomatic. 2Or 
FEV < 50% with respiratory failure.
(ATS/ERS = American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Journal; FEV = forced expiratory 
volume in 1 sec; GOLD = Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease; PD = post-
bronchodilator)
Adapted from National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease in over 16 s: diagnosis and management. NICE Guideline [NG115], July 2019. 
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng115/
R
L
Fig. 17.27 Gross emphysema. High-resolution computed tomogram showing 
emphysema, most evident in the right lower lobe.
0
25
50
75
100
50
25
Age (years)
Smoked regularly
and susceptible
to its effects
Stopped
smoking
at 45
Stopped
smoking
at 65
Never smoked or not
susceptible to smoke
FEV1
(% of value at age 25)
Disability
Death
Fig. 17.28 Model of annual decline in FEV1 with accelerated decline in 
susceptible smokers. When smoking is stopped, subsequent loss is similar to that 
in healthy non-smokers. (FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second)

[[p554]]
508    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
glucocorticoids (usually abbreviated to ICS, for ‘inhaled corticosteroids’), 
in the form of either a LABA/LAMA/ICS or LABA/ICS combination inhaler. 
These combined therapies improve lung function, reduce the frequency 
and severity of exacerbations and improve quality of life. However, these 
advantages may be accompanied by an increased risk of pneumonia, 
particularly in older people. Combination ICS inhalers are likely to reduce 
the frequency of exacerbations in patients with eosinophilia, and should 
be used in patients with a history of asthma.
Oral anti-inammatories
Oral glucocorticoids are useful during exacerbations but maintenance 
therapy contributes to osteoporosis and impaired skeletal muscle func-
tion, and should be avoided. Oral glucocorticoid trials assist in the diag-
nosis of asthma but do not predict response to inhaled glucocorticoids 
in COPD. Roumilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, improves lung 
function and reduces moderate to severe exacerbations in patients with 
severe or very severe COPD. Azithromycin 500 mg three times weekly 
can reduce the number of exacerbations, but non-tuberculous myco-
bacterial infections must rst be excluded, and LFTs, QTC and hearing 
should be monitored.
Other maintenance measures
Patients with COPD should be offered pneumococcal vaccination and 
annual inuenza vaccination. Obesity, poor nutrition, depression and 
social isolation should be identied and, if possible, addressed. Chest 
physiotherapy techniques and devices and mucolytic agents ease spu-
tum expectoration and may reduce exacerbations.
Oxygen therapy and home ventilation
Long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy (LTOT) improves survival in 
selected patients with COPD complicated by severe hypoxaemia (arterial 
PaO2 <7.3 kPa (55 mmHg); Box 17.27). It is most conveniently provided 
by an oxygen concentrator and patients should be instructed to use 
oxygen for a minimum of 15 hours a day; greater benets are seen in 
those who use it for more than 20 hours a day. The aim of therapy is to 
increase the PaO2 to at least 8 kPa (60 mmHg) or SaO2 to at least 90%. 
Ambulatory oxygen therapy should be considered in patients who desat-
urate on exercise and show objective improvement in exercise capacity 
and/or dyspnoea with oxygen. Oxygen ow rates should be adjusted 
to maintain SaO2 above 90%. Home non-invasive ventilation improves 
quality of life and prolongs time to readmission in patients with persistent 
hypercapnia.
Surgical intervention
Bullectomy may be considered when large bullae compress surrounding 
normal lung tissue. Patients with predominantly upper lobe emphysema, 
preserved gas transfer and no evidence of pulmonary hypertension may 
benet from lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS). LVRS involves resec-
tion of peripheral emphysematous lung tissue with the aim of reducing 
hyperination and decreasing the work of breathing. Both bullectomy 
and LVRS can be performed thorascopically, minimising morbidity. 
Bronchoscopic LVRS involves the use of one-way valves, lung coils or 
thermal ablation to collapse down areas of ineffective emphysematous 
lung. This enables the neighbouring areas of healthier lung to expand 
and work more efciently. Lung transplantation may benet carefully 
selected patients with advanced disease.
Palliative care
Addressing end-of-life needs is an important aspect of care in advanced 
COPD. Hand-held electric fans and morphine preparations may be used 
for palliation of breathlessness and low-dose benzodiazepines may 
reduce anxiety. Decisions regarding resuscitation and escalation of care 
should be addressed in advance of critical illness.
Prognosis
COPD has a variable natural history but is usually progressive. The progno-
sis is inversely related to age and directly related to the post-bronchodilator 
FEV1. Additional poor prognostic indicators include weight loss and pul-
monary hypertension. A composite score comprising the body mass index 
(B), the degree of airow obstruction (O), a measurement of dyspnoea (D) 
and exercise capacity (E) (BODE index) may assist in predicting death from 
respiratory and other causes (Box 17.28). Respiratory failure, pneumonia, 
cardiac disease and lung cancer represent common modes of death.
Specic challenges with the diagnosis and management of obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease in older people are shown in Box 17.29
Acute exacerbations of COPD
Acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD) are characterised by an 
increase in symptoms and deterioration in lung function and health sta-
tus. They become more frequent as the disease progresses and are 
usually triggered by infection or a change in air quality. They may be 
17.27  Prescription of long-term oxygen therapy in COPD
Arterial blood gases are measured in clinically stable patients on optimal medical 
therapy on at least two occasions 3 weeks apart:
 PaO2 <7.3 kPa (55 mmHg) irrespective of PaCO2
 PaO2 7.3–8 kPa (55–60 mmHg) plus pulmonary hypertension, peripheral 
oedema or polycythaemia (haematocrit >55%)
 the patient has stopped smoking
Use at least 15 hrs/day at the necessary ow rate to achieve a PaO2 >8 kPa 
(60 mmHg) without unacceptable rise in PaCO2
17.28  Calculation of the BODE index
Variable
Points on BODE index
0
1
2
3
FEV1
≥65
50–64
36–49
≤35
Distance walked in 
6 mins (m)
≥350
250–349
150–249
≤149
mMRC dyspnoea scale*
0–1
2
3
4
Body mass index
>21
≤21
A patient with a BODE index of 0–2 has a mortality rate of 20% at 4 years, 
whereas a patient with a BODE index of 7–10 has a mortality rate of 82% at 
4 years.
*See Box 17.25
(BODE – see text; FEV = forced expiratory volume in 1 sec)
17.29 Obstructive pulmonary disease in old age
 Asthma: may appear de novo in old age, so airow obstruction should not 
always be assumed to be due to COPD.
 Peak expiratory ow recordings: older people with poor vision have difculty 
reading PEF meters.
 Perception of bronchoconstriction: impaired by age, so an older patient’s 
description of symptoms may not be a reliable indicator of severity.
 Stopping smoking: the benets on the rate of loss of lung function decline with 
age but remain valuable up to the age of 80.
 Metered-dose inhalers: many older people cannot use these because of 
difculty coordinating and triggering the device. Aids are available, and frequent 
demonstration and re-instruction in the use of all devices are required.
 Mortality rates for acute asthma: higher in old age, partly because patients 
under-estimate the severity of bronchoconstriction and also develop a 
lower degree of tachycardia and pulsus paradoxus for the same degree of 
bronchoconstriction.
 Treatment decisions: advanced age in itself is not a barrier to intensive care or 
mechanical ventilation in an acute episode of asthma or COPD, but this decision 
may be difcult and should be shared with the patient (if possible), the relatives 
and the wider medical team.

[[p555]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    509
17
accompanied by the development of respiratory failure and/or uid reten-
tion and represent an important cause of death.
Many patients can be managed at home with the use of increased 
bronchodilator therapy, a short course of oral glucocorticoids and, if 
appropriate, antibiotics. The presence of cyanosis, peripheral oedema 
or an alteration in consciousness should prompt referral to hospital. In 
other patients, consideration of comorbidity and social circumstances 
may inuence decisions regarding hospital admission.
Oxygen therapy
In patients with an exacerbation of severe COPD, high concentrations 
of oxygen may cause respiratory depression and worsening acidosis. 
Controlled oxygen at 24% or 28% should be used with the aim of main-
taining SaO2 of 88%–92% or PaO2 of more than 8 kPa (60 mmHg) with-
out worsening acidosis.
Bronchodilators
Nebulised short-acting β2-agonists combined with an anticholiner-
gic agent (e.g. salbutamol and ipratropium) are routinely administered. 
However, the latter is only appropriate if the patient is unable to take their 
LAMA inhaler. Nebulisers can be driven with oxygen, but due to concern 
regarding oxygen sensitivity, they are more safely driven by compressed 
air with supplemental oxygen delivered by nasal cannula.
Glucocorticoids
Oral prednisolone reduces symptoms and improves lung function. Doses 
of 30 mg for 5 days are currently recommended but weaning courses are 
required if the patient has had a recent course of steroids. Prophylaxis 
against osteoporosis should be considered in patients who receive 
repeated courses of glucocorticoids.
Antibiotic therapy
The role of bacteria in exacerbations remains controversial. There is little 
evidence for the routine administration of antibiotics, but they are recom-
mended for patients reporting an increase in sputum purulence, sputum 
volume or breathlessness. In most cases simple regimens are advised, 
such as an aminopenicillin, a tetracycline or a macrolide. However, local 
practice will depend on local guidance and epidemiology.
Non-invasive ventilation
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) reduces mortality and invasive ventilation 
rates in patients with an acute exacerbation of COPD complicated by 
mild to moderate respiratory acidosis (pH <7.35 and PaCO2 >6.5 kPa). 
It should be considered when respiratory acidosis is not corrected within 
an hour of identication, despite optimal medical therapy, including con-
trolled oxygen therapy with a target saturation of 88%–92%. Invasive 
ventilation should be considered in patients with deteriorating acidosis 
despite optimal NIV settings, those unable to tolerate or wear the inter-
face (e.g. due to facial injury) and those who cannot protect their airway.
Additional therapy
Exacerbations may be accompanied by the development of peripheral 
oedema; this usually responds to diuretics. Hospital admission provides a 
good opportunity to address smoking cessation, mobility and sputum clear-
ance, inhaler technique and concordance, nutrition and swallowing concerns.
Discharge
Discharge from hospital may be contemplated once patients are clinically 
stable on their usual maintenance medication. Hospital-at-home teams 
may provide short-term nebuliser loan, improving discharge rates and 
providing additional support for the patient.
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis means abnormal dilatation of the bronchi. Chronic sup-
purative airway infection with sputum production, progressive scarring 
and lung damage occur, whatever the cause.
Aetiology and pathology
Bronchiectasis may result from a congenital defect affecting airway ion 
transport or ciliary function, such as cystic brosis (see below), or may 
be acquired secondary to damage to the airways by a destructive infec-
tion, inhaled toxin or foreign body. The result is chronic inammation and 
infection in the airways. Box 17.30 shows the common causes, of which 
tuberculosis is the most common worldwide.
Localised bronchiectasis may occur due to the accumulation of pus 
beyond an obstructing bronchial lesion, such as enlarged tuberculous 
hilar lymph nodes, a bronchial tumour or an inhaled foreign body.
The bronchiectatic cavities may be lined by granulation tissue, 
squamous epithelium or normal ciliated epithelium. There may also be 
inammatory changes in the deeper layers of the bronchial wall and 
hypertrophy of the bronchial arteries. Chronic inammatory and brotic 
changes are usually found in the surrounding lung tissue, causing 
progressive destruction of the normal lung architecture in advanced 
cases.
Clinical features
The symptoms are shown in Box 17.31
Physical signs in the chest may be unilateral or bilateral. If the bron-
chiectatic airways do not contain secretions and there is no associ-
ated lobar collapse, there are no abnormal physical signs. When there 
are large amounts of sputum in the bronchiectatic spaces, numer-
ous coarse crackles may be heard over the affected areas. Collapse 
with retained secretions blocking a proximal bronchus may lead to 
locally diminished breath sounds, while advanced disease may cause 
scarring and overlying bronchial breathing. Acute haemoptysis is an 
important complication of bronchiectasis; management is described 
on page 492.
17.30  Causes of bronchiectasis
Congenital
 Cystic brosis
 Ciliary dysfunction syndromes:
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (immotile cilia syndrome)
Kartagener syndrome (sinusitis and transposition of the viscera)
 Primary hypogammaglobulinaemia
Acquired: children
 Severe infections in infancy (especially whooping cough, measles)
 Primary tuberculosis
 Inhaled foreign body
Acquired: adults
 Suppurative pneumonia
 Pulmonary tuberculosis
 Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis complicating asthma
 Bronchial tumours
17.31  Symptoms of bronchiectasis
 Cough: chronic, daily, persistent
 Sputum: copious, continuously purulent
 Pleuritic pain: when infection spreads to involve pleura, or with segmental 
collapse due to retained secretions
 Haemoptysis
Streaks of blood common, larger volumes with exacerbations of infection
Massive haemoptysis requiring bronchial artery embolisation sometimes occurs
 Infective exacerbation: increased sputum volume with fever, malaise, anorexia
 Halitosis: frequently accompanies purulent sputum
 General debility: difculty maintaining weight, anorexia, exertional 
breathlessness

[[p556]]
510    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Investigations
In addition to common respiratory pathogens, sputum culture may reveal 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, fungi such as 
Aspergillus and non-tuberculous mycobacteria.
Mild bronchiectasis may not be apparent on a plain chest X-ray. In 
advanced disease, thickened airway walls, cystic bronchiectatic spaces 
and associated areas of pneumonic consolidation or collapse may be 
visible. CT is much more sensitive and shows thickened, dilated airways 
(Fig. 17.29).
If the patient is suspected of having a ciliary dysfunction syndrome a 
nasal FeNO sample should be taken as a screening test, then considera-
tion of nasal brush biopsy and genetic testing. The nasal biopsies shoud 
be assessed for cilary beat frequency and structural ciliary abnormalities 
assessed by electron microscopy.
Management
Physiotherapy
Patients should be shown how to perform regular daily physiotherapy 
to assist the drainage of excess bronchial secretions. This reduces the 
amount of cough and sputum and prevents recurrent episodes of bron-
chopulmonary infection. Patients should lie in a position in which the lobe 
to be drained is uppermost. Deep breathing, followed by forced expir-
atory manoeuvres (the ‘active cycle of breathing’ technique), helps to 
move secretions in the dilated bronchi towards the trachea, from which 
they can be cleared by vigorous coughing. Devices that increase airway 
pressure either by a constant amount (positive expiratory pressure mask) 
or in an oscillatory manner (utter valve) aid sputum clearance in some 
patients and a variety of techniques should be tried to nd the one that 
suits the individual. The optimum duration and frequency of physiother-
apy depend on the amount of sputum but 5–10 minutes twice daily is a 
minimum for most patients.
Antibiotic therapy
For most patients with bronchiectasis, the appropriate antibiotics are 
the same as those used in COPD but larger doses and longer courses 
are required. When secondary infection occurs with staphylococci and 
Gram-negative bacilli, in particular Pseudomonas species, antibiotic 
therapy becomes more challenging and should be guided by microbio-
logical sensitivities. For Pseudomonas, oral ciprooxacin (500–750 mg 
twice daily) or an intravenous anti-pseudomonal β-lactam (e.g. 
piperacillin–tazobactam or ceftazidime) will be required. Haemoptysis in 
bronchiectasis often responds to treatment of the underlying infection, 
although percutaneous embolisation of the bronchial circulation by an 
interventional radiologist may be necessary in the event of massive or 
repeated haemoptysis.
Surgical treatment
Excision of bronchiectatic areas is indicated in only a small proportion of 
cases. These are usually patients in whom the bronchiectasis is conned 
to a single lobe or segment on CT. Unfortunately, many of those in whom 
medical treatment proves unsuccessful are also unsuitable for surgery 
because of either extensive bilateral bronchiectasis or coexisting severe 
airow obstruction. In progressive forms of bronchiectasis, resection of 
destroyed areas of lung that are acting as a reservoir of infection should 
be considered only as a last resort.
Prognosis
The disease is progressive when associated with ciliary dysfunction or 
cystic brosis, and eventually causes respiratory failure. In other patients, 
the prognosis can be relatively good if physiotherapy is performed regu-
larly and antibiotics are used aggressively.
Prevention
As bronchiectasis commonly starts in childhood following measles, 
whooping cough or a primary tuberculous infection, adequate preven-
tion and treatment of these conditions is essential. Early recognition and 
treatment of bronchial obstruction is also important.
Cystic brosis
Genetics, pathogenesis and epidemiology
Cystic brosis (CF) is the most common life-limiting genetic disease in peo-
ple of predominantly European descent, with autosomal recessive inher-
itance, a carrier rate of 1 in 25, and an incidence of about 1 in 2500 live 
births in this population, although worldwide the incidence of CF varies 
widely. CF is the result of pathogenic variants affecting a gene on the long 
arm of chromosome 7, which codes for a chloride channel known as cystic 
brosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR); this inuences 
salt and water movement across epithelial cell membranes. The most 
common pathogenic CFTR variant in northern European and American 
populations is ΔF508, but over 2000 pathogenic variants of this gene have 
now been identied. The genetic defect causes increased sodium and 
chloride content in sweat and increased resorption of sodium and water 
from respiratory epithelium (Fig. 17.30). Relative dehydration of the airway 
epithelium is thought to predispose to chronic bacterial infection, ciliary 
dysfunction and bronchiectasis. The gene defect also causes disorders 
in the gut epithelium, pancreas, liver and reproductive tract (see below).
In the 1960s, few patients with CF survived infancy. In modern prac-
tice, however, life expectancy has been increased by aggressive treat-
ment of airway infection and nutritional support and in many high income 
countries there are now more adults than children with CF. Until recently, 
the diagnosis was most commonly made from the clinical picture (bowel 
obstruction, failure to thrive, steatorrhoea and/or chest symptoms in a 
young child), supported by sweat electrolyte testing and genotyping. 
Patients with unusual phenotypes were commonly missed, however, and 
late diagnosis led to poorer outcomes. Neonatal screening for CF using 
immunoreactive trypsin and genetic testing of newborn blood samples is 
now routine in the UK and should reduce delayed diagnosis and improve 
outcomes. Pre-implantation and/or prenatal testing may be offered to 
those known to be at high risk.
Clinical features
The lungs are macroscopically normal at birth, but bronchiolar inam-
mation and infections usually lead to bronchiectasis in childhood. At this 
stage, the lungs are most commonly infected with Staph. aureus, while 
in adulthood, many patients become colonised with antibiotic resistant 
Gram-negative bacilli. Recurrent exacerbations of bronchiectasis, initially 
in the upper lobes but subsequently throughout both lungs, cause pro-
gressive lung damage, resulting ultimately in death from respiratory failure. 
R
L
Fig. 17.29 Computed tomogram of bronchiectasis. Extensive dilatation of the 
bronchi, with thickened walls (arrows) in both lower lobes.

[[p557]]
Obstructive pulmonary diseases    511
17
Other clinical manifestations are shown in Box 17.32. Most men with CF 
are infertile due to failure of development of the vas deferens, but microsur-
gical sperm aspiration and in vitro fertilisation are possible. Genotype is a 
poor predictor of disease severity in individuals; even siblings with match-
ing genotypes may have different phenotypes. This suggests that other 
‘modier genes’, as yet unidentied, inuence clinical outcome.
Management
Treatment of CF lung disease
The management of CF lung disease is that of severe bronchiectasis. 
All patients with CF who produce sputum should perform chest phys-
iotherapy daily, and more frequently during exacerbations. While infec-
tions with Staph. aureus can often be managed with oral antibiotics, 
intravenous treatment (frequently self-administered at home through an 
implanted subcutaneous vascular access device) is usually needed for 
Pseudomonas infections.
Over time patients with CF become chronically infected with antibiot-
ic-resistant organisms. These include P. aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas 
maltophilia and Burkholderia cepacia complex, which may require 
prolonged treatment with combinations of intravenous antibiotics. 
The impact of non-tuberculous mycobacteria is less clear, with the 
exception of Mycobacterium abscessus. This organism, which is often 
pan-resistant, may be transmitted between patients with CF causing 
progressive lung destruction and potentially precluding lung transplan-
tation. Fungi such as Aspergillus fumigatus may cause infection or aller-
gic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
There has been a rapid advance in the maintenance therapies for 
patients with CF, including mucolytic therapies, long-term inhaled antibi-
otics, anti-inammatory agents and more recently CFTR modulator ther-
apies (Box 17.33) (see below).
For advanced CF lung disease, home oxygen and NIV may be neces-
sary to treat respiratory failure. Ultimately, lung transplantation can pro-
duce dramatic improvements but is limited by donor organ availability 
and the long-term issues associated with CLAD.
The transition from paediatric to adult CF care raises specic manage-
ment issues in adolescence, which are summarized in Box 17.34
Treatment of non-respiratory manifestations of CF
There is a clear link between good nutrition and prognosis in CF. 
Malabsorption occurs in 85% of patients due to exocrine pancreatic fail-
ure and is treated with oral pancreatic enzymes and vitamin supplements. 
The increased calorie requirements of patients with CF are met by sup-
plemental feeding, including nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feeding 
if required. Diabetes eventually develops in over 25% of patients and 
needs insulin therapy. Osteoporosis secondary to malabsorption and 
chronic ill health should be sought and treated.
CFTR modulator therapies
CFTR modulators are small molecules designed to target specic CFTR
variants. ‘Correctors’ act by correcting CFTR misfolding, thereby improv-
ing trafcking to the cell surface; and ‘potentiators’ act by improving the 
function of CFTR that is already at the cell surface.
Ivacaftor, a CFTR potentiator, is an oral treatment for the 5% of patients 
with the G551D variant and a number of other gating variants. It causes 
sustained improvements in FEV1 and weight, and normalization of the 
sweat chloride levels. Newer combinations of CFTR correctors and poten-
tiators (lumacaftor/ivacaftor and elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor) are now 
treating patients with the more common ΔF 508 variant and represent a 
cAMP
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Water
cAMP
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Chloride
ion
Sodium
ion
Water
Basal surface
1
2
3
4
Airway lumen
Apical surface
EPITHELIAL
CELL
β2-adrenoceptor
Cystic fibrosis
Normal
A
B
Fig. 17.30 Cystic brosis: basic defect in the pulmonary epithelium. 
CFTR) codes for a chloride channel (1) in the apical (luminal) membrane 
of epithelial cells in the conducting airways. This is normally controlled by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and indirectly by β-adrenoceptor stimulation, and is one of 
In cystic brosis, one of many cystic brosis gene defects causes absence or defective function of this chloride channel (3). This leads to reduced chloride secretion and loss of 
inhibition of sodium channels, with excessive sodium resorption (4) and dehydration of the airway lining. The resulting abnormal airway-lining uid predisposes to infection by 
mechanisms still to be fully explained.
17.32  Clinical features and complications of cystic brosis
Respiratory
 Progressive airway obstruction
 Infective exacerbations of 
bronchiectasis
 Respiratory failure
 Spontaneous pneumothorax
 Allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
 Haemoptysis
 Lobar collapse due to secretions
 Pulmonary hypertension
 Nasal polyps
Gastrointestinal and hepatic
 Malabsorption and steatorrhoea
 Distal intestinal obstruction 
syndrome
 Increased risk of gastrointestinal 
malignancy
 Cystic brosis-associated liver 
disease (CFLD), including biliary 
cirrhosis, portal hypertension, varices 
and splenomegaly
 Gallstones
Others
 Diabetes (25% of adults)
 Delayed puberty
 Male infertility
 Stress incontinence due to 
repeated forced cough
 Psychosocial problems
 Osteoporosis
 Arthropathy
 Cutaneous vasculitis

[[p558]]
512    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
step forward in therapy. Other strategies under development for the treat-
ment of CF including delivery of somatic gene therapy via liposome or viral 
vectors, and the use of gene-editing technology such as CRISPR.
Infections of the respiratory system
Infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract are a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality, particularly in patients at the extremes of age and 
those with pre-existing lung disease or immune suppression. Features 
that are specic to older people are shown in Box 17.35
Upper respiratory tract infection
Upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs), such as coryza (the com-
mon cold), acute pharyngitis and acute tracheobronchitis, are the most 
common of all communicable diseases and represent the most frequent 
cause of short-term absenteeism from work and school. The vast major-
ity of such infections are caused by viruses and, in adults, are usually 
short-lived and rarely serious.
Acute coryza is the most common URTI and is usually caused by 
rhinovirus infection. The usual symptoms are general malaise, nasal dis-
charge, sneezing and cough. Involvement of the pharynx causes a sore 
throat, and that of the larynx a hoarse or ‘lost’ voice. If complicated by 
tracheitis or bronchitis, chest tightness and wheeze typical of asthma 
occur. Specic investigation is rarely warranted and treatment is symp-
tomatic. Symptoms usually resolve quickly, but if repeated URTIs ‘go to 
the chest’, a more formal diagnosis of asthma ought to be considered. A 
variety of viruses causing URTI may also trigger exacerbations of asthma 
or COPD and aggravate other lung diseases.
Bordetella pertussis, the cause of whooping cough (pertussis), is an 
important cause of URTI. Vaccination confers protection and is usually 
offered in infancy, but its efcacy wanes in adult life and the infection is 
easily spread. Adults usually experience a mild illness similar to acute 
coryza but some individuals develop paroxysms of coughing that can 
persist for weeks to months, earning whooping cough the designation 
of ‘the cough of 100 days’. The diagnosis may be conrmed by bacterial 
culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from a nasopharyngeal swab or 
serological testing. If the illness is recognised early in the clinical course, 
macrolide antibiotics may ameliorate the course. Pertussis is a reportable 
disease in the UK.
Rhinosinusitis typically manifests as a combination of nasal conges-
tion, blockage or discharge and may be accompanied by facial pain/
pressure or loss of smell. Examination usually conrms erythematous 
swollen nasal mucosa and pus may be evident. Nasal polyps should 
be sought and dental infection excluded. Treatment with topical gluco-
corticoids, nasal decongestants and regular nasal douching is usually 
sufcient and, although bacterial infection is often present, antibiotics 
are indicated only if symptoms persist for more than 5 days. Persistent 
symptoms or recurrent episodes should prompt a referral to an ear, nose 
and throat specialist.
Viral respiratory tract infections with the potential to cause more severe 
disease (including COVID-19) are discussed in Chapter 13.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is as an acute respiratory illness associated with recently 
developed radiological pulmonary shadowing that may be segmental, 
lobar or multilobar. The context in which pneumonia develops is highly 
suggestive of the likely organism(s) involved; therefore, pneumonias are 
17.33  Treatments that reduce chest exacerbations and/or 
improve lung function in cystic brosis
Therapy
Drugs
Mucolytic therapies
Nebulised recombinant human DNase
2.5 mg daily
Nebulised hypertonic saline (7%) 4 mL 
twice daily
Inhaled mannitol 400 mg twice daily
Inhaled antibiotics
Nebulised tobramycin 300 mg twice daily, 
alternate months
Inhaled powder tobramycin 28 mg twice 
daily, given alternate months
Nebulised colistin 1 MU twice daily
Nebulised colistin 2 MU twice daily
Inhaled colistin 1.6 MU twice daily
Nebulised aztreonam 75 mg three times 
daily alternate months
Nebulised levooxacin 240 mg twice daily, 
alternate months
Anti-inammatory therapy
Azithromycin 250 mg/500 mg once a day 
three times weekly
CFTR modulator therapy
Ivacaftor
Ivacaftor/lumacaftor
Ivacaftor/tezacaftor
Ivacaftor/tezacaftor/elexacaftor
(CFTR = cystic brosis transmembrane conductance regulator; FEV = forced expiratory volume 
in 1 sec; FVC = forced vital capacity)
17.34  Cystic brosis (CF) in adolescence
Issues for the patient
 Move to adult CF centre – loss of trusted paediatric team
 Feelings of being different from peers due to chronic illness
 Demanding treatments that conict with social and school life
 Pressure to take responsibility for self-care
 Relationship/fertility concerns
Issues for the patient’s parents
 Loss of control over patient’s treatment – feeling excluded
 Loss of trusted paediatric team
 Need to develop trust in adult team
 Feelings of helplessness when adolescent rebels or will not take treatment
Issues for the CF team
 Reluctance or refusal by patient to engage with transition
 Management of deterioration due to non-adherence
 Motivation of adolescents to self-care
 Provision of adolescent-friendly health-care environment
17.35  Respiratory infection in old age
 Increased risk of and from respiratory infection: because of reduced 
immune responses, increased closing volumes, reduced respiratory muscle 
strength and endurance, altered mucus layer, poor nutritional status and the 
increased prevalence of chronic lung disease.
 Predisposing factors: other medical conditions may predispose to infection, 
e.g. swallowing difculties due to stroke increase the risk of aspiration 
pneumonia.
 Atypical presentation: older patients often present with delirium, rather than 
breathlessness or cough.
 Mortality: the vast majority of deaths from pneumonia in high-income countries 
occur in older people.
 Inuenza: has a much higher morbidity and mortality rate. Vaccination 
signicantly reduces morbidity and mortality in old age but uptake is poor.
 COVID-19: increasing age is recognized as a highly signicant risk factor for 
morbidity and mortality.
 Tuberculosis: most cases in old age represent reactivation of previous, often 
unrecognised, disease and may be precipitated by glucocorticoid therapy, 
diabetes mellitus and the factors above. Cryptic miliary tuberculosis is an 
occasional alternative presentation. Older people more commonly suffer adverse 
effects from antituberculous chemotherapy and require close monitoring.

[[p559]]
Infections of the respiratory system    513
17
usually classied as community- or hospital-acquired, or those occur-
ring in immunocompromised hosts. ‘Lobar pneumonia’ is a radiolog-
ical and pathological term referring to homogeneous consolidation of 
one or more lung lobes, often with associated pleural inammation; 
bronchopneumonia refers to more patchy alveolar consolidation asso-
ciated with bronchial and bronchiolar inammation, often affecting both 
lower lobes.
Community-acquired pneumonia
Figures from the UK suggest that an estimated 5–11/1000 adults suffer 
from community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) each year, accounting for 
around 5%–12% of all lower respiratory tract infections. CAP may affect 
all age groups but is commonest at the extremities of age.
Most cases are spread by droplet infection, and while CAP may 
occur in previously healthy individuals, several factors may impair the 
effectiveness of local defences and predispose to CAP (Box 17.36). 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Fig. 17.31) remains the most common 
infecting agent, and thereafter the likelihood that other organisms may be 
involved depends on the age of the patient and the clinical context. Viral 
infections are recognised as important causes of CAP in children and 
their contribution to adult CAP is increasingly recognized. The common 
causative organisms are shown in Box 17.37
Clinical features
Pneumonia, particularly lobar pneumonia, usually presents as an acute 
illness. Systemic features, such as fever, rigors, shivering and malaise, 
predominate and delirium may be present. The appetite is invariably lost 
and headache frequently reported.
Pulmonary symptoms include cough, which at rst is characteris-
tically short, painful and dry, but later is accompanied by the expec-
toration of mucopurulent sputum. Rust-coloured sputum may be 
produced by patients with Strep. pneumoniae infection and the occa-
sional patient may report haemoptysis. Pleuritic chest pain may be a 
presenting feature and on occasion may be referred to the shoulder or 
anterior abdominal wall. Upper abdominal tenderness is sometimes 
apparent in patients with lower lobe pneumonia or those with asso-
ciated hepatitis. Less typical presentations may be seen in childhood 
and old age.
While different organisms often give rise to a similar clinical and radi-
ological picture, it may be possible to infer the likely agent from the 
clinical context. Mycoplasma pneumoniae is more common in young 
people and rare in old age, whereas Haemophilus inuenzae is more 
common in older people, particularly those with underlying lung dis-
ease. Legionella pneumophila occurs in local outbreaks centred on 
contaminated cooling towers in hotels, hospitals and other industries. 
Staphylococcus aureus is more common following an episode of 
inuenza. Klebsiella pneumonia has a specic association with alco-
hol abuse and often presents with a particularly severe bacteraemic 
illness and cavitation on the chest X-ray. Recent foreign travel raises the 
possibility of infections that may otherwise be unusual in the UK, e.g. 
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), melioidosis (South-east Asia 
and northern Australia) and endemic fungal infection (North, Central or 
South America). Certain occupations may be associated with exposure 
to specic bacteria (p. 546).
Clinical examination should rst focus on the respiratory and pulse 
rates, blood pressure and an assessment of the mental state, as these 
are important in assessing the severity of the illness. In the UK, severity 
is assessed using the CURB-65 score, which takes into account both 
examination and investigation ndings (Fig. 17.32). Chest signs vary, 
depending on the inammatory response, which proceeds through 
stages of acute exudation, red and then grey hepatisation, and nally 
resolution. When consolidated, the lung is typically dull to percus-
sion and, as conduction of sound is enhanced, auscultation reveals 
bronchial breathing and whispering pectoriloquy; crackles are heard 
throughout. An assessment of the state of nutrition is important, par-
ticularly in old age and frailty. The presence of herpes labialis may point 
to streptococcal infection, as may the nding of ‘rusty’ sputum. The 
differential diagnosis of pneumonia is shown in Box 17.38
Investigations
The object of investigations, which are summarised in Box 17.39, is to 
conrm the diagnosis, assess severity and identify the development of 
complications.
Management
The most important aspects of management are oxygenation, uid bal-
ance and antibiotic therapy. In severe or prolonged illness, nutritional 
support may be required.
17.36  Factors that predispose to pneumonia
 Cigarette smoking
 Upper respiratory tract  
infections
 Alcohol
 Glucocorticoid therapy
 Old age
 Recent inuenza infection
 Pre-existing lung disease
 HIV
 Indoor air pollution
Fig. 17.31 Gram stain of sputum showing Gram-positive diplococci 
characteristic of Streptococcus pneumoniae (arrows).
17.37  Organisms causing community-acquired pneumonia
Bacteria
 Streptococcus pneumoniae
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
 Legionella pneumophila
 Chlamydia pneumoniae
 Haemophilus inuenzae
 Staphylococcus aureus
 Chlamydia psittaci
 Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)
 Klebsiella pneumoniae (Freidländer’s 
bacillus)
Viruses
 Inuenza, parainuenza
 Measles
 Herpes simplex
 Varicella
 Adenovirus
 Cytomegalovirus
 Coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-2 and 
MERS-CoV)
(MERS = Middle East respiratory syndrome; SARS = severe acute respiratory syndrome)
17.38  Differential diagnosis of pneumonia
 Pulmonary infarction
 Pulmonary/pleural tuberculosis
 Pulmonary oedema (can be unilateral)
 Pulmonary eosinophilia
 Malignancy: bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma
 Cryptogenic organising pneumonia/bronchiolitis obliterans organising 
pneumonia (COP/BOOP)

[[p560]]
514    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Oxygen
Oxygen should be administered to all patients with tachypnoea, hypox-
aemia, hypotension or acidosis to maintain the target oxygen saturations 
specied on p. 195. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) should 
be considered in those who remain hypoxic despite high-concentration 
oxygen therapy, and these patients should be managed in a high-
dependency or intensive care environment where mechanical ventilation 
is available. Indications for referral to an intensive care unit are summa-
rised in Box 17.40
Fluid balance
Intravenous uids should be considered in those with severe illness, in 
older patients and those with vomiting. It may be appropriate to discon-
tinue hypertensive agents temporarily, particularly if there is evidence of 
acute kidney injury secondary to sepsis. Otherwise, an adequate oral 
intake of uid should be encouraged. Vasopressor support may be 
required in patients with shock.
Antibiotic treatment
Prompt administration of appropriate antibiotics improves the outcome. 
The initial choice of antibiotic is guided by clinical context, severity assess-
ment, local knowledge of antibiotic resistance patterns and antibiotic 
guidelines. Current regimens are detailed in Box 17.41. In most patients 
with uncomplicated pneumonia a 5-day course is adequate, although 
treatment is usually required for longer in patients with pneumonia due to 
Legionella pneumophila, Staph. aureus or Klebsiella pneumoniae
Treatment of pleural pain
It is important to relieve pleural pain in order to allow the patient to 
breathe normally and cough efciently. For the majority, simple analgesia 
with paracetamol, co-codamol or NSAIDs is sufcient. In some patients, 
opiates may be required but must be used with extreme caution in indi-
viduals with poor respiratory function.
Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy is not usually indicated in patients with CAP, although it 
may be helpful to assist expectoration in patients who suppress cough 
because of pleural pain.
Prognosis
Most patients respond promptly to antibiotic therapy. Fever may per-
sist for several days, however, and the chest X-ray often takes several 
weeks or even months to resolve, especially in old age. Delayed recovery 
suggests either that a complication has occurred (Box 17.42) or that the 
diagnosis is incorrect (see Box 17.38). Alternatively, the pneumonia may 
be secondary to a proximal bronchial obstruction or recurrent aspira-
tion. The mortality rate of adults with non-severe pneumonia is very low 
(<1%); hospital death rates are typically between 5% and 10% but may 
be as high as 50% in severe illness.
Discharge and follow-up
The decision to discharge a hospitalised patient depends on the home 
circumstances and the likelihood of complications. A chest X-ray need 
not be repeated before discharge in patients making a satisfactory clini-
cal recovery. Clinical review by general practitioner or hospital should be 
arranged around 6 weeks later and a chest X-ray obtained if there are 
persistent symptoms, physical signs or reasons to suspect underlying 
malignancy, such as tobacco exposure.
Prevention
Current smokers should be advised to stop. Inuenza and pneumococ-
cal vaccination should be offered to patients at highest risk of pneumonia 
(e.g. those over 65 or with chronic lung, heart, liver or kidney disease, 
diabetes or immunosuppression). Causes of pneumonia that have 
important public health implications must be notied to the appropri-
ate health authority for appropriate investigation and follow-up (see Box 
6.11). In resource-poor settings, tackling malnourishment and indoor air 
pollution, and encouraging immunisation against measles, pertussis and 
Haemophilus inuenzae type b, are particularly important in children.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) is dened as an episode of pneu-
monia that presents at least 48 hours after admission to hospital and was 
not incubating at the time of admission. It is the second most common 
healthcare-associated infection (HAI) after surgical-site infections and the 
leading cause of HAI-associated death. Older patients are particularly at 
risk, as are patients in intensive care units. The term ventilator-associ-
ated pneumonia (VAP) is used to describe pneumonia that develops in a 
person who is mechanically ventilated. The factors predisposing to the 
development of HAP are listed in Box 17.43
Clinical features and investigation
The diagnosis should be considered in any hospitalised patient who 
develops purulent sputum (or endotracheal secretions), new radiological 
inltrates, an otherwise unexplained increase in oxygen requirement, a 
core temperature >38.3°C, and a leucocytosis or leucopenia. The clinical 
Consider hospital-supervised
treatment
Options may include
 Short-stay inpatient
 Hospital-supervised outpatient
Likely to be suitable for
home treatment
Manage in hospital as
severe pneumonia
Assess for ICU admission,
especially if CURB-65
score = 4 or 5
3 or
more
0 or 1
Any of:
  Confusion*
  Urea > 7 mmol/L
  Respiratory rate > 30/min
  Blood pressure (systolic < 90 mmHg or diastolic < 60 mmHg)
  Age > 65 years
CURB-65 score
2
Score 1 point for each feature present
Fig. 17.32 Hospital CURB-65. *Dened as a mental test score of 8 or less, or new disorientation in person, place or time. (ICU = intensive care unit; urea of 7 mmol/L ≅ 20 mg/dL)

[[p561]]
Infections of the respiratory system    515
17
17.39 Investigations in community-acquired pneumonia*
Blood
Full blood count
 Very high (>20 × 109/L) or low (<4 × 109/L) white cell count: marker of severity
 Neutrophil leucocytosis >15 × 109/L: suggests bacterial aetiology
 Haemolytic anaemia: occasional complication of Mycoplasma
Urea and electrolytes
 Urea >7 mmol/L (~20 mg/dL): marker of severity
 Hyponatraemia: marker of severity
Liver function tests
 Abnormal if basal pneumonia inames liver
 Hypoalbuminaemia: marker of severity
Procalcitonin
 A high procalcitonin is more suggestive of bacterial than viral infection (see Ch. 6)
C-reactive protein/erythrocyte sedimentation rate
 Non-specically elevated
Blood culture
 Bacteraemia: marker of severity
Arterial blood gases
 Measure when SpO2 <93% or when clinical features are severe, to assess 
ventilatory failure or acidosis
Sputum
Sputum samples
 Gram stain (see Fig. 17.31), culture and antimicrobial sensitivity testing
Pharyngeal swab
 NAAT for respiratory viruses (e.g. inuenza, parainuenza, coronaviruses) and 
bacteria (e.g. Mycoplasma pneumoniae)
Urine
 Pneumococcal and/or Legionella antigen
Chest X-ray
Lobar pneumonia
 Patchy opacication evolves into homogeneous consolidation of affected lobe
 Air bronchogram (air-lled bronchi appear lucent against consolidated lung 
tissue) may be present (Fig. 17.33)
Bronchopneumonia
 Typically patchy and segmental shadowing
Complications
 Para-pneumonic effusion, intrapulmonary abscess or empyema
Staphylococcus aureus
 Suggested by multilobar shadowing, cavitation, pneumatoceles and abscesses
Pleural uid
 Always aspirate and culture when present in more than trivial amounts, 
preferably with ultrasound guidance
(NAAT = nucleic acid amplication test)
features and radiographic signs are variable and non-specic, however, 
raising a broad differential diagnosis that includes pulmonary embolism, 
ARDS, pulmonary oedema, pulmonary haemorrhage and drug toxicity. 
Therefore, in contrast to CAP, microbiological conrmation should be 
sought whenever possible. Adequate sputum samples may be difcult 
to obtain and physiotherapy should be considered to aid expectoration. 
In patients who are mechanically ventilated, bronchoscopy-directed pro-
tected brush specimens, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or endotracheal 
aspirates may be obtained.
17.40  Indications for referral to intensive care
 CURB score of 4–5 (see Fig. 17.32), failing to respond rapidly to initial 
management
 Persisting hypoxia (PaO2 <8 kPa (60 mmHg)), despite high concentrations of 
oxygen
 Progressive hypercapnia
 Severe acidosis
 Circulatory shock
 Reduced conscious level
Management
The principles of management are similar to those of CAP, focusing on ade-
quate oxygenation, appropriate uid balance and antibiotics. The choice 
of empirical antibiotic therapy is considerably more challenging, however, 
given the diversity of pathogens and the potential for drug resistance.
The organisms implicated in early-onset HAP (occurring within 4–5 
days of admission) are similar to those involved in CAP. The initial choice 
of agents is most appropriately guided by knowledge of local patterns of 
microbiology and antibiotic resistance (Box 17.44). If the infecting organ-
ism is identied, antibiotic therapy should be rened, with the narrowest 
possible spectrum agent(s) being used. The most appropriate duration 
of antibiotic therapy has not been established and is a matter of clini-
cal judgement. Physiotherapy is important to aid expectoration in less 
mobile patients and adequate nutritional support is often required.
A
B
Fig. 17.33 Pneumonia of the right middle lobe. 
consolidation in the right middle lobe with characteristic opacication beneath the 
horizontal ssure and loss of normal contrast between the right heart border and 
*These investigations are for moderate- to high-severity community-acquired 
ammonia (CAP). Low-severity CAP is usually managed empirically without the need 
for blood tests and microbiological investigations, unless the patient has risk factors 
for underlying disease or an atypical clinical course.

[[p562]]
516    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
17.43  Factors predisposing to hospital-acquired pneumonia
Reduced host defences against bacteria
 Reduced immune defences (e.g. glucocorticoid treatment, diabetes, malignancy)
 Reduced cough reex (e.g. post-operative)
 Disordered mucociliary clearance (e.g. anaesthetic agents)
 Bulbar or vocal cord palsy
Aspiration of nasopharyngeal or gastric secretions
 Immobility or reduced conscious level
 Vomiting, dysphagia (N.B. stroke disease), achalasia or severe reux
 Nasogastric intubation
Bacteria introduced into lower respiratory tract
 Endotracheal intubation/tracheostomy
 Infected ventilators/nebulisers/bronchoscopes
 Dental or sinus infection
Bacteraemia
 Abdominal sepsis
 Intravenous cannula infection
 Infected emboli
17.42  Complications of pneumonia
 Para-pneumonic effusion – common
 Empyema
 Retention of sputum causing lobar collapse
 Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
 Pneumothorax, particularly with Staphylococcus aureus
 Suppurative pneumonia/lung abscess
 ARDS, renal failure, multi-organ failure
 Ectopic abscess formation (Staphylococcus aureus)
 Hepatitis, pericarditis, myocarditis, meningoencephalitis
 Arrhythmias (e.g. atrial brillation)
 Pyrexia due to drug hypersensitivity
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome)
Prevention
Despite appropriate management, the mortality from HAP is high (approx-
imately 30%), mandating prevention whenever possible. Good hygiene is 
paramount, particularly with regard to hand-washing and any equipment 
used. Steps should be taken to minimise the chances of aspir ation and 
to limit the use of stress ulcer prophylaxis with proton pump inhibitors. 
Oral antiseptic (chlorhexidine 2%) may be used to decontaminate the 
upper airway and some intensive care units employ selective decontam-
ination of the digestive tract when the anticipated requirement for venti-
lation will exceed 48 hours.
Suppurative pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia and 
pulmonary abscess
These conditions are considered together, as their aetiology and clinical 
features overlap. Suppurative pneumonia is characterised by destruction 
of the lung parenchyma by the inammatory process. Although micro-
abscess formation is a characteristic histological feature, ‘pulmonary 
abscess’ is usually taken to refer to lesions in which there is a large local-
ised collection of pus, or a cavity lined by chronic inammatory tissue, 
from which pus has escaped by rupture into a bronchus.
Suppurative pneumonia and pulmonary abscess often develop after 
the inhalation of septic material during operations on the nose, mouth or 
throat, under general anaesthesia, or of vomitus during anaesthesia or 
coma, particularly if oral hygiene is poor. Additional risk factors for aspira-
tion pneumonia include bulbar or vocal cord palsy, achalasia or oesoph-
ageal reux, and alcoholism. Aspiration tends to localise to dependent 
areas of the lung, such as the apical segment of the lower lobe in a 
supine patient. These conditions may also complicate local bronchial 
obstruction from a neoplasm or foreign body.
Infections are usually due to a mixture of anaerobes and aerobes in 
common with the typical ora encountered in the mouth and upper res-
piratory tract. Isolates of Prevotella melaninogenica, Fusobacterium nec-
rophorum, anaerobic or microaerophilic cocci and Bacteroides fragilis
may be identied. When suppurative pneumonia or a pulmonary abscess 
occurs in a previously healthy lung, the most likely infecting organisms 
are Staph. aureus or K. pneumoniae. Actinomyces spp. cause chronic 
suppurative pulmonary infections, which may be associated with poor 
dental hygiene.
Bacterial infection of a pulmonary infarct or a collapsed lobe may also 
produce a suppurative pneumonia or lung abscess. The organism(s) 
isolated from the sputum include Strep. pneumoniae, Staph. aureus, 
Streptococcus pyogenes, H. inuenzae and, in some cases, anaerobic 
bacteria. In many cases, however, no pathogen can be isolated, particu-
larly when antibiotics have been given.
Some strains of Staph. aureus, often community-acquired MRSA 
(CA-MRSA), produce the cytotoxin Panton–Valentine leukocidin (PVL). 
PVL-producing strains are mainly responsible for suppurative skin infec-
tion but also cause a rapidly progressive severe necrotising pneumonia.
Lemierre syndrome is a rare cause of pulmonary abscesses. The 
usual causative agent is the anaerobe Fusobacterium necrophorum. The 
illness typically commences as a sore throat, painful swollen neck, fever, 
rigor, haemoptysis and dyspnoea; spread into the jugular veins leads to 
thrombosis and metastatic dispersal of the organisms.
Injection drug-users are at particular risk of developing haematogenous 
lung abscess, often in association with endocarditis affecting the pulmo-
nary and tricuspid valves. These abcesses are usually caused by staphy-
lococci and streptococci, and occasionally by fungi such as Candida spp.
A non-infective form of aspiration pneumonia – exogenous lipid pneu-
monia – may follow the aspiration of animal, vegetable or mineral oils.
The clinical features of suppurative pneumonia are summarised in 
Box17.45
Investigations
Radiological features of suppurative pneumonia include homogeneous 
lobar or segmental opacity consistent with consolidation or collapse. 
Abscesses are characterised by cavitation and a uid level. Occasionally, 
a pre-existing emphysematous bulla becomes infected and appears as 
a cavity containing an air–uid level.
17.41  Antibiotic treatment for community-acquired 
pneumonia (CAP)1
Low severity CAP (CURB-65 score 0–1)
 Amoxicillin 500 mg 3 times daily orally (or IV if necessary2)
If patient is allergic to penicillin
 Doxycycline 200 mg loading dose then 100 mg/day orally or clarithromycin 
500 mg twice daily orally
Moderate severity CAP (CURB-65 score 2)
 Amoxicillin 500 mg–1 g 3 times daily orally (or IV if oral medication not 
possible2) or benzylpenicillin 1.2 g 4 times daily IV
 plus clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily orally/IV
If patient is allergic to penicillin
 Doxycycline 200 mg loading dose then 100 mg/day orally or levooxacin 
500 mg/day orally
Severe CAP (CURB-65 score 3–5)
 Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g 3 times daily IV or cefuroxime 1.5 g 3 times daily IV or
ceftriaxone 1–2 g daily IV
 plus clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily IV
 or benzylpenicillin 1.2 g 4 times daily IV plus levooxacin 500 mg twice daily IV
If Legionella is strongly suspected
 Consider adding levooxacin 500 mg twice daily IV
1Antibiotic use in individual patients should take into account local guidance and antibiotic sensitivity 
patterns.
2Reasons would include impaired consciousness, impaired swallowing reex and functional 
or anatomical reasons for malabsorption. (CURB – see Fig. 17.32; IV = intravenous)
Adapted from British Thoracic Society Guidelines.

[[p563]]
Infections of the respiratory system    517
17
17.44  Antibiotics for adults aged 18 years and over with hospital-acquired pneumonia
Antibiotic
Dosage and course length
First-choice oral antibiotic for non-severe  
symptoms or signs and not at higher risk of resistance1
Co-amoxiclav
500/125 mg 8-hourly for 5 days then review
Alternative oral antibiotics for non-severe symptoms or  
signs and not at higher risk of resistance, if penicillin allergy  
or if co-amoxiclav unsuitable2
Options include:
Doxycycline
200 mg on rst day, then 100 mg daily for 4 days (5-day course) then review
Cefalexin (caution in penicillin allergy)
500 mg 3 times or twice daily (can be increased to 1  g to 1.5 g 4 or 3 times daily) for 
5 days then review
Co-trimoxazole
960 mg twice daily for 5 days then review
Levooxacin (only if switching from IV levooxacin with specialist advice; 
consider safety issues)
500 mg daily or twice daily for 5 days then review
First-choice IV antibiotics if severe symptoms or signs  
(e.g. of sepsis) or at higher risk of resistance. Review IV antibiotics  
by 48 hrs and consider switching to oral antibiotics as above  
for a total of 5 days then review2
Options include:
Piperacillin with tazobactam
4.5 g 3 times daily (increased to 4.5 g 4 times daily if severe infection)
Ceftazidime
2 g 3 times daily
Ceftriaxone
2 g once daily
Cefuroxime
750 mg 4 or 3 times daily (increased to 1.5 g 4 or 3 times daily if severe infection)
Meropenem
0.5 g to 1 g 3 times daily
Ceftazidime with avibactam
2/0.5 g 3 times daily
Levooxacin (consider safety issues)
500 mg daily or twice daily (use higher dosage if severe infection)
Antibiotics to be added if suspected or conrmed MRSA  
infection (dual therapy with an IV antibiotic listed above)
Vancomycin
15 mg/kg to 20 mg/kg 3 times or twice daily IV, adjusted according to serum 
vancomycin concentration (a loading dose of 25 mg/kg to 30 mg/kg can be used in 
seriously ill people); maximum 2 g per dose
Teicoplanin
Initially 6 mg/kg twice daily for 3 doses, then 6 mg/kg daily
Linezolid (if vancomycin cannot be used; specialist advice only)
600 mg twice daily or IV
1Guided by microbiological results when available. 2Choice should be based on specialist microbiological advice and local resistance data.
Adapted from National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Pneumonia (hospital-acquired): antimicrobial prescribing. NICE Guideline [NG139], September 2019. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng139
Management
Aspiration pneumonia can usually be treated with amoxicillin and 
metronidazole. Further modification of antibiotics should be informed 
by clinical response and microbiological results. CA-MRSA is usu-
ally susceptible to a variety of oral non-β-lactam antibiotics, such 
as trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, tetracyclines and 
linezolid. Parenteral therapy with vancomycin or linezolid can also 
be considered. Fusobacterium necrophorum is highly suscepti-
ble to β-lactam antibiotics and to metronidazole, clindamycin and 
third-generation cephalosporins. Prolonged treatment for 4–6 weeks 
may be required in some patients with lung abscess. Established 
pulmonary actinomycosis requires 6–12 months' treatment with 
intravenous or oral penicillin, or with a tetracycline in penicillin-aller-
gic patients.
Physiotherapy is of great value, especially when suppuration is present 
in the lower lobes or when a large abscess cavity has formed. In most 
patients there is a good response to treatment, and although residual 
brosis and bronchiectasis are common sequelae, these seldom give 
rise to serious morbidity. Surgery should be contemplated if no improve-
ment occurs despite optimal medical therapy. Removal or treatment of 
any obstructing endobronchial lesion is essential.
Pneumonia in the immunocompromised patient
Patients immunocompromised by drugs or disease (particularly human 
immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection) are at increased risk of pulmonary 
infection and pneumonia is the most common cause of death in this group. 
The majority of infections are caused by the same pathogens that cause 
17.45  Clinical features of suppurative pneumonia
Symptoms
 Cough with large amounts of sputum, sometimes fetid and blood-stained
 Pleural pain common
 Sudden expectoration of copious amounts of foul sputum if abscess ruptures 
into a bronchus
Clinical signs
 High remittent pyrexia
 Profound systemic upset
 Digital clubbing may develop quickly (10–14 days)
 Consolidation on chest examination; signs of cavitation rarely found
 Pleural rub common
 Rapid deterioration in general health, with marked weight loss if not adequately treated

[[p564]]
518    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
pneumonia in immunocompetent individuals, but in patients with more 
profound immunosuppression less common organisms, or those nor-
mally considered to be of low virulence or non-pathogenic, may become 
‘opportunistic’ pathogens. Depending on the clinical context, clinicians 
should consider the possibility of Gram-negative bacteria, especially P. 
aeruginosa, viruses, fungi, mycobacteria, and less common organisms 
such as Nocardia spp. Infection is often due to more than one organism.
Clinical features
These typically include fever, cough and breathlessness but are inuenced 
by the degree of immunosuppression, and the presentation may be less 
specic in the more profoundly immunosuppressed. The onset of symp-
toms tends to be swift in those with a bacterial infection but more gradual 
in patients with opportunistic organisms such as Pneumocystis jirovecii and 
mycobacterial infections. In P. jirovecii pneumonia, symptoms of cough and 
breathlessness can be present several days or weeks before the onset of 
systemic symptoms or the appearance of radiographic abnormality. The 
clinical features of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis are dealt with on p. 525.
Investigations
The approach is informed by the clinical context and severity of the 
illness. Invasive investigations, such as bronchoscopy, BAL, trans-
bronchial biopsy or surgical lung biopsy, are often impractical, as many 
patients are too ill to undergo these safely; however, ‘induced sputum’ 
(p. 487) offers a relatively safe method of obtaining microbiological sam-
ples. HRCT can be helpful:
 focal unilateral airspace opacication favours bacterial infection, 
mycobacteria or Nocardia
 bilateral opacication favours P. jirovecii pneumonia, fungi, viruses 
and unusual bacteria, e.g. Nocardia
 cavitation may be seen with N. asteroides, mycobacteria and fungi
 the presence of a ‘halo sign’ (a zone of intermediate attenuation 
between the nodule and the lung parenchyma) may suggest asper-
gillosis or other invasive fungal infection
 pleural effusions suggest pyogenic bacterial infections and are 
uncommon in P. jirovecii pneumonia.
ß-1,3-D-glucan levels are characteristically elevated in P. jirovecii
pneumonia.
Management
In theory, treatment should be based on an established aetiological diagno-
sis; in practice, however, the causative agent is frequently unknown. Factors 
that favour a bacterial aetiology include neutropenia, rapid onset and dete-
rioration. In these circumstances, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy should 
be commenced immediately, e.g. a third-generation cephalosporin, or a 
quinolone, plus an antistaphylococcal antibiotic, or an antipseudomonal 
penicillin plus an aminoglycoside. Thereafter, treatment may be tail-
ored according to the results of investigations and the clinical response. 
Depending on the clinical context and response to treatment, antifungal or 
antiviral therapies may be added. The management of P. jirovecii infection is 
detailed on page 361 and that of invasive aspergillosis on page 527.
Tuberculosis
Epidemiology
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by infection with Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis (MTB), which is part of a complex of organisms including M. bovis
(reservoir cattle) and M. africanum (reservoir humans). The resurgence in 
TB in the UK observed over the latter part of the 20th century has been 
reversed. Following a 44% drop between 2011 and 2018, the number 
of new cases of TB in England has dropped to the lowest levels since 
records began in 1960. Nevertheless, its impact on world health remains 
signicant. An estimated 10 million new cases were recorded in 2018, 
with the majority of these presenting in the world’s poorest nations, which 
struggle to cover the costs associated with management and control 
programmes (Fig. 17.34). In the same year, 1.5 million men, women and 
children died of TB, compared to 1 million of HIV/AIDS, making TB the 
worldwide leading cause of death from a single infectious agent that year.
Pathology and pathogenesis
M. tuberculosis is spread by the inhalation of aerosolised droplet nuclei 
from other infected patients. Once inhaled, the organisms lodge in the 
alveoli and initiate the recruitment of macrophages and lymphocytes. 
Macrophages undergo transformation into epithelioid and Langhans 
cells, which aggregate with the lymphocytes to form the classical tuber-
culous granuloma (Fig. 17.35). Numerous granulomas aggregate to form 
a primary lesion or ‘Ghon focus’ (a pale yellow, caseous nodule, usually a 
few millimetres to 1–2 cm in diameter), which is characteristically situated 
in the periphery of the lung. Spread of organisms to the hilar lymph nodes 
is followed by a similar pathological reaction, and the combination of the 
primary lesion and regional lymph nodes is referred to as the ‘primary 
complex of Ranke’. Reparative processes encase the primary complex in 
a brous capsule, limiting the spread of bacilli. If no further complications 
ensue, this lesion eventually calcies and is clearly seen on a chest X-ray. 
Lymphatic or haematogenous spread may occur before containment is 
established, however, seeding secondary foci in other organs, including 
lymph nodes, serous membranes, meninges, bones, liver, kidneys and 
lungs, which may lie dormant for years. The only clue that infection is 
0–9.9
10–99
100–199
200–299
300–499
500
No data
Not applicable
Fig. 17.34 Worldwide incidence of tuberculosis (2019). Estimated new cases (all 
forms) per 100 000 population. From Global tuberculosis report 2020. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2020.
Fig. 17.35 Tuberculous granuloma. Normal lung tissue is lost and replaced by 
a mass of brous tissue with granulomatous inammation characterised by large 
numbers of macrophages and multinucleate giant cells (white arrow). The central 
area of this focus shows caseous degeneration (black arrow). Courtesy of Dr William 
Wallace, Department of Pathology, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.

[[p565]]
Infections of the respiratory system    519
17
present may be the appearance of a cell-mediated, delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity reaction to tuberculin, demonstrated by tuberculin skin testing 
or an interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA): so-called latent TB infec-
tion (LTBI). If these controlling processes fail, primary progressive disease 
ensues (Fig. 17.36). The estimated lifetime risk of developing active dis-
ease after infection is 10%, with roughly half of this risk occurring in the 
rst 2 years after infection. Factors predisposing to TB are summarised 
in Box 17.46 and the natural history of infection with TB is summarised 
in Box 17.47
Clinical features: pulmonary disease
Primary pulmonary TB
Primary TB refers to the infection of a previously uninfected (tubercu-
lin-negative) individual. A few patients develop a self-limiting febrile illness 
but clinical disease occurs only if there is a hypersensitivity reaction or 
progressive infection (Box 17.48). Progressive primary disease may 
appear during the course of the initial illness or after a latent period of 
weeks or months.
Miliary TB
Blood-borne dissemination gives rise to miliary TB, which may present 
acutely but more frequently is characterised by 2–3 weeks of fever, night 
sweats, anorexia, weight loss and a dry cough. Hepatosplenomegaly 
may develop and the presence of a headache may indicate coexistent 
tuberculous meningitis. Auscultation of the chest is frequently normal but 
in more advanced disease widespread crackles are evident. Fundoscopy 
may show choroidal tubercles. The classical appearances on chest X-ray 
are of ne 1–2 mm lesions (‘millet seed’) distributed throughout the lung 
elds, although occasionally the appearances are coarser. Anaemia and 
leucopenia reect bone marrow involvement.
Post-primary pulmonary TB
Post-primary disease refers to exogenous (‘new’ infection) or endoge-
nous (reactivation of a dormant primary lesion) infection in a person who 
has been sensitised by earlier exposure. It is most frequently pulmonary 
and characteristically occurs in the apex of an upper lobe, where the oxy-
gen tension favours survival of the strictly aerobic organism. The onset 
is usually insidious, developing slowly over several weeks. Systemic 
symptoms include fever, night sweats, malaise and loss of appetite and 
weight, and are accompanied by progressive pulmonary symptoms 
(Box 17.49). Radiological changes include ill-dened opacication in one 
or both of the upper lobes, and as progression occurs, consolidation, 
collapse and cavitation develop to varying degrees (Fig. 17.37). It is often 
difcult to distinguish active from quiescent disease on radiological crite-
ria alone but the presence of a miliary pattern or cavitation favours active 
disease. In extensive disease, collapse may be marked and results in 
signicant displacement of the trachea and mediastinum. Occasionally, 
a caseous lymph node may drain into an adjoining bronchus, leading to 
tuberculous pneumonia.
Clinical features: extrapulmonary disease
Extrapulmonary TB accounts for 20% of cases in those who are HIV-
negative but is more common in HIV-positive patients.
Lymphadenitis
Lymph nodes are the most common extrapulmonary site of disease. 
Cervical and mediastinal glands are affected most frequently, followed 
by axillary and inguinal, and more than one region may be involved. 
Disease may represent primary infection, spread from contiguous sites 
or reactivation. Supraclavicular lymphadenopathy is often the result of 
spread from mediastinal disease. The nodes are usually painless and ini-
tially mobile but become matted together with time. When caseation and 
liquefaction occur, the swelling becomes uctuant and may discharge 
through the skin with the formation of a ‘collar-stud’ abscess and sinus 
formation. Approximately half of cases fail to show any constitutional 
features, such as fevers or night sweats. During or after treatment, par-
adoxical enlargement, development of new nodes and suppuration may 
all occur but without evidence of continued infection; surgical excision is 
1
2
4
3
Fig. 17.36 Primary pulmonary tuberculosis. (1) Spread from the primary focus 
to hilar and mediastinal lymph glands to form the ‘primary complex’, which heals 
spontaneously in most cases. (2) Direct extension of the primary focus – progressive 
pulmonary tuberculosis. (3) Spread to the pleura – tuberculous pleurisy and pleural 
effusion. (4) Blood-borne spread: few bacilli – pulmonary, skeletal, renal, genitourinary 
infection, often months or years later; massive spread – miliary pulmonary 
tuberculosis and meningitis.
17.47  Natural history of untreated primary tuberculosis
Time from infection
Manifestations
3–8 weeks
Primary complex, positive tuberculin skin test
3–6 months
Meningeal, miliary and pleural disease
Up to 3 years
Gastrointestinal, bone and joint, and lymph node 
disease
Around 8 years
Renal tract disease
From 3 years onwards
Post-primary disease due to reactivation or 
re-infection
Adapted from Davies PDO, ed. Clinical tuberculosis. London: Hodder Arnold; 1998.
17.46  Factors increasing the risk of tuberculosis
Patient-related
 Age (children > young adults < old age)
 First-generation immigrants from high-prevalence countries
 Close contacts of patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB
 Overcrowding (prisons, collective dormitories); homelessness (shelters and 
hostels)
 Chest X-ray evidence of primary TB infection
 Primary infection <1 year previously
 Smoking: cigarettes, bidis (Indian cigarettes made of tobacco wrapped in 
tembhurni leaves) and cannabis
Associated diseases
 Immunosuppression: HIV (reduced by ART), anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
and other biologic therapies, high-dose glucocorticoids, cytotoxic agents
 Malignancy (especially lymphoma and leukaemia)
 Diabetes mellitus
 Chronic kidney disease
 Silicosis
 Gastrointestinal disease associated with malnutrition (gastrectomy, jejuno-ileal 
bypass, cancer of the pancreas, malabsorption)
 Deciency of vitamin D or A
 Recent measles in children

[[p566]]
rarely necessary. In non-immigrant children in the UK, most mycobact-
erial lymphadenitis is caused by opportunistic mycobacteria, especially 
of the M. avium complex.
Pleural tuberculosis
Tuberculous pleural effusions are common. Patients present with pleur-
itic chest pain in addition to the classic clinical features of pulmonary 
TB. Effusions are caused by both primary and reactivated TB, but can 
also result from a delayed hypersensitivity reaction to TB in the pleural 
cavity. Pseudochylothorax, due to compression from TB lymphadenitis, 
and empyema occur infrequently. Pleural uid analysis demonstrates a 
lymphocytic exudate, with low glucose and pH. Pleural uid smear and 
culture have sensitivities of only 10% and 25% respectively, however 
pleural tissue culture increases this to 80%. Raised adenosine deami-
nase has high sensitivity but low specicity as it occurs in malignancy 
and empyema also. Effusion volume uctuates during treatment, even 
when successful. Therapeutic drainage is performed when necessary 
and steroids are sometimes used as an alternative.
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis
TB can affect any part of the bowel and patients may present with a 
wide range of symptoms and signs (Fig. 17.38). Upper gastrointestinal 
tract involvement is rare and is usually an unexpected histological nding 
in an endoscopic or laparotomy specimen. Ileocaecal disease accounts 
for approximately half of abdominal TB cases. Fever, night sweats, anor-
exia and weight loss are usually prominent and a right iliac fossa mass 
may be palpable. Up to 30% of cases present with an acute abdomen. 
Ultrasound or CT may reveal thickened bowel wall, abdominal lymphad-
enopathy, mesenteric thickening or ascites. Diagnosis rests on obtaining 
histology by either colonoscopy or mini-laparotomy. The main differen-
tial diagnosis is Crohn’s disease. Tuberculous peritonitis is characterised 
by abdominal distension, pain and constitutional symptoms. The ascitic 
uid is exudative and cellular, with a predominance of lymphocytes. 
Laparoscopy reveals multiple white ‘tubercles’ over the peritoneal and 
omental surfaces. Low-grade hepatic dysfunction is common in miliary 
disease, in which biopsy reveals granulomas.
Pericardial disease
Disease occurs in two forms: pericardial effusion and constrictive pericar-
ditis (see Fig. 17.38 and p. 476). Fever and night sweats are rarely prom-
inent and the presentation is usually insidious, with breathlessness and 
abdominal swelling. Coexistent pulmonary disease is very rare, with the 
exception of pleural effusion. Pulsus paradoxus, a raised JVP, hepatomeg-
aly, prominent ascites and peripheral oedema are common to both types. 
Pericardial effusion is associated with increased pericardial dullness and a 
globular enlarged heart on chest X-ray, and pericardial calcication occurs 
in around 25% of cases. Constriction is associated with an early third heart 
sound and, occasionally, atrial brillation. Diagnosis is based on clinical, 
radiological and echocardiographic ndings. The effusion is frequently 
blood-stained. Open pericardial biopsy can be performed where there is 
diagnostic uncertainty. The addition of glucocorticoids to antituberculous 
chemotherapy has been shown to be benecial in constrictive pericarditis.
Central nervous system disease
Meningeal disease represents the most important form of central nerv-
ous system (CNS) TB. Unrecognised and untreated, it is rapidly fatal. Even 
when appropriate treatment is prescribed, mortality rates of 30% have 
been reported, while survivors may be left with neurological sequelae. 
Clinical features, investigations and management are described on p.1173.
Bone and joint disease
The spine is the most common site for bony TB (Pott disease), which 
usually presents with chronic back pain and typically involves the lower 
thoracic and lumbar spine (see Fig. 17.38). The infection starts as a dis-
citis and then spreads along the spinal ligaments to involve the adjacent 
anterior vertebral bodies, causing angulation of the vertebrae with subse-
quent kyphosis. Paravertebral and psoas abscess formation is common 
and the disease may present with a large (cold) abscess in the inguinal 
region. CT or MRI is valuable in gauging the extent of disease, the degree 
of cord compression, and the site for needle biopsy or open exploration, 
17.48  Features of primary tuberculosis
Infection (4–8 weeks)
 Inuenza-like illness
 Skin test conversion
 Primary complex
Disease
 Lymphadenopathy: hilar (often 
unilateral), paratracheal or 
mediastinal
 Collapse (especially right middle 
lobe)
 Consolidation (especially right 
middle lobe)
 Obstructive emphysema
 Cavitation (rare)
 Pleural effusion
 Miliary disease
 Meningitis
 Pericarditis
Hypersensitivity
 Erythema nodosum
 Phlyctenular conjunctivitis
 Dactylitis
‘Miliary’ diffuse shadowing
Differential diagnosis
 Sarcoidosis
 Malignancy
 Pneumoconiosis
 Infection (e.g. histoplasmosis,
   melioidosis)
 Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (TPE)
Pleural effusion/empyema
Differential diagnosis
 Bacterial pneumonia
 Pulmonary infarction
 Carcinoma 
 Connective tissue disorder
Cavitation
Differential diagnosis
 Pneumonia/lung abscess
 Lung cancer
 Pulmonary infarct
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
   (Wegener’s granulomatosis)
 Progressive massive fibrosis
Consolidation/collapse
Differential diagnosis
 Pneumonia
 Bronchial carcinoma
 Pulmonary infarct
Fig. 17.37 Chest X-ray: major manifestations and differential diagnosis of 
pulmonary tuberculosis. Less common manifestations include pneumothorax, acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), cor pulmonale and localised emphysema.
 Chronic cough, often with 
haemoptysis
 Pyrexia of unknown origin
 Unresolved pneumonia
 Exudative pleural effusion
 Asymptomatic (diagnosis on chest 
X-ray)
 Weight loss, general debility
 Spontaneous pneumothorax
520    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
17.49 Clinical presentations of pulmonary tuberculosis

[[p567]]
Infections of the respiratory system    521
17
if required. The major differential diagnosis is malignancy, which tends to 
affect the vertebral body and leave the disc intact. Important complica-
tions include spinal instability or cord compression.
TB can affect any joint but most frequently involves the hip or knee. 
Presentation is usually insidious, with pain and swelling; fever and night 
sweats are uncommon. Radiological changes are often non-specic but, 
as disease progresses, reduction in joint space and erosions appear. 
Poncet arthropathy is an immunologically mediated polyarthritis that usu-
ally resolves within 2 months of starting treatment.
Genitourinary disease
Fever and night sweats are rare with renal tract TB and patients are often 
only mildly symptomatic for many years. Haematuria, frequency and 
dysuria are often present, with sterile pyuria found on urine microscopy 
and culture. In women, infertility from endometritis, or pelvic pain and 
swelling from salpingitis or a tubo-ovarian abscess occurs occasionally. 
In men, genitourinary TB may present as epididymitis or prostatitis.
Investigations
The presence of an otherwise unexplained cough for more than 3 weeks, 
particularly in regions where TB is prevalent, or typical chest X-ray or 
CT changes (Fig. 17.39) should prompt further investigation (Box 17.50). 
Direct microscopy of a sputum smear remains the most important rst 
step. At least two sputum samples (including at least one obtained in the 
early morning) from a spontaneously produced deep cough should be 
obtained. Induced sputum may be used in those unable to expectorate. 
In selected cases, bronchoscopy and lavage or aspiration of a lymph 
node by EBUS may be used.
Light-emitting diode uorescent microscopy with auramine staining 
(Fig. 17.40) is increasingly replacing the more traditional standard light 
microscopy and Ziehl–Neelsen stain. A positive smear is sufcient for 
the presumptive diagnosis of TB but denitive diagnosis requires either 
culture or the detection of M. tuberculosis DNA. The probability of visual-
ising acid-fast bacilli is proportional to the bacillary burden in the sputum. 
Smear-negative sputum should also be cultured, as only 10–100 viable 
organisms are required for sputum to be culture-positive. A diagnosis of 
smear-negative TB may be considered in advance of culture if the chest 
X-ray appearances are typical of TB.
The slow growth of MTB on solid (typically between 4 and 6 weeks) 
and liquid (typically around 2 weeks) culture media has prompted the 
development of rapid NAATs. For example, the Cepheid GeneXpert 
MTB/RIF has the capacity to detect MTB (and certain molecular markers 
of rifampicin resistance) in less than 2 hours. However, while it is specic 
to MTB, it is not sufciently sensitive to have replaced culture.
Exudative ascites
Mesenteric adenitis
Intestinal obstruction
Cranial nerve palsy
Lymph node enlargement
Pericardial effusion
Constrictive pericarditis
Monoarthritis
Haematuria/dysuria
Infertility in women
Epididymitis
Anorectal ulceration
Headache, vomiting,
seizures, delirium
Lymphocytic meningitis
Hydrocephalus
Space-occupying lesion
(tuberculoma)
Kyphosis
Cord compression
Abdominal mass
Psoas abscess
General observation
 
Weight loss
 
Fever
 
Night sweats
Chronic back pain
Fig. 17.38 Systemic presentations of extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
Fig. 17.39 Typical changes of tuberculosis. The chest X-ray shows bilateral 
upper lobe airspace shadowing with cavitation.

[[p568]]
522    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
The diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB can be more challenging. There 
are generally fewer organisms (particularly in meningeal or pleural uid), 
so culture, histopathological examination of tissue and/or NAAT may 
be required. Stimulation of T cells by mycobacterial antigens leads to 
increased levels of adenosine deaminase (ADA) in pleural, pericardial, 
cerebrospinal and ascitic uid, so measuring ADA in these uids may 
support a diagnosis of TB, but should not replace culture. IGRA and 
tuberculin skin tests have low sensitivity and specicity, are not routinely 
used in the diagnosis of active TB infection.
Drug sensitivity testing
The rapid detection of drug resistance is central both to the management 
of the individual with TB and to control of the disease in the population. 
The gold standard remains culture. Molecular tests are increasingly used 
to provide rapid drug sensitivity testing (DST), particularly with regard to the 
detection of rifampicin resistance, which is important because rifampicin 
forms the cornerstone of 6-month chemotherapy. Rapid identication of 
rifampicin resistance is provided by Xpert MTB/RIF. Line probe assays 
(LPAs) use PCR and reverse hybridisation to detect genetic sequences 
linked to resistance to both rifampicin and isoniazid, and increasingly to 
resistance to pyrazinamide, ethambutol and second-line agents.
Whole genome sequencing is now being used routinely in resource-
rich settings both for identication of mycobacterium and to predict anti-
microbial susceptibility, at least to rst-line agents.
Management
Chemotherapy
The treatment of TB is based on the principle of an initial inten-
sive phase to reduce the bacterial population rapidly, followed by a 
continuation phase to destroy any remaining bacteria (Box 17.51). 
Standard treatment involves 6 months' treatment with isoniazid and 
rifampicin, supplemented in the first 2 months with pyrazinamide and 
ethambutol. Fixed-dose tablets combining two, three or four drugs 
are preferred. Unless there is reason to suspect drug resistance or 
non-tuberculous mycobacterium, treatment should be commenced 
immediately in any patient who is smear-positive, and in those who 
are smear-negative but with typical chest X-ray changes and no 
response to standard antibiotics. Where drug resistance is not anti-
cipated, patients can be assumed to be non-infectious after 2 weeks 
of appropriate therapy.
17.51  Treatment of new tuberculosis (TB) patients (World Health Organization recommendations)
Intensive phase
Continuation phase
Comments
Standard regimen
2 months of HRZE
4 months of HR
2 months of HRZE
4 months of HRE
Applies only in countries with high levels of isoniazid resistance in new TB patients, and where isoniazid drug 
susceptibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are unavailable) before the continuation phase 
begins
Dosing frequency
Daily*
Daily
Optimal
Daily*
3 times/week
No longer recommended but sometimes used in practice for patients receiving directly observed therapy
3 times/week
3 times/week
No longer recommended but sometimes used in practice for patients receiving directly observed therapy, 
provided the patient is not living with HIV or living in an HIV-prevalent setting
*Daily (rather than 3 times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may help to prevent acquired drug resistance in TB patients starting treatment with isoniazid resistance. (H = isoniazid; R = rifampicin;  
Z = pyrazinamide; E = ethambutol; HIV = human immunodeciency virus)
Adapted from World Health Organization. Guidelines for treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis and patient care, 2017 update.
Fig. 17.40 Auramine-stained sputum sample. Mycobacterium tuberculosis and 
other mycobacteria retain the auramine stain after washing with acid and alcohol and 
are therefore seen as uorescent organisms against a dark background. Courtesy of 
Richard Hobson.
17.50  Diagnosis of tuberculosis
Specimens required
Pulmonary
 Sputum* (induced with nebulised hypertonic saline if patient not expectorating)
 Bronchoscopy with washings or BAL
 Gastric washing* (mainly used for children)
Extrapulmonary
 Fluid examination (cerebrospinal, ascitic, pleural, pericardial, joint): yield 
classically very low
 Tissue biopsy (from affected site or enlarged lymph node): bone marrow/liver 
may be diagnostic in disseminated disease
Diagnostic tests
 Stain
Auramine uorescence
Ziehl–Neelsen
 Nucleic acid amplication
 Culture
Solid media (Löwenstein–Jensen, Middlebrook)
Liquid media (e.g. MGIT)
 Pleural uid: adenosine deaminase
 Response to empirical antituberculous drugs
Baseline blood tests
 Full blood count, C-reactive protein, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests
*Preferably three early morning samples. 
(BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage; MGIT = mycobacteria growth indicator tube)

[[p569]]
Infections of the respiratory system    523
17
Six months of therapy is appropriate for all patients with pulmonary 
TB and most cases of extrapulmonary TB. However, 12 months of 
therapy is recommended for CNS TB. Most patients can be treated 
at home. Admission to a hospital unit with appropriate isolation 
facilities should be considered where there is uncertainty about the 
diagnosis, intolerance of medication, questionable treatment adher-
ence, adverse social conditions or a significant risk of multidrug-
resistant TB.
Adverse drug reactions occur in about 10% of patients (Box 17.52). 
Patients treated with rifampicin should be advised that their urine, 
tears and other secretions will develop a bright, orange/red coloration. 
Rifampicin is a cytochrome P450 inducer, it accelerates the metab-
olism of several drugs, thereby reducing their effective dose. These 
medications include steroids, oral hypoglycaemics, antiretrovirals, 
warfarin, opiates (including methadone) and contraceptives. Women 
taking oral or depot hormonal contraceptives must be warned that 
their efcacy, and that of emergency hormonal contraception, will be 
reduced and alternative contraception may be necessary. Standard 
TB medication is safe during pregnancy, however pregnant women 
experience an increased rate of side-effects, so conception is not 
advised. Pyridoxine should be prescribed in pregnant women and 
malnourished patients to reduce the risk of peripheral neuropathy 
with isoniazid. Ethambutol should be used with caution in severe 
renal impairment, with appropriate dose reduction and monitoring of 
drug levels. Visual acuity and colour vision should be assessed before 
commencing ethambutol.
Baseline liver function and regular monitoring are important for patients 
treated with standard therapy. Rifampicin may cause asymptomatic 
hyperbilirubinaemia but, along with isoniazid and pyrazinamide, may 
also cause hepatitis. Mild asymptomatic increases in transaminases are 
common but signicant hepatotoxicity occurs in only 2%–5%. It is impor-
tant to stop treatment and allow any symptoms to subside and the liver 
function tests to recover before commencing a stepwise re-introduction 
of the individual drugs. Less hepatotoxic regimens may be considered, 
including streptomycin, ethambutol and uoroquinolones.
Glucocorticoids reduce inammation and limit tissue damage; they 
are currently recommended when treating constrictive pericarditis or 
CNS disease, and in children with endobronchial disease. They may 
confer benet in TB of the ureter, pleural effusions and extensive pul-
monary disease, and can suppress hypersensitivity drug reactions. 
Embolization should be considered for treatment of massive haemop-
tysis. Surgery is required for patients with spinal TB causing spinal cord 
compression.
The effectiveness of therapy for pulmonary TB is assessed by fur-
ther sputum analysis at 2 months to ensure sputum culture conversion, 
if the patient is still producing sputum. If sputum is culture-positive at 
2 months, repeat sputum should be obtained at month 3. If this sam-
ple is culture-positive then DST should be repeated. Treatment failure is 
dened as a positive sputum culture at 5 months or any patient with a 
newly converted multidrug-resistant strain, regardless of whether they 
are smear-positive or negative. Extrapulmonary TB must be assessed 
clinically or radiographically, as appropriate.
Control and prevention
Active TB is preventable, particularly so in those with latent TB. 
Supporting the development of laboratory and health-care services to 
improve detection and treatment of active and latent TB is an important 
component of this goal.
Latent TB infection (LTBI)
The majority of individuals exposed to MTB harbour the bacteria, which 
remain dormant. They do not develop any signs of active disease and 
are non-infectious. They are, however, at risk of developing active TB 
disease and becoming infectious. The lifetime risk of TB disease for a 
person with documented LTBI is estimated at 5%–15%, with the majority 
of cases occurring within the rst 5 years after initial infection.
LTBI may be identied by the presence of immune responses to M. 
tuberculosis antigens. Contact tracing is a legal requirement in many 
countries. It has the potential to identify the probable index case, other 
cases infected by the same index patient (with or without evidence 
of disease), and close contacts who should receive BCG vaccination 
(see below) or chemotherapy. Approximately 10%–20% of close con-
tacts of patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB and 2%–5% of 
those with smear-negative, culture-positive disease have evidence of 
TB infection.
Cases are commonly identied using the tuberculin skin test (TST; 
Fig. 17.41) or an IGRA (Fig. 17.42). An otherwise asymptomatic contact 
who tests positive but has a normal chest X-ray may be treated with 
chemoprophylaxis to prevent infection from progressing to clinical dis-
ease. Chemoprophylaxis should be offered to adults up to the age of 65 
(although age-specic cut-off varies by country). It should also be con-
sidered for HIV-infected close contacts of a patient with smear-positive 
disease. A course of rifampicin and isoniazid for 3 months or isoniazid for 
6 months is effective.
Tuberculin skin testing may be associated with false-positive reactions 
in those who have had a BCG vaccination and in areas where exposure 
to non-tuberculous mycobacteria is high. The skin tests may also be 
falsely negative in the setting of immunosuppression or overwhelming 
TB infection.
IGRAs detect the release of interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) from sensi-
tised T cells in response to antigens, such as early secretory antigenic 
target (ESAT)-6 or culture ltrate protein (CFP)-10, which are encoded 
by genes specic to M. tuberculosis and are not shared with BCG or 
opportunistic mycobacteria (see Fig. 17.42). IGRAs are more specic 
than skin testing and logistically more convenient, as they require a 
single blood test rather than two clinic visits. In the UK, IGRA repre-
sents the rst choice investigation, except in children, for whom TST is 
recommended.
17.52  Main adverse reactions of rst-line antituberculous drugs
Isoniazid
Rifampicin
Pyrazinamide
Ethambutol
Mode of action
Cell wall synthesis
DNA transcription
Unknown
Cell wall synthesis
Major adverse reaction
Peripheral neuropathy1
Hepatitis2
Rash
Febrile reactions
Hepatitis
Rash
Gastrointestinal disturbance
Hepatitis
Gastrointestinal disturbance
Hyperuricaemia
Retrobulbar neuritis3
Arthralgia
Less common adverse 
reaction
Lupoid reactions
Seizures
Psychoses
Interstitial nephritis
Thrombocytopenia
Haemolytic anaemia
Rash
Photosensitisation
Gout
Peripheral neuropathy
Rash
1The risk may be reduced by prescribing pyridoxine. 2More common in patients with a slow acetylator status and in alcoholics. 3Reduced visual acuity and colour vision may be reported with higher  
doses and are usually reversible.

[[p570]]
524    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Directly observed therapy
Poor adherence to therapy is a major factor in prolonged illness, risk of 
relapse and the emergence of drug resistance. Directly observed ther-
apy (DOT) involves the supervised administration of therapy three times 
weekly to improve adherence. DOT has become an important control 
strategy in resource-poor nations. In the UK, it is currently recommended 
for patients with previous TB, multidrug-resistant TB, poor adherence 
to treatment, denial of the diagnosis, those with a history of homeless-
ness, alcohol or drug misuse, those currently or recently in prison, and 
those with major psychiatric, memory or cognitive disorders. DOT can 
be replaced by video-observed consultation (VOT) if appropriate facilities 
are available.
TB and HIV/AIDS
The close links between HIV and TB, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, 
and the potential for both diseases to overwhelm health-care funding 
in resource-poor nations, have been recognised, with the promotion of 
programmes that link detection and treatment of TB with detection and 
treatment of HIV. It is recommended that all patients with TB should be 
tested for HIV infection, in addition to hepatits B and C. Mortality is high 
and TB is a leading cause of death in HIV-positive patients. Full discus-
sion of its presentation and management with antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
is given in Chapter 14.
ART should be initiated for all HIV-positive patients with TB. ART is 
usually initiated after 2 weeks of tuberculous therapy, but in patients with 
a CD4 count under 50 cells/µL or CNS TB is often delayed until 8 weeks 
of TB therapy has been completed to reduced the risk of IRIS/paradox-
ical reaction. TB-associated immune reconstitution inammatory syn-
drome (TB-IRIS) is a paradoxical increase in pre-existing, or development 
of new, TB signs or symptoms, due to ART reviving the immune system. 
TB-IRIS may be self-limiting, but in severe cases steroids are used to 
reduce symptoms, and patients are advised to continue TB chemother-
apy and ART. Choice of initial ART or change in ART should reect the 
need to avoid drug interactions.
Drug-resistant TB
Drug-resistant TB is dened by the presence of resistance to any rst-line 
agent. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is dened by resistance 
to at least rifampicin and isoniazid, with or without other drug resistance. 
Globally, an estimated 3.5% of new TB cases and 18% of previously 
treated cases have MDR-TB. In 2017, an estimated 230 000 people died 
of MDR-TB. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) is dened 
as resistance to at least rifampicin and isoniazid, in addition to any 
quinolone and at least one injectable second-line agent. An estimated 
8.5% of people with MDR-TB have XDR-TB. The prevalence of MDR-TB 
is rising, particularly in post-Soviet states, Central Asia and South Africa. 
It is more common in individuals with a prior history of TB, particularly if 
treatment has been inadequate. Box 17.53 lists the factors contributing 
to the emergence of drug-resistant TB. Diagnosis is challenging, espe-
cially in resource-poor settings, and although cure is possible, it requires 
prolonged treatment with less effective, more toxic and more expensive 
second-line therapies. These include injectable drugs (aminoglycosides), 
uoroquinolones and various other antibiotics and TB-specic agents 
(see p. 315). The mortality rate from tuberculosis increases with the level 
of drug resistance.
Vaccines
BCG (bacille Calmette–Guérin), a live attenuated vaccine derived from 
M. bovis, is the most established TB vaccine. It is administered by intra-
dermal injection and is highly immunogenic. BCG appears to be effective 
in preventing disseminated disease, including tuberculous meningitis, in 
children, but its efcacy in adults is inconsistent and new vaccines are 
urgently needed. Current vaccination policies vary worldwide accord-
ing to incidence and health-care resources, but usually target children 
and other high-risk individuals. BCG is very safe, with the occasional 
Incubate in
the presence
of antigens
specific to MTB
Incubate in
the presence
of antigens
specific to MTB
Purified
T lymphocytes
IFN-γ
released
IFN-γ binds to
antibody on base
of ELISPOT wells
Spots counted
A
Whole
blood
IFN-γ
released
Supernatant
removed and
IFN-γ measured
by ELISA
B
Fig. 17.42 The principles of interferon-gamma release assays (IGRAs).
(QuantiFERON–TB Gold test) is incubated in the presence of antigens specic to 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). The release of interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) by 
the cells is measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). (ELISPOT = 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot assay)
A
B
Fig. 17.41 The tuberculin skin test. 
of tuberculin puried protein derivative (PPD) on the inner surface of the forearm is 
measured across the forearm and is positive when ≥ 5 mm.

[[p571]]
Infections of the respiratory system    525
17
complication of local abscess formation. It should not be administered to 
those who are immunocompromised (e.g. by HIV) or pregnant.
Prognosis
Following successful completion of chemotherapy, cure should be antici-
pated in the majority of patients, though complications such as lung scar-
ring and bronchiectasis are not uncommon (Box 17.54). There is a small 
(<5%) and unavoidable risk of relapse. Most relapses occur within 5 months 
and usually have the same drug susceptibility. In the absence of treatment, 
a patient with smear-positive TB will remain infectious for an average of 
2 years; in 1 year, 25% of untreated cases will die. Death is more likely in 
those who are smear-positive and those who smoke. A few patients die 
unexpectedly soon after commencing therapy and it is possible that some 
have subclinical hypoadrenalism that is unmasked by a rifampicin-induced 
increase in glucocorticoid metabolism. HIV-positive patients have higher 
mortality rates and a modestly increased risk of relapse.
Non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection
Other species of environmental mycobacteria (termed ‘non-tuberculous’) 
may cause human disease (Box 17.55). The sites commonly involved are 
the lungs, lymph nodes, skin and soft tissues. The most widely recog-
nised of these mycobacteria, M. avium complex (MAC), is well described 
in severe HIV disease (CD4 count <50 cells/µL). However, several oth-
ers (including MAC) colonise and/or infect apparently immunocompe-
tent patients with chronic lung diseases such as COPD, bronchiectasis, 
pneumoconiosis, old TB, or cystic brosis. The clinical presentation varies 
from a relatively indolent course in some to an aggressive course charac-
terised by cavitatory or nodular disease in others. Radiological appear-
ances may be similar to classical TB, but in patients with bronchiectasis, 
opportunistic infection may present with lower-zone nodules. The most 
commonly reported organisms include M. kansasii, M. malmoense, 
M. xenopi and M. abscessus but geographical variation is marked. M. 
abscessus and M. fortuitum grow rapidly but the majority of others grow 
slowly. More rapid diagnostic systems are under development, includ-
ing DNA probes, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), PCR 
restriction enzyme analysis (PRA) and 16 S rRNA gene sequence anal-
ysis. Drug sensitivity testing is often unhelpful in predicting treatment 
response, with the exception of macrolide susceptibility for MAC and 
rifampicin sensitivity for M. kansasii. In the UK, these organisms are not 
notiable to local public health departments as they are not normally 
communicable; patient-to-patient transmission of M. abscessus in cystic 
brosis is a key exception.
Respiratory diseases caused by fungi
The majority of fungi encountered by humans are harmless saprophytes 
but in certain circumstances (Box 17.56) some species may cause dis-
ease by infecting human tissue, promoting damaging allergic reactions 
or producing toxins. ‘Mycosis’ is the term applied to disease caused by 
fungal infection. The conditions associated with Aspergillus species are 
listed in Box 17.57
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) occurs as a result of a 
hypersensitivity reaction to germinating fungal spores in the airway wall. 
The condition may complicate the course of asthma and cystic brosis, 
and is a recognised cause of pulmonary eosinophilia. The prevalence 
of ABPA is approximately 1%–2% in asthma and 5%–10% in patients 
with CF. A variety of human leucocyte antigens (HLAs) convey both an 
increased and a decreased risk of developing the condition, suggesting 
that genetic susceptibility is important.
Clinical features
Clinical features depend on the stage of the disease. Common man-
ifestations in the early phases include fever, breathlessness, cough 
17.53  Factors contributing to the emergence of drug-resistant 
tuberculosis
 Drug shortages
 Poor-quality drugs
 Poor concordance with drugs
 Lack of appropriate supervision
 Transmission of drug-resistant strains
 Prior antituberculosis treatment
 Treatment failure (culture-positive at 5 months)
17.54  Complications of pulmonary tuberculosis
 Bronchiectasis
 Massive haemoptysis
 Cor pulmonale
 Fibrosis/emphysema
 Atypical mycobacterial infection
 Aspergilloma/chronic pulmonary 
aspergillosis
 Obstructive airways disease
 Bronchopleural stula
 Lung/pleural calcication and 
pleural thickening
Non-pulmonary complications
 Empyema necessitans
 Laryngitis
 Enteritis*
 Anorectal disease*
 Amyloidosis
 Poncet’s polyarthritis
*From swallowed sputum.
17.55  Site-specic opportunistic mycobacterial disease
Pulmonary
 M. xenopi
 M. kansasii
 M. malmoense
 MAC
 M. abscessus (in cystic brosis)
Lymph node
 MAC
 M. malmoense
 M. fortuitum
 M. chelonei
Soft tissue/skin
 M. leprae
 M. ulcerans (prevalent in Africa, 
northern Australia and South-east 
Asia)
 M. marinum
 M. fortuitum
 M. chelonae
Disseminated
 MAC (HIV-associated)
 M. haemophilum
 M. genavense
 M. chimera (cardiopulmonary 
bypass-associated)
 M. fortuitum
 M. chelonae
 BCG
(BCG = bacille Calmette–Guérin; MAC = Mycobacterium avium complex – M. scrofulaceum, 
M. intracellulare and M. avium)
17.56  Factors predisposing to pulmonary fungal disease
Systemic factors
 Haematological malignancy
 HIV
 Diabetes mellitus
 Chronic alcoholism
 Radiotherapy
 Glucocorticoids, cytotoxic 
chemotherapy, biologic therapies 
and other immunosuppressant 
medication
Local factors
 Tissue damage by suppuration or necrosis
 Alteration of normal bacterial ora by antibiotic therapy

[[p572]]
526    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
productive of bronchial casts and worsening of asthmatic symptoms. 
The appearance of radiographic inltrates may cause ABPA to be 
mistaken for pneumonia but the diagnosis may also be suggested by 
segmental or lobar collapse on chest X-rays of patients whose asthma 
symptoms are stable. Diagnostic features are shown in Box 17.58. If 
bronchiectasis develops, the symptoms and complications of that dis-
ease often overshadow those of asthma.
Management
ABPA is generally considered an indication for regular therapy with low-
dose oral glucocorticoids (prednisolone 7.5–10 mg/day) with the aim of 
suppressing the immunopathological responses and preventing pro-
gressive tissue damage. In some patients, itraconazole (400 mg/day) 
facilitates a reduction in oral glucocorticoids; a 4-month trial is usually 
recommended to assess its efcacy, but there needs to be considera-
tion for the interactions with inhaled glucocorticoids. The use of specic 
anti-IgE monoclonal antibodies is under consideration. Exacerbations, 
particularly when associated with new chest X-ray changes, should be 
treated promptly with prednisolone (40–60 mg/day) and physiotherapy. 
If persistent lobar collapse occurs, bronchoscopy (usually under gen-
eral anaesthetic) should be performed to remove impacted mucus and 
ensure prompt re-ination.
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis
The term chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA) encompasses simple 
aspergilloma, chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis, chronic brosing 
pulmonary aspergillosis, Aspergillus nodule and semi-invasive aspergil-
losis. They are uncommon conditions and challenging to diagnose and 
treat.
Simple aspergilloma
Cavities left by diseases such as TB or by damaged bronchi provide 
favourable conditions in which inhaled Aspergillus may lodge and germi-
nate. At the earliest stage, CT scanning may identify an irregular mucosal 
wall and, as fungal growth progresses, this nally collapses into the cav-
ity, forming a fungal ball that may be identied on imaging (Fig. 17.43).
Simple aspergillomas are often asymptomatic. They can, however, 
give rise to a variety of non-specic symptoms, such as lethargy and 
weight loss, and may cause recurrent haemoptysis, which may be 
life-threatening.
The typical radiological picture is invariably accompanied by elevated 
serum IgG/precipitins to A. fumigatus. Sputum microscopy typically 
demonstrates scanty hyphal fragments and is usually positive on culture. 
Less than half exhibit skin hypersensitivity to extracts of A. fumigatus. 
Rarely, other lamentous fungi can cause intracavity mycetoma and are 
identied by culture.
Asymptomatic cases do not require treatment but haemoptysis should 
be controlled by surgery. Tranexamic acid or bronchial artery emboli-
sation may provide a bridge to surgery or palliate haemoptysis when 
surgery is not possible. Antifungal agents are usually not benecal due 
to poor penetration into the mycetoma, and generally surgical resection 
is the treatment of choice. Antifungals can be trialled in those patients 
with multiple mycetomas or who are not t enough for surgical resection. 
Instillation of antifungal agents, such as amphotericin B, via a catheter 
placed into the cavity has been reported but is rarely used in the UK.
Chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis and chronic 
brosing pulmonary aspergillosis
The features of chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis (CCPA) include 
cough (with or without haemoptysis), weight loss, anorexia and fatigue 
over months or years, with associated fever, night sweats and elevated 
inammatory markers. Radiological features include thick-walled cavi-
ties (predominantly apical), pulmonary inltrates and pleural thickening 
(Fig. 17.44). Once again, diagnosis rests on a combination of radiological 
examination, histopathology, isolation of fungus from the respiratory tract 
and detection of Aspergillus IgG in serum. Treatment usually involves 
prolonged courses of itraconazole or voriconazole. Cure is unusual and 
the most frequent pattern is chronic relapse/remission with gradual dete-
rioration. Surgical intervention is fraught with complications and should 
be avoided. Many patients are malnourished and require nutritional sup-
port. Glucocorticoids should be avoided. As CCPA progresses, brotic 
destruction of the lung results and the condition may then be referred to 
as chronic brosing pulmonary aspergillosis (CFPA).
Aspergillus nodule
The formation of one or more nodules is a less common manifestation 
of Aspergillus infection. In addition to lung cancer, the Aspergillus nodule 
may mimic TB but cavitation is unusual. Cryptococcosis or coccidioi-
domycosis should be considered in areas where these conditions are 
endemic.
Subacute invasive aspergillosis
Subacute invasive aspergillosis (SIA) was previously referred to as 
chronic necrotising or semi-invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. The clinical 
and radiological picture is similar to CCPA but lung biopsy demonstrates 
invasion of lung tissue by hyphae. The development of SIA is favoured 
by mild immunocompromise and should be suspected in patients with 
diabetes mellitus, malnutrition or alcoholism, or with advanced age and 
in prolonged glucocorticoid use. It is also seen in the presence of COPD, 
non-tuberculous mycobacteria or HIV infection. SIA should be treated in 
a similar manner to invasive pulmonary aspergillosis.
Fig. 17.43 Computed tomogram of aspergilloma in the left upper lobe. The 
rounded fungal ball is separated from the wall of the cavity by an ‘air crescent’ 
(arrow).
17.57  Classication of bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
 Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (asthmatic pulmonary eosinophilia)
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Aspergillus clavatus)
 Intracavitary aspergilloma
 Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
 Chronic and subacute pulmonary aspergillosis
17.58  Features of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
 Asthma (in the majority of cases)
 Proximal bronchiectasis (inner two-thirds of chest CT eld)
 Positive skin test to an extract of Aspergillus fumigatus
 Elevated total serum IgE >417 kU/L (1000 ng/mL)
 Elevated A. fumigatus-specic IgE or IgG
 Peripheral blood eosinophilia >0.5 ×109/L
 Presence or history of chest X-ray abnormalities
 Recovery of A. fumigatus from sputum
(CT = computed tomography; Ig = immunoglobulin)

[[p573]]
Infections of the respiratory system    527
17
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) is most commonly a complication 
of profound neutropenia caused by drugs (especially immunosuppres-
sive agents) and/or disease (Box 17.59).
Clinical features
Acute IPA causes a severe necrotising pneumonia and must be consid-
ered in any immunocompromised patient who develops fever, new res-
piratory symptoms (particularly pleural pain or haemoptysis) or a pleural 
rub. Invasion of pulmonary vessels causes thrombosis and infarction, 
and systemic spread may occur to the brain, heart, kidneys and others 
organs. Tracheobronchial aspergillosis involvement is characterised by 
the formation of fungal plaques and ulceration.
HRCT characteristically shows macronodules (usually ≥ 1 cm), which 
may be surrounded by a ‘halo’ of intermediate attenuation if captured 
early (<5 days). Culture or histopathological evidence of Aspergillus
in diseased tissues provides a denitive diagnosis but the majority of 
patients are too ill for invasive tests, such as bronchoscopy or lung 
biopsy. Other investigations include detection of Aspergillus galactoman-
nan in blood or BAL uid, β-1,3-D-glucan in blood and (where available) 
Aspergillus DNA in blood. Diagnosis is often inferred from a combination 
of features (Box 17.60).
Management and prevention
IPA carries a high mortality rate, especially if treatment is delayed. The 
drug of choice is voriconazole. Second-line agents include liposomal 
amphotericin, caspofungin, posaconazole and isavuconazole. Response 
may be assessed clinically, radiologically and serologically (by estima-
tion of the circulating galactomannan level). Recovery is dependent on 
immune reconstitution, which may be accompanied by enlargement 
and/or cavitation of pulmonary nodules.
Patients at risk of Aspergillus (and other fungal infections) should be 
managed in rooms with high-efciency particulate air (HEPA) lters and 
laminar airow. In areas with high spore counts, patients are advised 
to wear a mask if venturing outside their hospital room. Posaconazole 
(200 mg 3 times daily) or itraconazole (200 mg/day) may be prescribed 
for primary prophylaxis, and patients with a history of denite or proba-
ble IPA should be considered for secondary prophylaxis before further 
immunosuppression.
A
B
Fig. 17.44 Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. 
computed tomography reveals multiple small cavities and pleural thickening with an 
aspergilloma and surrounding air crescent (arrow) in one of the cavities. Courtesy of 
Professor David Denning, National Aspergillosis Centre, Manchester, UK.
17.59  Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis
 Neutropenia: risk related to duration and degree
 Solid organ or allogeneic stem cell transplantation
 Prolonged high-dose glucocorticoid therapy
 Leukaemia and other haematological malignancies
 Cytotoxic chemotherapy
 Advanced HIV disease
 Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Critically ill patients on intensive care units
 Chronic granulomatous disease
17.60  Criteria for the diagnosis of probable invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis
Host factors
 Recent history of neutropenia (<0.5 ×109/L for ≥10 days) temporally related to 
the onset of fungal disease
 Recipient of allogeneic stem cell transplant
 Prolonged use of glucocorticoids (average minimum 0.3 mg/kg daily 
prednisolone or equivalent) for >3 weeks (excludes allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis)
 Treatment with other recognised T-cell immune suppressants, such as 
ciclosporin, tumour necrosis factor alpha-blockers, specic monoclonal 
antibodies (e.g. alemtuzumab) or nucleoside analogues during the last 90 days
 Inherited severe immune deciency, e.g. chronic granulomatous disease or 
severe combined immune deciency
Clinical criteria1
 The presence of one of the following on CT:
Dense, well-circumscribed lesion(s) with or without a halo sign
Air crescent sign
Cavity
Tracheobronchitis
 Tracheobronchial ulceration, nodule, pseudomembrane, plaque or eschar seen 
on bronchoscopy
Mycological criteria
 Mould in sputum, BAL uid or bronchial brush, indicated by one of the following:
Recovery of fungal elements indicating a mould of Aspergillus
Recovery by culture of a mould of Aspergillus
 Indirect tests (detection of antigen or cell wall constituents)
Galactomannan antigen in plasma, serum or BAL uid
β-1,3-glucan detected in serum (detects other species of fungi, as well as 
Aspergillus)2
Adapted from De Pauw B, Walsh TJ, Donnelly JP, et al. Revised denitions of invasive fungal 
disease from the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study 
Group. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1813–1821.
1Must be consistent with the mycological ndings and temporally related to current episode. 2May 
be useful as a preliminary screening tool for invasive aspergillosis. (BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage)

[[p574]]
528    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Other fungal infections
Mucormycosis may present with a pulmonary syndrome that is clinically 
indistinguishable from acute IPA. Diagnosis relies on histopathology 
(where available) and/or culture of the organism from diseased tissue. 
The principles of treatment are as for other forms of mucormycosis: cor-
rection of predisposing factors, antifungal therapy with high-dose lipid 
amphotericin B or posaconazole (second line), and surgical débridement.
The endemic mycoses (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, blas-
tomycosis and emergomycosis) and cryptococcosis are discussed on 
pages 345–347. Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is described on page 
361.
Tumours of the bronchus and lung
Lung cancer is the most common cause of death from cancer world-
wide, causing 2 million deaths per year (Box 17.61). Tobacco use is the 
major preventable cause. Just as tobacco use and cancer rates are fall-
ing in some high-income countries, both smoking and lung cancer are 
rising in many low- and middle-income countries. The great majority of 
tumours in the lung are primary lung cancers and, in contrast to many 
other tumours, the prognosis remains poor, with approximately 40% and 
16% of patients surviving at 1 and 5 years respectively.
Primary tumours of the lung
Aetiology
Cigarette smoking is by far the most important cause of lung cancer. It 
is thought to be directly responsible for at least 85% of cases in the UK, 
the risk being proportional to the amount smoked and the tar content 
of cigarettes. but the proportion of cases not related to tobacco expo-
sure is rising. The death rate from the disease in heavy smokers is 
40 times that in non-smokers. Risk falls slowly after smoking cessation 
but remains above that in non-smokers for many years. It is estimated 
that 1 in 2 smokers dies from a smoking-related disease, about half in 
middle age. The effect of ‘passive’ smoking is more difcult to quantify 
but is currently thought to be a factor in 5% of all lung cancer deaths. 
Exposure to naturally occurring radon is another risk. The incidence of 
lung cancer is slightly higher in urban than in rural dwellers, which may 
reect differences in atmospheric pollution (including tobacco smoke) or 
occupation, since a number of industrial materials are associated with 
lung cancer, such as asbestos, arsenicals and beryllium-containing com-
pounds. In recent years, the strong link between smoking and ill health 
has led many governments to legislate against smoking in public places, 
and smoking prevalence and some smoking-related diseases are already 
declining in these countries.
Lung cancer
The incidence of lung cancer increased dramatically during the 20th cen-
tury as a direct result of the tobacco epidemic (Fig. 17.45). In women, 
smoking prevalence and deaths from lung cancer continue to increase, 
and more women now die of lung cancer than breast cancer in the 
United States and the UK.
Pathology
Lung cancers arise from the bronchial epithelium or mucous glands. The 
common cell types are listed in Box 17.62. When the tumour occurs in a 
large bronchus, symptoms arise early but tumours originating in a periph-
eral bronchus can grow very large without producing symptoms, result-
ing in delayed diagnosis. Peripheral squamous tumours may undergo 
central necrosis and cavitation and may resemble a lung abscess on 
X-ray (Fig. 17.46). Lung cancer may involve the pleura directly or by lym-
phatic spread and may extend into the chest wall, invading the intercos-
tal nerves or the brachial plexus and causing pain. Lymphatic spread 
to mediastinal and supraclavicular lymph nodes often occurs before 
diagnosis. Blood-borne metastases occur most commonly in liver, bone, 
brain, adrenals and skin. Even a small primary tumour may cause wide-
spread metastatic deposits and this is a particular characteristic of small-
cell lung cancers.
Clinical features
Lung cancer presents in many different ways, reecting local, metastatic 
or paraneoplastic tumour effects.
25–49
50–59
60–69
70–79
80+
800
600
400
200
Year of diagnosis
0
Rate per 100000
1979–81
1980–82
1981–83
1982–84
1983–85
1984–86
1985–87
1986–88
1987–89
1988–90
1989–91
1990–92
1991–93
1992–94
1993–95
1994–96
1995–97
1996–98
1997–99
1998–00
1999–01
2000–02
2001–03
2002–04
2003–05
2004–06
2005–07
2006–08
2007–09
2008–10
2009–11
2010–12
2011–13
A
320
400
25–49
50–59
60–69
70–79
80+
240
160
80
Year of diagnosis
0
Rate per 100000
1979–81
1980–82
1981–83
1982–84
1983–85
1984–86
1985–87
1986–88
1987–89
1988–90
1989–91
1990–92
1991–93
1992–94
1993–95
1994–96
1995–97
1996–98
1997–99
1998–00
1999–01
2000–02
2001–03
2002–04
2003–05
2004–06
2005–07
2006–08
2007–09
2008–10
2009–11
2010–12
2011–13
B
Fig. 17.45 Mortality trends from lung cancer in UK, 1979–2013, by age and 
year of death. 
cancer in men and increase in mortality in older women towards the end of this 
period, reecting changes in smoking habits. From Cancer Research UK: http://www.
cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/
lung-cancer/mortality. Accessed January 2017.
17.62  Common cell types in lung cancer
Cell type
%
Adenocarcinoma
35–40
Squamous
25–30
Small-cell
15
Large-cell
10–15
17.61  The burden of lung cancer
 1.8 million new cases worldwide each year
 Most common cancer in men
 Rates rising in women:
Female lung cancer deaths outnumber male in some Nordic countries
Has overtaken breast cancer in several countries
 More than a threefold increase in deaths since 1950
 More than 50% of cases have metastatic disease at diagnosis

[[p575]]
Tumours of the bronchus and lung    529
17
Cough This is the most common early symptom. It is often dry, but sec-
ondary infection may cause purulent sputum. A change in the character 
of a smoker’s cough, particularly if associated with other new symptoms, 
should always raise suspicion of lung cancer.
Haemoptysis Haemoptysis is common, especially with central bronchial 
tumours. Although it may be caused by bronchitic infection, haemop-
tysis in a smoker should always be investigated to exclude a lung can-
cer. Occasionally, central tumours invade large vessels, causing sudden 
massive haemoptysis which is invariably a terminal event.
Bronchial obstruction This is another common presentation. The clinical 
and radiological manifestations (Fig. 17.47 and see Fig. 17.5, and Box 
17.63) depend on the site and extent of the obstruction, any secondary 
infection and the extent of coexisting lung disease. Complete obstruc-
tion causes collapse of a lobe or lung, with breathlessness, mediastinal 
displacement and dullness to percussion with reduced breath sounds. 
Partial bronchial obstruction may cause a monophonic, unilateral 
wheeze that fails to clear with coughing, and may also impair the drain-
age of secretions to cause pneumonia or lung abscess as a presenting 
problem. Pneumonia that recurs at the same site or responds slowly to 
treatment, particularly in a smoker, should always suggest an underlying 
lung cancer. Stridor (a harsh inspiratory noise) occurs when the larynx, 
trachea or a main bronchus is narrowed by the primary tumour or by 
compression from malignant enlargement of the subcarinal and paratra-
cheal lymph nodes.
Breathlessness Breathlessness may be caused by collapse or pneu-
monia, or by tumour causing a large pleural effusion or compressing a 
phrenic nerve and leading to diaphragmatic paralysis.
Pain and nerve entrapment Pleural pain may indicate malignant pleural 
invasion, although it can occur with distal infection. Intercostal nerve 
involvement causes pain in the distribution of a thoracic dermatome. 
Cancer in the lung apex may cause Horner syndrome (ipsilateral par-
tial ptosis, enophthalmos, miosis and hypohidrosis of the face) due to 
involvement of the sympathetic nerves to the eye at or above the stel-
late ganglion. Pancoast syndrome (pain in the inner aspect of the arm, 
sometimes with small muscle wasting in the hand) indicates malignant 
destruction of the T1 and C8 roots in the lower part of the brachial plexus 
by an apical lung tumour.
Mediastinal spread Involvement of the oesophagus may cause dys-
phagia. If the pericardium is invaded, arrhythmia or pericardial effusion 
may occur. Superior vena cava obstruction by malignant nodes causes 
suffusion and swelling of the neck and face, conjunctival oedema, 
headache and dilated veins on the chest wall and is most commonly 
due to lung cancer. Involvement of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve 
by tumours at the left hilum causes vocal cord paralysis, voice alter-
ation and a ‘bovine’ cough (lacking the normal explosive character). 
Supraclavicular lymph nodes may be palpably enlarged or identied 
using ultrasound; if so, a needle aspirate may provide a simple means 
of cytological diagnosis.
Metastatic spread This may lead to focal neurological defects, epilep-
tic seizures, personality change, jaundice, bone pain or skin nodules. 
Lassitude, anorexia and weight loss usually indicate metastatic spread.
Finger clubbing Overgrowth of the soft tissue of the terminal phalanx, 
leading to increased nail curvature and nail bed uctuation, is often seen.
Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPOA) This is a painful perios-
titis of the distal tibia, bula, radius and ulna, with local tenderness and 
sometimes pitting oedema over the anterior shin. X-rays reveal subper-
iosteal new bone formation. While most frequently associated with lung 
cancer, HPOA can occur with other tumours.
Non-metastatic extrapulmonary effects (Box 17.64) The syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH, p. 624) and ectopic 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone secretion (p. 684) are usually associated 
with small-cell lung cancer. Hypercalcaemia may indicate malignant 
Fig. 17.46 Large cavitated lung cancer in left lower lobe.
B
Compensatory 
emphysema
of left lung
Site of 
obstruction of
right main bronchus
Displacement of 
trachea, heart and other 
mediastinal
structures to the right
Position of elevated
right hemidiaphragm 
(not seen on chest X-ray)
A
Fig. 17.47 Collapse of the right lung: effects on neighbouring structures. 

[[p576]]
530    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
bone destruction or production of hormone-like peptides by a tumour. 
Associated neurological syndromes may occur with any type of lung 
cancer.
Investigations
The main aims of investigation are to conrm the diagnosis, establish the 
histological cell type and dene the extent of the disease.
Imaging
Lung cancer produces a range of appearances on chest X-ray, from 
lobar collapse (see Fig. 17.5) to mass lesions, effusion or malignant rib 
destruction (Fig. 17.48). CT should be performed early, as it may reveal 
mediastinal or metastatic spread and is helpful for planning biopsy pro-
cedures, e.g. in establishing whether a tumour is accessible by bron-
choscopy or percutaneous CT-guided biopsy.
Biopsy and histopathology
Over half of primary lung tumours can be visualised and sampled directly 
by biopsy and brushing using a exible bronchoscope. Bronchoscopy 
also allows an assessment of operability, from the proximity of central 
tumours to the main carina (Fig. 17.49).
For tumours that are too peripheral to be accessible by bronchoscope, 
the yield of ‘blind’ bronchoscopic washings and brushings from the radi-
ologically affected area is low and percutaneous needle biopsy under CT 
(or less commonly ultrasound) guidance is a more reliable way to obtain a 
histological diagnosis. There is a risk of iatrogenic pneumothorax, which 
may preclude the procedure if there is extensive coexisting emphysema. 
In patients with a peripheral tumour and enlarged hilar or paratracheal 
lymph nodes on CT, bronchoscopy with EBUS-guided node sampling 
may allow both diagnosis and staging.
In patients with pleural effusions, pleural aspiration and biopsy is the 
preferred investigation. Where facilities exist, thoracoscopy increases yield 
by allowing targeted biopsies under direct vision. In patients with meta-
static disease, the diagnosis can often be conrmed by needle aspiration 
or biopsy of affected lymph nodes, skin lesions, liver or bone marrow.
Staging to guide treatment
The propensity of small-cell lung cancer to metastasise early means these 
patients are usually not suitable for surgical intervention. In non-small-cell 
2
5
6
7
4
3
8
1
Fig. 17.48 Common radiological presentations of lung cancer. (1) Unilateral 
hilar enlargement suggests a central tumour or hilar glandular involvement. However, 
a peripheral tumour in the apex of a lower lobe can look like an enlarged hilar 
shadow on the posteroanterior X-ray. (2) Peripheral pulmonary opacity is usually 
irregular but well circumscribed, and may contain irregular cavitation. It can be very 
large. (3) Lung, lobe or segmental collapse is usually caused by tumour occluding 
a proximal bronchus. Collapse may also be due to compression of a bronchus by 
enlarged lymph glands. (4) Pleural effusion usually indicates tumour invasion of the 
pleural space or, very rarely, infection in collapsed lung tissue distal to a lung cancer. 
(5) Paratracheal lymphadenopathy may cause widening of the upper mediastinum. 
(6) A malignant pericardial effusion may cause enlargement of the cardiac shadow. 
(7) A raised hemidiaphragm may be caused by phrenic nerve palsy. Screening 
will show paradoxical upward movement when the patient sniffs. (8) Osteolytic rib 
destruction indicates direct invasion of the chest wall or metastatic spread.
Fig. 17.49 Bronchoscopic view of a lung cancer. There is distortion of mucosal 
folds, partial occlusion of the airway lumen and abnormal tumour tissue.
17.63  Causes of large bronchus obstruction
Common
 Lung cancer or adenoma
 Enlarged tracheobronchial lymph nodes (malignant or tuberculous)
 Inhaled foreign bodies (especially right lung)
 Bronchial casts or plugs consisting of inspissated mucus or blood clot 
(especially asthma, cystic brosis, haemoptysis, debility)
 Collections of mucus or mucopus retained in the bronchi as a result of 
ineffective expectoration (especially post-operative following abdominal surgery)
Rare
 Aortic aneurysm
 Giant left atrium
 Pericardial effusion
 Congenital bronchial atresia
 Fibrous bronchial stricture (e.g. following tuberculosis or bronchial surgery/lung 
transplant)
17.64  Non-metastatic extrapulmonary manifestations of lung 
cancer
Endocrine (Ch. 20)
 Inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) secretion, causing 
hyponatraemia
 Ectopic adrenocorticotrophic hormone secretion
 Hypercalcaemia due to secretion of parathyroid hormone-related peptides
 Carcinoid syndrome
 Gynaecomastia
Neurological (Ch. 28)
 Polyneuropathy
 Myelopathy
 Cerebellar degeneration
 Myasthenia (Lambert–Eaton syndrome
Other
 Digital clubbing
 Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
 Eosinophilia

[[p577]]
Tumours of the bronchus and lung    531
17
lung cancer (NSCLC), treatment and prognosis are determined by dis-
ease extent, so careful staging is required. CT is used early to detect 
obvious local or distant spread. Enlarged upper mediastinal nodes may 
be sampled using an EBUS-equipped bronchoscope or by medias-
tinoscopy. Nodes in the lower mediastinum can be sampled through 
the oesophageal wall using endoscopic ultrasound. Combined CT and 
whole-body FDG-PET (see Fig. 17.6) is commonly used to detect occult 
but metabolically active metastases. Head CT, radionuclide bone scan-
ning, liver ultrasound and bone marrow biopsy are generally reserved for 
patients with clinical, haematological or biochemical evidence of tumour 
spread to these sites. Information on tumour size and nodal and meta-
static spread is then collated to assign the patient to one of nine staging 
groups that determine optimal management and prognosis (Fig. 17.50). 
Detailed physiological testing is required to assess whether respiratory 
and cardiac function is sufcient to allow aggressive treatment.
Management
Surgical resection carries the best hope of long-term survival but some 
patients treated with radical radiotherapy and chemotherapy also 
achieve prolonged remission or cure. In over 75% of cases, treatment 
with the aim of cure is not possible or is inappropriate due to extensive 
spread or comorbidity. Such patients are offered palliative therapy and 
best supportive care. Radiotherapy and, in some cases, chemotherapy 
can relieve symptoms.
Surgical treatment
Accurate preoperative staging, coupled with improvements in surgical 
and postoperative care, now offers 5-year survival rates of over 80% 
in stage I disease (N0, tumour conned within visceral pleura) and over 
70% in stage II disease, which includes resection in patients with ipsilat-
eral peribronchial or hilar node involvement.
Radiotherapy
While much less effective than surgery, radical radiotherapy can offer 
long-term survival in selected patients with localised disease in whom 
comorbidity precludes surgery. Radical radiotherapy is usually combined 
with chemotherapy when lymph nodes are involved (stage III). Highly 
targeted (stereotactic) radiotherapy may be given in 3–5 treatments for 
small lesions.
The greatest value of radiotherapy, however, is in the palliation of dis-
tressing complications, such as superior vena cava obstruction, recur-
rent haemoptysis and pain caused by chest wall invasion or by skeletal 
metastatic deposits. Obstruction of the trachea and main bronchi can 
also be relieved temporarily. Radiotherapy can be used in conjunction 
with chemotherapy in the treatment of small-cell carcinoma and is par-
ticularly efcient at preventing the development of brain metastases in 
patients who have had a complete response to chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy
The treatment of small-cell carcinoma with combinations of cytotoxic 
drugs, sometimes with radiotherapy, can increase median survival from 3 
months to well over a year. The use of combinations of chemotherapeu-
tic drugs requires considerable skill and should be overseen by multidis-
ciplinary teams of clinical oncologists and specialist nurses. Combination 
chemotherapy leads to better outcomes than single-agent treatment. 
Regular cycles of therapy, including combinations of intravenous cyclo-
phosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine or intravenous cisplatin and 
etoposide, are commonly used.
In NSCLC chemotherapy is less effective, though platinum-based 
chemotherapy regimens offer 30% response rates and a modest increase 
in survival, and are widely used. Some non-small-cell lung tumours, 
particularly adenocarcinomas in non-smokers, carry detectable patho-
genic variants, e.g. in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene. 
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as erlotinib and monoclonal antibodies to 
EGFR (e.g. bevacizumab), show improved treatment responses in met-
astatic NSCLC and EGFR variants, and similar approaches are being 
developed to target other known genetic abnormalities.
In NSCLC there is some evidence that chemotherapy given before 
surgery may increase survival and can effectively ‘down-stage’ disease 
with limited nodal spread. Post-operative chemotherapy is now proven 
to enhance survival rates when operative samples show nodal involve-
ment by tumour.
Nausea and vomiting are common side-effects of chemotherapy and 
are best treated with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.
Laser therapy and stenting
Palliation of symptoms caused by major airway obstruction can be 
achieved in selected patients using bronchoscopic laser treatment to 
N2
(Ipsilateral mediastinal
or subcarinal)
N1
(Ipsilateral hilar)
N0
(None)
T1a (≤1 cm)
T1b (>1 to ≤2 cm)
T1c (>2 to ≤3 cm)
T2a (>3 to ≤4 cm)
T2b (>4 cm to ≤5 cm)
T3 (>5 cm)
M1a Lung metastasis/effusion
M1b Single extrathoracic metastasis
M1c Multiple extrathoracic metastases
T4 (>7 cm or invading heart,
vessels, oesophagus, carina etc.)
IA1 (92%)
IIB (53%)
IIIA (36%)
IVA (10%)
IVB (0%)
IIIB (26%)
IIIB (26%)
IIIC (13%)
IIIA (36%)
IA2 (83%)
IA3 (77%)
IB (68%)
IIA (60%)
IIB (53%)
N3
(Contralateral or
supraclavicular)
Lymph node spread
Tumour stage
Fig. 17.50 Tumour stage and 5-year survival in non-small-cell lung cancer. The gure shows the relationship between tumour extent (size, lymph node status and 
metastases) and prognosis (% survival at 5 years for each clinical stage). Based on data from Detterbeck FC, Boffa DJ, Kim AW, Tanoue T. The eighth edition lung cancer stage 
classication. Chest 2017; 151:193–203.

[[p578]]
532    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Secondary tumours of the lung
Blood-borne metastatic deposits in the lungs may be derived from many 
primary carcinomas, in particular breast, kidney, uterus, ovary, testes and 
thyroid, and also from osteogenic and other sarcomas. These secondary 
deposits are usually multiple and bilateral. Often there are no respiratory 
symptoms and the diagnosis is incidental on X-ray. Breathlessness may 
occur if a considerable amount of lung tissue has been replaced by met-
astatic tumour. Endobronchial deposits are uncommon but can cause 
haemoptysis and lobar collapse.
Lymphatic inltration may develop in carcinoma of the breast, stom-
ach, bowel, pancreas or bronchus. ‘Lymphangitic carcinomatosis’ 
causes severe, rapidly progressive breathlessness with marked hypox-
aemia. The chest X-ray shows diffuse pulmonary shadowing radiating 
from the hilar regions, often with septal lines, and CT shows character-
istic polygonal thickened interlobular septa. Palliation of breathlessness 
with opiates may help.
Tumours of the mediastinum
Figure 17.51 shows the major compartments of the mediastinum and 
Box 17.66 lists likely causes of a mediastinal mass.
Benign tumours and cysts in the mediastinum are often diagnosed 
when a chest X-ray is undertaken for some other reason. In general, they 
do not invade vital structures but may cause symptoms by compressing 
17.65  Rare types of lung tumour
Tumour
Status
Histology
Typical presentation
Prognosis
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Malignant
Tumours with areas of 
unequivocal squamous and 
adeno-differentiation
Peripheral or central lung 
mass
Stage-dependent
Neuro-endocrine 
(carcinoid) tumour
Low-grade malignant
Neuro-endocrine 
differentiation
Bronchial obstruction, cough
95% 5-year survival with 
resection
Bronchial gland adenoma
Benign
Salivary gland differentiation
Tracheobronchial irritation/
obstruction
Local resection curative
Bronchial gland carcinoma
Low-grade malignant
Salivary gland differentiation
Tracheobronchial irritation/
obstruction
Local recurrence
Hamartoma
Benign
Mesenchymal cells, cartilage
Peripheral lung nodule
Local resection curative
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma
Malignant
Tumour cells line alveolar 
spaces
Alveolar shadowing, 
productive cough
Variable, worse if multifocal
1
3
2
4
Lower border of
4th thoracic vertebra
Lymphoid masses
Neurogenic tumour
Retrosternal thyroid
Thymus
Lower border of
manubrium sterni
Teratoma
Dermoid
Pleuropericardial cyst
Fig. 17.51 The divisions of the mediastinum. (1) Superior mediastinum. (2) Anterior mediastinum. (3) Middle mediastinum. (4) Posterior mediastinum. Sites of the more 
common mediastinal tumours are also illustrated. From Johnson N McL. Respiratory medicine. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 1986.
clear tumour tissue and allow re-aeration of collapsed lung. The best 
results are achieved in tumours of the main bronchi. Endobronchial 
stents can be used to maintain airway patency in the face of extrinsic 
compression by malignant nodes.
General aspects of management
The best outcomes are obtained when lung cancer is managed in spe-
cialist centres by multidisciplinary teams, including oncologists, thor-
acic surgeons, respiratory physicians and specialist nurses. Effective 
communication, pain relief and attention to diet are important. Lung 
tumours can cause clinically signicant depression and anxiety, and 
these may need specic therapy. The management of non-metastatic 
endocrine manifestations is described in Chapter 20. When a malignant 
pleural effusion is present, an attempt should be made to drain the 
pleural cavity using an intercostal drain; depending upon response to 
initial drainage, subsequent uid acculumlations can be managed with 
long-term indwelling pleural catheters or pleuredesis with sclerosising 
agents such as talc.
Prognosis
The overall prognosis in lung cancer is very poor, approximately 60% and 
over 80% of patients dying within 1 and 5 years respectively of diagno-
sis. The best prognosis is with well-differentiated squamous cell tumours 
that have not metastasised and are amenable to surgical resection. The 
clinical features and prognosis of some less common tumours are given 
in Box 17.65.

[[p579]]
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases    533
17
the trachea or the superior vena cava. A dermoid cyst may very occa-
sionally rupture into a bronchus.
Malignant mediastinal tumours are distinguished by their power to 
invade, as well as compress, surrounding structures. As a result, even a 
small malignant tumour can produce symptoms, although, more com-
monly, the tumour has attained a considerable size before this happens 
(Box 17.67). The most common cause is mediastinal lymph node metas-
tasis from lung cancer but lymphomas, leukaemia, malignant thymic 
tumours and germ-cell tumours can cause similar features. Aortic and 
innominate aneurysms have destructive features resembling those of 
malignant mediastinal tumours.
Investigations
A benign mediastinal tumour generally appears on chest X-ray as a 
sharply circumscribed mediastinal opacity encroaching on one or both 
lung elds (as shown in Fig. 17.52). CT (or MRI) is the investigation of 
choice for mediastinal tumours (e.g. see Fig. 20.12). A malignant medi-
astinal tumour seldom has a clearly dened margin and often presents as 
a general broadening of the mediastinum.
Bronchoscopy may reveal a primary lung cancer causing mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy. EBUS may be used to guide sampling of peribron-
chial masses. The posterior mediastinum can be imaged and biopsied 
via the oesophagus using endoscopic ultrasound.
Mediastinoscopy under general anaesthetic can be used to visualise 
and biopsy masses in the superior and anterior mediastinum but surgical 
exploration of the chest, with removal of part or all of the tumour, is often 
required to obtain a histological diagnosis.
Management
Benign mediastinal tumours should be removed surgically because most 
produce symptoms sooner or later. Cysts may become infected, while 
neural tumours have the potential to undergo malignant transformation. 
The operative mortality is low in the absence of coexisting cardiovascular 
disease, COPD or extreme age.
Interstitial and inltrative pulmonary 
diseases
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease
The diffuse parenchymal lung diseases (DPLDs) are a heterogeneous 
group of conditions affecting the pulmonary parenchyma (interstitium) 
and/or alveolar lumen, which are frequently considered collectively as 
they share a sufcient number of clinical physiological and radiographic 
similarities (Box 17.68). They often present with cough, which is typi-
cally dry and distressing, and breathlessness, which is often insidious 
in onset but thereafter relentlessly progressive. Physical examina-
tion reveals the presence of inspiratory crackles and in many cases 
digital clubbing develops. Pulmonary function tests typically show a 
restrictive ventilatory defect in the presence of small lung volumes 
and reduced gas transfer. The typical radiographic ndings include, in 
the earliest stages, ground glass and reticulonodular shadowing, with 
progression to honeycomb cysts and traction bronchiectasis. While 
these appearances may be seen on a ‘plain’ chest X-ray, they are most 
easily appreciated on HRCT, which has assumed a central role in the 
evaluation of DPLD (Fig. 17.53). The current classication is shown 
in Figure 17.54 and the potential differential diagnoses in Box 17.69. 
Common features of interstitial lung disease in old age are shown in 
Box 17.70
17.66  Causes of a mediastinal mass
Superior mediastinum
 Retrosternal goitre
 Persistent left superior vena cava
 Prominent left subclavian artery
 Thymic tumour
 Dermoid cyst
 Lymphoma
 Aortic aneurysm
Anterior mediastinum
 Retrosternal goitre
 Dermoid cyst
 Thymic tumour
 Lymphoma
 Aortic aneurysm
 Germ cell tumour
 Pericardial cyst
 Hiatus hernia through the 
diaphragmatic foramen of Morgagni
Posterior mediastinum
 Neurogenic tumour
 Paravertebral abscess
 Oesophageal lesion
 Aortic aneurysm
 Foregut duplication
Middle mediastinum
 Lung cancer
 Lymphoma
 Sarcoidosis
 Bronchogenic cyst
 Hiatus hernia
17.67  Clinical features of malignant mediastinal invasion
Trachea and main bronchi
 Stridor, breathlessness, cough, pulmonary collapse
Oesophagus
 Dysphagia, oesophageal displacement or obstruction on barium swallow 
examination
Phrenic nerve
 Diaphragmatic paralysis
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
 Paralysis of left vocal cord with hoarseness and ‘bovine’ cough
Sympathetic trunk
 Horner syndrome
Superior vena cava
 SVC obstruction: non-pulsatile distension of neck veins, subconjunctival 
oedema, and oedema and cyanosis of head, neck, hands and arms; dilated 
anastomotic veins on chest wall
Pericardium
 Pericarditis and/or pericardial effusion
Fig. 17.52 Intrathoracic goitre (arrows) extending from right upper 
mediastinum.

[[p580]]
534    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
The idiopathic interstitial pneumonias represent a major subgroup of 
DPLD that are grouped together as a result of their unknown aetiology 
(Box 17.71). They are often distinguished by the predominant histolog-
ical pattern on tissue biopsy; hence they are frequently referred to by 
their pathological description, e.g. usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) or 
non-specic interstitial pneumonia (NSIP). The most important of these 
is idiopathic pulmonary brosis.
Idiopathic pulmonary brosis
Idiopathic pulmonary brosis (IPF) is dened as a progressive brosing 
interstitial pneumonia of unknown cause, occurring in adults and asso-
ciated with the histological or radiological pattern of UIP. Important dif-
ferentials include brosing diseases caused by occupational exposure, 
medication or connective tissue diseases, which must be excluded by 
careful history, examination and investigation.
The histological features of the condition are suggestive of repeated 
episodes of focal damage to the alveolar epithelium consistent with an 
autoimmune process but the aetiology remains elusive: speculation has 
included exposure to viruses (e.g. Epstein–Barr virus), occupational dusts 
(metal or wood), drugs (antidepressants) or chronic gastro-oesophageal 
Clinical assessment including chest X-ray, pulmonary function tests, haematology,
biochemical and immunological investigations
Appearances consistent
with another diffuse
parenchymal lung disease,
e.g. sarcoid
Inconsistent clinical or
CT appearances
Appearances consistent
with usual interstitial
pneumonia
High-resolution CT
Further investigations, e.g.
bronchoalveolar lavage,
transbronchial biopsy,
surgical biopsy
Diagnose idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
Diagnose and treat
accordingly
Fig. 17.53 Algorithm for the investigation of patients with interstitial lung disease following initial clinical and chest X-ray examination.
DPLD of known cause,
e.g. drugs or association
with connective tissue
disease
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease (DPLD)
Idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia
Granulomatous DPLD,
e.g. sarcoidosis
Other forms of DPLD, e.g.
lymphangioleiomyomatosis,
histiocytosis X etc.
Idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis
Idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia other
than idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
Desquamative interstitial
pneumonia
Respiratory bronchiolitis
interstitial lung disease
Acute interstitial
pneumonia
Cryptogenic organising
pneumonia
Non-specific interstitial
pneumonia
Lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonia
Fig. 17.54 Classication of diffuse parenchymal lung disease.
17.68  Features common to the diffuse parenchymal lung 
diseases
Clinical presentation
 Cough: usually dry, persistent and distressing
 Breathlessness: usually slowly progressive; insidious onset; acute in some 
cases
Examination ndings
 Crackles: typically bilateral and basal
 Clubbing: common in idiopathic pulmonary brosis but also seen in other types, 
e.g. asbestosis
 Central cyanosis and signs of right heart failure in advanced disease
Radiology
 Chest X-ray: typically small lung volumes with reticulonodular shadowing but 
may be normal in early or limited disease
 High-resolution computed tomography: combinations of ground glass changes, 
reticulonodular shadowing, honeycomb cysts and traction bronchiectasis, 
depending on stage of disease
Pulmonary function
 Typically restrictive ventilatory defect with reduced lung volumes and impaired gas 
transfer; exercise tests assess exercise tolerance and exercise-related fall in SaO2

[[p581]]
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases    535
17
reux. Familial cases are rare but genetic factors that control the inam-
matory and brotic response are likely to be important. There is a strong 
association with cigarette smoking.
Clinical features
IPF usually presents in the older adult and is uncommon before the age 
of 50 years. With the advent of widespread CT scanning it may pres-
ent as an incidental nding in an otherwise asymptomatic individual but 
more typically presents with progressive breathlessness (which may have 
been insidious) and a non-productive cough. Constitutional symptoms 
are unusual. Clinical ndings include nger clubbing and the presence of 
bi-basal ne late inspiratory crackles likened to the unfastening of Velcro.
Investigations
These are summarised in Box 17.72. Established IPF will be apparent on 
chest X-ray as a bilateral lower lobe and subpleural reticular shadowing. 
The chest X-ray may be normal in individuals with early or limited disease, 
however. HRCT typically demonstrates a patchy, predominantly periph-
eral, subpleural and basal reticular pattern and, in more advanced dis-
ease, the presence of honeycombing cysts and traction bronchiectasis 
(Fig. 17.55). When these features are present, HRCT has a high positive 
predictive value for the diagnosis of IPF and recourse to biopsy is seldom 
necessary. HRCT appearances may also be sufciently characteristic to 
suggest an alternative diagnosis such as hypersensitivity pneumonitis or 
sarcoidosis. The presence of pleural plaques may suggest asbestosis.
Pulmonary function tests classically show a restrictive defect with 
reduced lung volumes and gas transfer. However, lung volumes may 
be preserved in patients with concomitant emphysema. Dynamic tests 
are useful to document exercise tolerance and demonstrate exercise-in-
duced arterial hypoxaemia, but as IPF advances, arterial hypoxaemia 
and hypocapnia are present at rest.
Bronchoscopy is seldom indicated unless there is serious consider-
ation of differential diagnoses of infection or a malignant process; lym-
phocytosis may suggest chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The tissue 
samples obtained by transbronchial lung biopsy are invariably insufcient 
to be of value, and if tissue is required, a surgical lung biopsy should 
be sought. Lung biopsy should be considered in cases of diagnostic 
uncertainty or with atypical features. UIP is the histological pattern pre-
dominantly encountered in IPF (Fig. 17.56); however, it is also found in 
asbestosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, connective tissue diseases and 
drug reactions.
It is not uncommon to identify a mildly positive antinuclear antibody 
(ANA) or anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide 2 (anti-CCP2) and repeat sero-
logical testing may be performed, as lung disease may precede the 
appearance of connective tissue disease.
Management
The management options for IPF are improving. If the vital capacity is 
between 50% and 80% predicted, patients may be offered either pirfeni-
done (an antibrotic agent) or nintedanib (a tyrosine kinase inhibitor). Both 
of these agents have been shown to reduce the rate of decline in lung 
function. Patients taking pirfenidone should be advised to avoid direct 
exposure to sunlight and use photoprotective clothing and high-protec-
tion sunscreens. Nintedanib may be accompanied by diarrhoea. Neither 
drug improves cough or breathlessness and treatment should be discon-
tinued if lung function declines by more than 10% over the rst year of 
treatment. Medication to control gastro-oesophageal reux may improve 
17.69  Conditions that mimic diffuse parenchymal lung disease
Infection
 Viral pneumonia
 Pneumocystis jirovecii
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
 Tuberculosis
 Parasite, e.g. lariasis
 Fungal infection
Malignancy
 Leukaemia and lymphoma
 Lymphangitic carcinomatosis
 Multiple metastases
 Bronchoalveolar carcinoma
Pulmonary oedema
Aspiration pneumonitis
17.70  Interstitial lung disease in old age
 Idiopathic pulmonary brosis: the most common interstitial lung disease, with 
a poor prognosis.
 Chronic aspiration pneumonitis: must always be considered in older patients 
presenting with bilateral basal shadowing on a chest X-ray.
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA): a rare condition but more common 
in old age. Renal involvement is more common at presentation and upper 
respiratory problems are fewer.
 Asbestosis: symptoms may appear only in old age because of the prolonged 
latent period between exposure and disease.
 Drug-induced interstitial lung disease: more common, presumably because 
of the increased chance of exposure to multiple drugs.
 Rarer interstitial disease: sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis, 
alveolar proteinosis and eosinophilic pneumonia rarely present.
 Increased dyspnoea: coexistent muscle weakness, chest wall deformity (e.g. 
thoracic kyphosis) and deconditioning may all exacerbate dyspnoea associated 
with interstitial lung disease.
 Surgical lung biopsy: often inappropriate in the very frail. A diagnosis therefore 
frequently depends on clinical and high-resolution computed tomography 
ndings alone.
17.71  Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
Clinical diagnosis
Notes
Usual interstitial pneumonia 
(UIP)
Idiopathic pulmonary brosis – see 
text
Non-specic interstitial 
pneumonia (NSIP)
See page 537
Respiratory bronchiolitis–
interstitial lung disease
More common in men and smokers. 
Usually presents at age 40–60 years. 
Smoking cessation may lead to 
improvement. Natural history unclear
Acute interstitial pneumonia
Often preceded by viral upper 
respiratory tract infection. Severe 
exertional dyspnoea, widespread 
pneumonic consolidation and diffuse 
alveolar damage on biopsy. Prognosis 
often poor
Desquamative interstitial 
pneumonia (DIP)
More common in men and smokers. 
Presents at age 40–60 years. Insidious 
onset of dyspnoea. Clubbing in 50%. 
Biopsy shows increased macrophages 
in alveolar space, septal thickening 
and type II pneumocyte hyperplasia. 
Prognosis generally good
Cryptogenic organising 
pneumonia (‘bronchiolitis 
obliterans organising 
pneumonia’ – BOOP)
Presents as clinical and radiological 
pneumonia. Systemic features 
and markedly raised erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate common. Finger 
clubbing absent. Biopsy shows orid 
proliferation of immature collagen 
(Masson bodies) and brous tissue. 
Response to glucocorticoids classically 
excellent
Lymphocytic interstitial 
pneumonia (LIP)
More common in women, slow onset 
over years. Investigate for associations 
with connective tissue disease or HIV. 
Unclear whether glucocorticoids are 
helpful

[[p582]]
536    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
the cough. Current smokers should be apprised of the increased risk of 
lung cancer and advised to stop. Inuenza and pneumococcal vaccina-
tion should be recommended. Patients should be encouraged to exer-
cise and participate in pulmonary rehabilitation using ambulatory oxygen 
if appropriate. Domiciliary oxygen should be considered for palliation of 
breathlessness in severe cases. Where appropriate, lung transplantation 
should be considered. The optimum treatment for acute exacerbations 
is unknown. Treatment is largely supportive. Broad-spectrum antibiotics 
may be combined with glucocorticoids and sometimes additional immu-
nosuppression but there are few data to support this approach.
Prognosis
The natural history is usually one of steady decline; however, some patients 
are prone to exacerbations accompanied by an acute deterioration in 
breathlessness, disturbed gas exchange, and new ground glass changes 
or consolidation on HRCT. In advanced disease, central cyanosis is 
detectable and patients may develop pulmonary hypertension and fea-
tures of right heart failure. A median survival of 3 years is widely quoted; 
the rate of disease progression varies considerably, however, from death 
17.72  Investigations in diffuse parenchymal lung disease
Laboratory investigations
 Full blood count: lymphopenia in sarcoidosis; eosinophilia in pulmonary 
eosinophilias and drug reactions; neutrophilia in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
 Ca2+: may be elevated in sarcoidosis
 Lactate dehydrogenase: may be elevated in active alveolitis
 Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme: non-specic indicator of disease activity 
in sarcoidosis
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein: non-specically raised
 Autoimmune screen: anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) and other 
autoantibodies may suggest connective tissue disease
Radiology
 See Box 17.68
Pulmonary function
 See Box 17.68
Bronchoscopy
 Bronchoalveolar lavage: differential cell counts may point to sarcoidosis 
and drug-induced pneumonitis, pulmonary eosinophilias, hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis or cryptogenic organising pneumonia; useful to exclude infection
 Transbronchial biopsy: useful in sarcoidosis and differential of malignancy or 
infection
 Bronchial biopsy: occasionally useful in sarcoidosis
Video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy (in selected cases)
 Allows pathological classication: presence of asbestos bodies may suggest 
asbestosis; silica in occupational brosing lung disease
Others
 Liver biopsy: may be useful in sarcoidosis
 Urinary calcium excretion: may be useful in sarcoidosis
B
A
Fig. 17.55 Idiopathic pulmonary brosis. Typical high-resolution CT images 
demonstrate the bilateral, predominantly basal and peripheral reticular opacities, 
Transverse section. Courtesy of Dr Andrew Baird, Consultant Radiologist, NHS Lothian, 
Edinburgh, UK.
B
A
Fig. 17.56 Pathology of usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)
showing severe interstitial brosis with loss of the normal alveolar architecture and the development of ‘honeycomb’ cysts. Courtesy of Dr William Wallace, Department of 
Pathology, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.

[[p583]]
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases    537
17
within a few months to survival with minimal symptoms for many years. 
Serial lung function testing may provide useful prognostic information, 
relative preservation of lung function suggesting longer survival and sig-
nicantly impaired gas transfer and/or desaturation on exercise heralding 
a poorer prognosis. The nding of high numbers of broblastic foci on 
biopsy suggests a more rapid deterioration.
Non-specic interstitial pneumonia
The clinical picture of brotic NSIP is similar to that of IPF, although patients 
tend to be women and younger in age. As with UIP, the condition may 
present as an isolated idiopathic pulmonary condition, but an NSIP pattern 
is often associated with connective tissue disease, certain drugs, chronic 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis or HIV infection and care must be taken to 
exclude these possibilities. As with UIP, the pulmonary condition may 
precede the appearance of connective tissue disease. HRCT ndings are 
less specic than with IPF and lung biopsy may be required. The prognosis 
is signicantly better than that of IPF, particularly in the cellular form of the 
condition, and the 5-year mortality rate is typically less than 15%.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disorder of unknown aetiol-
ogy that is characterised by the presence of non-caseating granulomas 
(Fig. 17.57). The condition is more frequently described in colder parts of 
northern Europe. It also appears to be more common and more severe 
in those from an African Caribbean background. The tendency for sar-
coidosis to present in the spring and summer has led to speculation about 
the role of infective agents, including mycobacteria, propionibacteria and 
viruses, but the cause remains elusive. Genetic susceptibility is supported 
by familial clustering; a range of class II HLA alleles confer protection from, 
or susceptibility to, the condition. Sarcoidosis occurs less frequently in 
smokers. It may be associated with common variable immunodeciency.
Clinical features
Sarcoidosis is considered with other DPLDs, as over 90% of cases affect 
the lungs, but the condition can involve almost any organ (Fig.17.58
and Box 17.73). Löfgren syndrome – an acute illness characterised by 
Fig. 17.57 Sarcoidosis of the lung. Histology showing non-caseating granulomas 
(arrows). Courtesy of Dr William Wallace, Department of Pathology, Royal Inrmary of 
Edinburgh.
Pachymeningitis
Space-occupying lesion
Diabetes insipidus
Anterior uveitis
Sicca syndrome
Lymphadenopathy
Bilateral hilar
lymphadenopathy (BHL)
Cardiac arrhythmia
Heart block, sudden death
Splenomegaly
Nephrocalcinosis
Hypercalciuria
Renal stones
Arthropathies
Osteoporosis
Arthropathies
Osteoporosis
Mononeuritis multiplex
Peripheral neuropathy
Skin plaques and nodules
Infiltration of scars
Granulomatous liver disease
Phalangeal bone cysts
Lacrimal gland enlargement
Cranial nerve palsy
Interstitial lung disease
Nasal cutaneous sarcoid
lesions (lupus pernio)
Erythema nodosum
Parotid gland enlargement
Fig. 17.58 Possible systemic involvement in sarcoidosis. Inset (Erythema nodosum): From Savin JA, Hunter JAA, Hepburn NC. Skin signs in clinical medicine. London: 
Mosby–Wolfe; 1997.

[[p584]]
538    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
erythema nodosum, peripheral arthropathy, uveitis, bilateral hilar lym-
phadenopathy (BHL), lethargy and occasionally fever – is often seen 
in young women. Alternatively, BHL may be detected in an otherwise 
asymptomatic individual undergoing a chest X-ray for other purposes. 
Pulmonary disease may also present in a more insidious manner with 
cough, exertional breathlessness and radiographic inltrates; chest aus-
cultation is often surprisingly unremarkable. Fibrosis occurs in around 
20% of cases of pulmonary sarcoidosis and may cause a silent loss of 
lung function. Pleural disease is uncommon and nger clubbing is not a 
feature. Complications such as bronchiectasis, aspergilloma, pneumo-
thorax, pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale have been reported 
but are rare.
Investigations
Lymphopenia is characteristic and liver function tests may be mildly 
deranged. Hypercalcaemia may be present (reecting increased forma-
tion of calcitriol – 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D – by alveolar macrophages), 
particularly if the patient has been exposed to strong sunlight. 
Hypercalciuria may also be seen and may lead to nephrocalcinosis. 
Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) may provide a non-spe-
cic marker of disease activity and can assist in monitoring the clinical 
course. Chest radiography has been used to stage sarcoidosis (Box 
17.74). In patients with pulmonary inltrates, pulmonary function testing 
may show a restrictive defect accompanied by impaired gas exchange. 
Exercise tests may reveal oxygen desaturation. Bronchoscopy may 
demonstrate a ‘cobblestone’ appearance of the mucosa, and bron-
chial and transbronchial biopsies usually show non-caseating granulo-
mas, as may samples from the mediastinal nodes obtained by EBUS. 
Bronchoalveolar lavage uid typically contains an increased CD4:CD8 
T-cell ratio. Characteristic HRCT appearances include reticulonodular 
opacities that follow a perilymphatic distribution centred on broncho-
vascular bundles and the subpleural areas. FDG-PET scanning can 
detect extrapulmonary disease.
The occurrence of erythema nodosum with BHL on chest X-ray is 
often sufcient for a condent diagnosis, without recourse to a tissue 
biopsy. Similarly, a typical presentation with classical HRCT features may 
also be accepted. In other instances, however, the diagnosis should be 
conrmed by histological examination of the involved organ. The pres-
ence of anergy (e.g. to tuberculin skin tests) may support the diagnosis.
Management
Patients who present with acute illness and erythema nodosum should 
receive NSAIDs and, on occasion, a short course of glucocorticoids. 
The majority of patients enjoy spontaneous remission and so, if there 
is no evidence of organ damage, systemic glucocorticoid therapy can 
be withheld for 6 months. However, prednisolone (at a starting dose 
of 20–40 mg/day) should be commenced immediately in the presence 
of hypercalcaemia, pulmonary impairment, renal impairment and uvei-
tis. Topical glucocorticoids may be useful in cases of mild uveitis, and 
inhaled glucocorticoids have been used to shorten the duration of sys-
temic glucocorticoid use in asymptomatic parenchymal sarcoidosis. 
Patients should be warned that strong sunlight may precipitate hypercal-
caemia and endanger renal function.
Features suggesting a less favourable outlook include age over 40, 
African Caribbean ancestry, persistent symptoms for more than 6 months, 
the involvement of more than three organs, lupus pernio (see Fig. 17.58) 
and a stage III/IV chest X-ray. In patients with severe disease, methotrex-
ate (10–20 mg/week), azathioprine (50–150 mg/day) and specic tumour 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors have been effective. Chloroquine, 
hydroxychloroquine and low-dose thalidomide may be useful in cutaneous 
sarcoidosis with limited pulmonary involvement. Selected patients may be 
referred for consideration of single lung transplantation. The overall mortal-
ity is low (1%–5%) and usually reects cardiac involvement or pulmonary 
brosis.
Lung diseases due to systemic inammatory 
disease
The acute respiratory distress syndrome
See page 201.
Respiratory involvement in connective tissue 
disorders
Pulmonary complications of connective tissue disease are common, 
affecting the airways, alveoli, pulmonary vasculature, diaphragm and 
chest wall muscles, and the chest wall itself. In some instances, pul-
monary disease may precede the appearance of the connective tissue 
disorder (Box 17.75). Indirect associations between connective tissue 
disorders and respiratory complications include those due to disease 
in other organs, e.g. thrombocytopenia causing haemoptysis; pulmon-
ary toxic effects of drugs used to treat the connective tissue disorder 
(e.g. gold and methotrexate); and secondary infection due to the disease 
itself, neutropenia or immunosuppressive drug regimens.
Rheumatoid disease
Pulmonary involvement in rheumatoid disease is important, accounting 
for around 10%–20% of the mortality associated with the condition. The 
majority of cases occur within 5 years of the rheumatological diagnosis 
but pulmonary manifestations may precede joint involvement in 10%–
20%. Pulmonary brosis is the most common pulmonary manifestation. 
All forms of interstitial disease have been described but NSIP is probably 
the most common. A rare variant of localised upper lobe brosis and 
cavitation is occasionally seen.
Pleural effusion is common, especially in men with seropositive dis-
ease. Effusions are usually small and unilateral, but can be large and 
bilateral. Most resolve spontaneously. Biochemical testing shows an exu-
date with markedly reduced glucose levels and raised lactate dehydro-
genase (LDH). Effusions that fail to resolve spontaneously may respond 
to a short course of oral prednisolone (30–40 mg/day) but some become 
chronic.
17.74  Chest X-ray changes in sarcoidosis
Stage I: BHL (usually symmetrical); paratracheal nodes often enlarged
 Often asymptomatic but may be associated with erythema nodosum and 
arthralgia. The majority of cases resolve spontaneously within 1 year
Stage II: BHL and parenchymal inltrates
 Patients may present with breathlessness or cough. The majority of cases 
resolve spontaneously
Stage III: parenchymal inltrates without BHL
 Disease less likely to resolve spontaneously
Stage IV: pulmonary brosis
 Can cause progression to ventilatory failure, pulmonary hypertension and cor 
pulmonale
(BHL = bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy)
17.73  Presentation of sarcoidosis
 Asymptomatic: abnormal routine chest X-ray (~30%) or abnormal liver function 
tests
 Respiratory and constitutional symptoms (20%–30%)
 Erythema nodosum and arthralgia (20%–30%)
 Ocular symptoms (5%–10%)
 Skin sarcoidosis (including lupus pernio) (5%)
 Supercial lymphadenopathy (5%)
 Other (1%), e.g. hypercalcaemia, diabetes insipidus, cranial nerve palsies, 
cardiac arrhythmias, nephrocalcinosis

[[p585]]
Interstitial and infiltrative pulmonary diseases    539
17
Rheumatoid pulmonary nodules are usually asymptomatic and 
detected incidentally on imaging. They are most often multiple and 
subpleural in site (Fig. 17.59). Solitary nodules can mimic primary lung 
cancer; when multiple, the differential diagnoses include pulmonary met-
astatic disease. Cavitation raises the possibility of TB and predisposes to 
pneumothorax. The combination of rheumatoid nodules and pneumoco-
niosis is known as Caplan syndrome.
Bronchitis and bronchiectasis are both more common in rheumatoid 
patients. Rarely, the potentially fatal condition called obliterative bron-
chiolitis may develop. Bacterial lower respiratory tract infections are fre-
quent. Treatments given for rheumatoid arthritis may also be relevant: 
glucocorticoid therapy predisposes to infections, methotrexate may 
cause pulmonary brosis, and anti-TNF therapy has been associated 
with the reactivation of TB.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pleuropulmonary involvement is more common in lupus than in any other 
connective tissue disorder and may be a presenting problem, when it is 
sometimes attributed incorrectly to infection or pulmonary embolism. Up 
to two-thirds of patients have repeated episodes of pleurisy, with or without 
effusions. Effusions may be bilateral and may also involve the pericardium.
The most serious manifestation of lupus is an acute pneumonitis that 
may be associated with diffuse alveolar haemorrhage. This condition is 
life-threatening and requires either immediate immunosuppression with 
glucocorticoids or a step-up in immunosuppressive treatment, if already 
started.
Pulmonary brosis is a relatively uncommon manifestation of systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Some patients with SLE present with exer-
tional dyspnoea and orthopnoea but without overt signs of pulmonary 
brosis. The chest X-ray reveals elevated diaphragms and pulmonary 
function testing shows reduced lung volumes. This condition has been 
described as ‘shrinking lungs’ and has been attributed to diaphragmatic 
myopathy.
SLE patients with antiphospholipid antibodies are at increased risk 
of venous and pulmonary thromboembolism and require life-long 
anticoagulation.
Systemic sclerosis
Most patients with systemic sclerosis eventually develop diffuse pul-
monary brosis; at necropsy more than 90% have evidence of lung 
brosis. In some patients it is indolent, but when progressive, as in IPF, 
the median survival time is around 4 years. Pulmonary brosis is rare 
in CREST syndrome but isolated pulmonary hypertension may develop.
Other pulmonary complications include recurrent aspiration pneumo-
nias secondary to oesophageal disease. Rarely, sclerosis of the skin of 
the chest wall may be so extensive and cicatrising as to restrict chest 
wall movement – the so-called ‘hidebound chest’.
Pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides
Pulmonary eosinophilia refers to the association of radiographic 
(usually pneumonic) abnormalities and peripheral blood eosinophilia. 
The term encompasses a group of disorders of different aetiology 
(Box17.76). Eosinophils are the predominant cell recovered in spu-
tum or BAL, and eosinophil products are likely to the prime mediators 
of tissue damage.
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is an acute febrile illness (of less than 
5 days’ duration), characterised by diffuse pulmonary inltrates and 
hypoxic respiratory failure. The pathology is usually that of diffuse alve-
olar damage. Diagnosis is conrmed by BAL, which characteristically 
demonstrates >25% eosinophils. The condition is usually idiopathic but 
drug reactions should be considered. Glucocorticoids invariably induce 
prompt and complete resolution.
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia typically presents in an insidious man-
ner with malaise, fever, weight loss, breathlessness and unproductive 
cough. It is more common in middle-aged females. The classical chest 
X-ray appearance has been likened to the photographic negative of pul-
monary oedema with bilateral, peripheral and predominantly upper lobe 
17.75  Respiratory complications of connective tissue disorders
Disorder
Airways
Parenchyma
Pleura
Diaphragm and chest wall
Rheumatoid arthritis
Bronchitis, obliterative 
bronchiolitis, bronchiectasis, 
crico-arytenoid arthritis, 
stridor
Pulmonary brosis, nodules, 
upper lobe brosis, infections
Pleurisy, effusion, 
pneumothorax
Poor healing of intercostal 
drain sites
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
–
Pulmonary brosis, 
‘vasculitic’ infarcts
Pleurisy, effusion
Diaphragmatic weakness 
(shrinking lungs)
Systemic sclerosis
Bronchiectasis
Pulmonary brosis, aspiration 
pneumonia
–
Cutaneous thoracic restriction 
(hidebound chest)
Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Lung cancer
Pulmonary brosis
–
Intercostal and diaphragmatic 
myopathy
Granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (GPA)
Epistaxis, nasal discharge 
crusting, subglottic stenosis
Pulmonary nodules that may 
cavitate
Pleurisy, effusion
–
Fig. 17.59 Rheumatoid (necrobiotic) nodules. Thoracic CT just below the level of 
the main carina, showing the typical appearance of peripheral pleural-based nodules 
(arrows). The nodule in the left lower lobe shows characteristic cavitation.

[[p586]]
540    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
parenchymal shadowing. The peripheral blood eosinophil count is almost 
always very high, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and total 
serum IgE are elevated. BAL reveals a high proportion of eosinophils in 
the lavage uid. Response to prednisolone (20–40 mg/day) is usually dra-
matic. Prednisolone can usually be withdrawn after a few weeks without 
relapse but long-term, low-dose therapy is occasionally necessary.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia occurs as a result of a mosquito-borne 
larial infection with Wuchereria bancrofti or Brugia malayi (p. 335). The 
condition presents with fever, weight loss, dyspnoea and asthma-like 
symptoms. The peripheral blood eosinophilia is marked, as is the elevation 
of total IgE. High antilarial antibody titres are seen. The diagnosis may be 
conrmed by a response to treatment with diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg 
daily for 3 weeks). Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia must be distinguished 
from infection with Strongyloides stercoralis, in which glucocorticoids 
may cause a life-threatening hyperinfection syndrome. Ascariasis (‘larva 
migrans’) and other hookworm infestations are covered in Chapter 13
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA, formerly referred to as Wegener’s 
granulomatosis) is a rare vasculitic and granulomatous condition described 
in Chapter 26). The lung is commonly involved in systemic forms of the dis-
ease but a limited pulmonary form may also occur. Respiratory symptoms 
include cough, haemoptysis and chest pain. Associated upper respiratory 
tract manifestations include nasal discharge and crusting, and otitis media. 
Fever, weight loss and anaemia are common. Radiological features include 
multiple nodules and cavitation that may resemble primary or metastatic 
carcinoma, or a pulmonary abscess. Tissue biopsy conrms the distinc-
tive pattern of necrotising granulomas and necrotising vasculitis. Other 
respiratory complications include tracheal subglottic stenosis and saddle 
nose deformity. The differential diagnoses include mycobacterial and fun-
gal infection and other forms of pulmonary vasculitis, including polyarte-
ritis nodosa (pulmonary infarction), microscopic polyangiitis, eosinophilic 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA: marked tissue eosinophilia and 
association with asthma), necrotising sarcoidosis, bronchocentric granu-
lomatosis and lymphomatoid granulomatosis.
Goodpasture’s disease
This describes the association of pulmonary haemorrhage and glom-
erulonephritis, in which IgG antibodies bind to the glomerular or 
alveolar basement membranes. Pulmonary disease usually precedes 
renal involvement and includes radiographic inltrates and hypoxia with 
or without haemoptysis. It occurs more commonly in men and almost 
exclusively in smokers.
Lung diseases due to irradiation and drugs
Radiotherapy
Targeting radiotherapy to certain tumours is inevitably accompanied by 
irradiation of normal lung tissue. Although delivered in divided doses, 
the effects are cumulative. Acute radiation pneumonitis is typically seen 
within 6–12 weeks and presents with cough and dyspnoea. This may 
resolve spontaneously but responds to glucocorticoid treatment. Chronic 
interstitial brosis may present several months later with symptoms of 
exertional dyspnoea and cough. Changes are often conned to the area 
irradiated but may be bilateral. Established post-irradiation brosis does 
not usually respond to glucocorticoid treatment. The pulmonary effects 
of radiation are exacerbated by treatment with cytotoxic drugs, and the 
phenomenon of ‘recall pneumonitis’ describes the appearance of radia-
tion injury in a previously irradiated area when chemotherapy follows radi-
otherapy. If the patient survives, there are long-term risks of lung cancer.
Drugs
Drugs may cause a variety of pulmonary conditions (Box 17.77). 
Pulmonary brosis may occur in response to a variety of drugs but is 
seen most frequently with bleomycin, methotrexate, amiodarone and 
nitrofurantoin. Eosinophilic pulmonary reactions can also be caused by 
drugs. The pathogenesis may be an immune reaction similar to that in 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, which specically attracts large numbers 
of eosinophils into the lungs. This type of reaction is well described as 
a rare reaction to a variety of antineoplastic agents (e.g. bleomycin), 
antibiotics (e.g. sulphonamides), sulfasalazine and the anticonvulsants 
phenytoin and carbamazepine. Patients usually present with breath-
lessness, cough and fever. The chest X-ray characteristically shows 
17.77  Drug-induced respiratory disease
Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (ARDS)
 Hydrochlorothiazide
 Thrombolytics (streptokinase)
 Intravenous β-adrenoceptor agonists (e.g. for premature labour)
 Aspirin and opiates (in overdose)
Non-eosinophilic alveolitis
 Amiodarone, ecainide, gold, nitrofurantoin, cytotoxic agents – especially 
bleomycin, busulfan, mitomycin C, methotrexate, sulfasalazine
Pulmonary eosinophilia
 Antimicrobials (nitrofurantoin, penicillin, tetracyclines, sulphonamides, nalidixic 
acid)
 Drugs used in joint disease (gold, aspirin, penicillamine, naproxen)
 Cytotoxic drugs (bleomycin, methotrexate, procarbazine)
 Psychotropic drugs (chlorpromazine, dosulepin, imipramine)
 Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenytoin)
 Others (sulfasalazine, nadolol)
Pleural disease
 Bromocriptine, amiodarone, methotrexate, methysergide
 Induction of systemic lupus erythematosus – phenytoin, hydralazine, isoniazid
Asthma
 Pharmacological mechanisms (β-blockers, cholinergic agonists, aspirin and 
NSAIDs)
 Idiosyncratic reactions (tamoxifen, dipyridamole)
(ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs)
17.76  Pulmonary eosinophilia
Extrinsic (cause known)
 Helminths: e.g. Ascaris, Toxocara, Filaria
 Drugs: nitrofurantoin, para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), sulfasalazine, imipramine, 
chlorpropamide, phenylbutazone
 Fungi: e.g. Aspergillus fumigatus causing allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
Intrinsic (cause unknown)
 Cryptogenic eosinophilic pneumonia
 Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA, formerly Churg–Strauss 
syndrome), diagnosed on the basis of four or more of the following features:
Asthma
 Peripheral blood eosinophilia >1.5 ×109/L (or >10% of a total white  
cell count)
Mononeuropathy or polyneuropathy
Pulmonary inltrates
Paranasal sinus disease
Eosinophilic vasculitis on biopsy of an affected site
 Hypereosinophilic syndrome
 Polyarteritis nodosa

[[p587]]
Occupational and environmental lung disease    541
17
patchy shadowing. Most cases resolve completely on withdrawal of 
the drug, but if the reaction is severe, rapid resolution can be obtained 
with glucocorticoids.
Drugs may also cause other lung diseases, such as asthma, pulmo-
nary haemorrhage, pleural effusion and, rarely, pleural thickening. An 
ARDS-like syndrome of acute non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema may 
present with dramatic onset of breathlessness, severe hypoxaemia and 
signs of alveolar oedema on the chest X-ray. This syndrome has been 
reported most frequently in cases of opiate overdose in injection drug 
users but also after salicylate overdose, and there are occasional reports 
of its occurrence after therapeutic doses of drugs, including hydrochlo-
rothiazides and some cytotoxic agents.
Rare interstitial lung diseases
See Box 17.78
Occupational and environmental lung 
disease
The role of occupation and environmental exposure in lung disease is 
a particularly important area of respiratory medicine. Occupational lung 
disease is common and, in addition to the challenges of its diagnosis 
and management, often involves discussions about the workplace and, 
in some circumstances, litigation. Many countries encourage the regis-
tration of cases of occupational lung disease.
Occupational airway disease
Occupational asthma
Occupational asthma is asthma that results from specic workplace 
sensitizers and not asthma exacerbated by occupational irritants. It is 
responsible for 10% of adult-onset asthma and should be considered in 
any individual of working age who develops new-onset asthma, particu-
larly if the individual reports improvement in asthma symptoms during 
periods away from work, e.g. at weekends and on holidays. Workers 
in certain occupations appear to be at particularly high risk (Box 17.79) 
and the condition is more common in smokers and atopic individuals. 
Depending on the intensity of exposure, asthmatic symptoms usually 
develop within the rst few years of employment but are classically 
preceded by a latent period. Symptoms of rhinoconjunctivitis often 
precede the development of asthma. When occupational asthma fol-
lows exposure to high-molecular-weight proteins, sensitisation may be 
demonstrated by skin testing or measurement of specic IgE to the agent 
in question. Conrmation of occupational asthma should be sought from 
lung function tests. This usually involves serial recording of peak ow at 
work and home at least four times per day for a minimum of 3 weeks 
and, if possible, including a holiday period away from work (Fig.17.60). 
In certain circumstances, specic challenge tests are required to conrm 
the diagnosis.
It may be possible to remove the worker from the implicated agent, but 
when this cannot be done, consideration of personal protective equip-
ment and workplace hygiene may allow the worker to retain their job 
17.78  Rare interstitial lung diseases
Disease
Presentation
Chest X-ray
Course
Idiopathic pulmonary 
haemosiderosis
Haemoptysis, breathlessness, 
anaemia
Bilateral inltrates, often perihilar
Diffuse pulmonary brosis
Rapidly progressive in children
Slow progression or remission in adults
Death from massive pulmonary 
haemorrhage or cor pulmonale and 
respiratory failure
Alveolar proteinosis
Breathlessness and cough
Occasionally fever, chest pain and 
haemoptysis
Diffuse bilateral shadowing, often 
more pronounced in the hilar 
regions
Air bronchogram
Spontaneous remission in one-third
Whole-lung lavage or granulocyte–
macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM–CSF) therapy may be effective
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 
(histiocytosis X)
Breathlessness, cough, 
pneumothorax
Diffuse interstitial shadowing 
progressing to honeycombing
Course unpredictable but may progress to 
respiratory failure
Smoking cessation may be followed by 
signicant improvement
Poor response to immunosuppressive 
treatment
Neurobromatosis
Breathlessness and cough in 
a patient with multiple organ 
involvement with neurobromas, 
including skin
Bilateral reticulonodular shadowing 
of diffuse interstitial brosis
Slow progression to death from respiratory 
failure
Poor response to glucocorticoid therapy
Alveolar microlithiasis
May be asymptomatic
Breathlessness and cough
Diffuse calcied micronodular 
shadowing more pronounced in the 
lower zones
Slowly progressive to cor pulmonale and 
respiratory failure
May stabilise in some
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM)
Haemoptysis, breathlessness, 
pneumothorax and chylous 
effusion in females
Diffuse bilateral shadowing
CT shows characteristic thin-walled 
cysts with well-dened walls 
throughout both lungs
Progressive to death within 10 years
Oestrogen ablation and progesterone 
therapy of doubtful value
Consider lung transplantation
Pulmonary tuberous sclerosis
Very similar to lymphangioleiomyomatosis, except occasionally occurs in men
17.79  Occupational asthma
Most frequently reported causative agents
 Isocyanates
 Flour and grain dust
 Colophony and uxes
 Latex
 Animals
 Aldehydes
 Wood dust
Workers most commonly reported to occupational asthma schemes
 Paint sprayers
 Bakers and pastry-makers
 Nurses
 Chemical workers

[[p588]]
542    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
and livelihood. Specialist follow-up in such situations is highly advisable. 
Where reduction or avoidance of exposure fails to bring about resolution, 
the management is identical to that of any patient with asthma.
Irritant-induced asthma
Irritant-induced asthma (previously called reactive airways dysfunction 
syndrome) refers to the development of a persistent asthma-like syn-
drome following the inhalation of an airway irritant: typically, a single, 
specic exposure to a gas, smoke, fume or vapour in very high concen-
trations. Pulmonary function tests show airow obstruction and airway 
hyper-reactivity, and the management is similar to that of asthma. Once 
developed, the condition often persists but it is common for symptoms 
to improve over years.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
While tobacco smoking remains the most important preventable cause 
of COPD, there is increasing recognition that other noxious particles and 
gases can cause, or aggravate, the condition. Occupational COPD is 
recognised in workers exposed to coal dust, crystalline silica and cad-
mium. In many low-income countries, indoor air pollution from the burn-
ing of biomass fuels in conned spaces used for cooking contributes to 
the development of COPD.
Byssinosis
Byssinosis occurs in workers of cotton and ax mills exposed to cot-
ton brack (dried leaf and plant debris). An acute form of the disease 
may occur, but more typically, byssinosis develops after 20–30 years' 
exposure. Typical symptoms include chest tightness or breathlessness 
accompanied by a drop in lung function; classically, these are most 
severe on the rst day of the working week (‘Monday fever’) or on return 
to work following a period away. As the week progresses, symptoms 
improve and the fall in lung function becomes less dramatic. Continued 
exposure leads to the development of persistent symptoms and a pro-
gressive decline in FEV1, similar to that observed in COPD.
Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis may be dened as a permanent alteration of lung struc-
ture due to the inhalation of mineral dust and the tissue reactions of the 
lung to its presence, excluding bronchitis and emphysema (Box17.80). 
Not all dusts are pathogenic. For example, silica is highly brogenic, 
whereas iron (siderosis), tin (stannosis) and barium (baritosis) are almost 
inert. Beryllium causes an interstitial granulomatous disease similar to 
sarcoidosis. In many types of pneumoconiosis, a long period of dust 
exposure is required before radiological changes appear and these 
may precede clinical symptoms. The most important pneumoconioses 
include coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, silicosis and asbestosis.
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP) follows prolonged inhalation of 
coal dust. Dust-laden alveolar macrophages aggregate to form macules 
in or near the centre of the secondary pulmonary lobule and a brotic 
reaction ensues, resulting in the appearance of scattered discrete brotic 
lesions. Classication is based on the size and extent of radiographic 
nodularity. Simple coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (SCWP) refers to the 
appearance of small radiographic nodules in an otherwise asymptomatic 
individual. SCWP does not impair lung function and, once exposure 
ceases, will seldom progress. Progressive massive brosis (PMF) refers 
to the formation of one or more conglomerate masses more than 1 cm 
in diameter (mainly in the upper lobes), which may calcify, cavitate, or 
undergo necrosis. The development of PMF is usually associated with 
cough, sputum that may be black (melanoptysis) and breathlessness. 
Despite the term brosis, examination is unremarkable, and the identi-
cation of clubbing or crepitations suggests an alternative diagnosis. The 
chest X-ray appearances may be confused with lung cancer, TB and 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). Management involves remov-
ing or reducing coal dust exposure, and is otherwise supportive treat-
ment. PMF may progress, even after coal dust exposure ceases, and 
in extreme cases leads to respiratory failure and right ventricular failure. 
CWP is not associated with increased risk of lung cancer.
Caplan syndrome describes the coexistence of rheumatoid arthri-
tis and rounded brotic nodules 0.5–5 cm in diameter. They show 
pathological features similar to a rheumatoid nodule, including central 
necrosis, palisading histiocytes, and a peripheral rim of lymphocytes 
and plasma cells. This syndrome may also occur in other types of 
pneumoconiosis.
Silicosis
Silicosis results from the inhalation of crystalline silica, usually in the form of 
quartz, by workers cutting, grinding and polishing stone. Patients experi-
ence dry cough and breathlessness, with the sensation of chest restriction 
400
450
500
550
600
0%
20%
50%
Diurnal
variation
of PEF
Peak flow (L/min)
Weekdays
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
m
t
w
t
f
s
s
Fig. 17.60 Peak ow readings in occupational asthma. In this example, an individual with suspected occupational asthma has performed serial peak ow recording both at 
and away from work. The maximum, mean and minimum values are plotted daily. Days at work are indicated by the shaded areas. The diurnal variation is displayed at the top. 
Here, a period away from work is followed by a marked improvement in peak ow readings and a reduction in diurnal variation. (PEF = peak expiratory ow)

[[p589]]
Occupational and environmental lung disease    543
17
replicated on spirometry. Classic or sub-acute silicosis is most common 
and usually manifests after 10–20 years of continuous silica exposure, 
during which time the patient remains asymptomatic. Accelerated silico-
sis is associated with a much shorter duration of dust exposure (typically 
5–10 years), may present as early as after 1 year of exposure and, as the 
name suggests, follows a more aggressive course. Intense exposure to 
very ne crystalline silica dust can cause a more acute disease: silicopro-
teinosis, similar to alveolar proteinosis (see Box 17.78). Chronic silicosis 
can develop after 10–30 years of continuous exposure to lower concen-
trations of silica dust.
Radiological features are similar to those of CWP, with multiple well-cir-
cumscribed 3–5 mm nodular opacities predominantly in the mid- and 
upper zones. As the disease progresses, PMF may develop (Fig. 17.61), 
and often does so more rapidly than in CWP and with larger opacities. 
Enlargement of the hilar glands with an ‘egg-shell’ pattern of calcication 
is said to be characteristic but is non-specic. Silica is highly brogenic 
and the disease is usually progressive, even when exposure ceases; 
hence the affected worker should invariably be removed from further 
exposure. Individuals with silicosis are at increased risk of TB (silicotu-
berculosis), non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection, lung cancer and 
COPD; associations with renal and connective tissue disease have also 
been described. Treatment, aside from stopping exposure, is mainly sup-
portive, though some individuals benet from inhaled bronchodilators, 
and transplant is occasionally appropriate.
Berylliosis
Exposure to beryllium is encountered in the aerospace, engineering, tele-
communications and biomedical industries. The presence of cough, pro-
gressive breathlessness, night sweats and arthralgia in a worker exposed 
to dusts, fumes or vapours containing beryllium should raise suspicion 
of berylliosis. Berylliosis is a delayed hypersensitivity-type reaction with 
a symptom latency ranging from months to more than 10 years. The 
radiographic appearances are similar in type and distribution to those 
of sarcoidosis, with nodules and then progression to interstitial brosis 
predominantly in the upper lobes. Bronchoalveolar lavage reveals lym-
phocytes, biopsy shows sarcoid-like granulomas, and spirometry is 
restrictive. The diagnosis may be conrmed by the beryllium lymphocyte 
proliferation test, which indicates sensitization to beryllium. Treatment is 
with long-term steroids to delay or prevent progression to brosis. As 
with sarcoidosis, complications can occur as a result of hypercalcaemia.
Less common pneumoconioses
Siderosis refers to the development of a benign iron oxide pneumoco-
niosis in welders and other iron foundry workers. Baritosis may be seen 
in barium process workers and stannosis in tin rening. Haematite lung 
occurs in iron ore miners and resembles silicosis but stains the lung red. 
Diamond polishers may develop hard metal disease, which is similar to 
UIP but the pathology shows a giant-cell interstitial pneumonia. Workers 
exposed to aluminium oxide develop bauxite pneumoconiosis, some-
times referred to as Shaver disease. Popcorn worker’s lung is a form 
17.80  Lung diseases caused by exposure to inorganic dusts
Cause
Occupation
Description
Characteristic pathological features
Coal dust
Coal mining
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
Focal and interstitial brosis, 
centrilobular emphysema, progressive 
massive brosis
Silica
Mining, quarrying, stone dressing, 
metal grinding, pottery, boiler scaling
Silicosis
Asbestos
Demolition, ship breaking, 
manufacture of reproof insulating 
materials, pipe and boiler lagging
Asbestos-related disease
Pleural plaques, diffuse pleural 
thickening, acute benign pleurisy, 
carcinoma of lung, interstitial brosis, 
mesothelioma
Iron oxide
Arc welding
Siderosis
Mineral deposition only
Tin oxide
Tin mining
Stannosis
Tin-laden macrophages
Beryllium
Aircraft, atomic energy and 
electronics industries
Berylliosis
Granulomas, interstitial brosis
B
A
Fig. 17.61 Silicosis.
resolution computed tomogram from the same patient, demonstrating conglomeration 
of nodules with posterior bias.

[[p590]]
544    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
of obliterative bronchiolitis following ingestion of diacetyl, used in butter 
avouring.
Lung diseases due to organic dusts
A wide range of organic agents may cause respiratory disorders (Box 
17.81). Disease results from a local immune response to animal proteins 
or fungal antigens in mouldy vegetable matter. Hypersensitivity pneumo-
nitis is the most common of these conditions.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; previously called extrinsic allergic alve-
olitis) results from the inhalation of a wide variety of organic antigens 
that give rise to a diffuse immune complex reaction in the walls of alveoli 
and bronchioles. Common causes include farmer’s lung and bird fanci-
er’s lung. Other examples are shown in Box 17.81. HP is not exclusively 
occupational or environmental and other important causes include med-
ications (see Box 17.77).
The pathology of HP is consistent with both type III and type IV immu-
nological mechanisms. Precipitating IgG antibodies may be detected 
in the serum and a type III Arthus reaction is believed to occur in the 
lung, where the precipitation of immune complexes results in activation 
of complement and an inammatory response in the alveolar walls, char-
acterised by the inux of mononuclear cells and foamy histiocytes. The 
presence of poorly formed non-caseating granulomas in the alveolar 
walls suggests that type IV responses are also important. The distribution 
of the inammatory inltrate is predominantly peribronchiolar. Chronic 
forms of the disease may be accompanied by brosis. For reasons that 
remain uncertain, there is a lower incidence of HP in smokers compared 
to non-smokers.
Clinical features
The presentation of HP varies from an acute form to a more indolent 
pattern in accordance with the antigen load. For example, the farmer 
exposed to mouldy hay, as occurs when the hay is gathered and stored 
damp during a wet summer, or the pigeon fancier cleaning a large pigeon 
loft, will, within a few hours, report inuenza-like symptoms accompa-
nied by cough, breathlessness and wheeze. The individual with low-level 
antigen exposure, however, such as the owner of an indoor pet bird, 
will typically present in a more indolent fashion with slowly progressive 
breathlessness; in some cases, established brosis may be present by 
the time the disease is recognised. Chest auscultation typically reveals 
widespread end-inspiratory crackles and squeaks.
Investigations
In cases of acute HP, the chest X-ray typically shows ill-dened patchy 
airspace shadowing, which, given the systemic features, may be con-
fused with pneumonia. HRCT is more likely to show bilateral ground-
glass shadowing and areas of consolidation superimposed on small 
centrilobar nodular opacities with an upper and middle lobe predomi-
nance and mosaicism (areas of increased lucency due to air-trapping) 
(Fig. 17.62). In more chronic disease, features of brosis, such as volume 
loss, traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing, appear. In common 
with other brotic diseases, pulmonary function tests show a restrictive 
ventilatory defect with reduced lung volumes and impaired gas transfer, 
dynamic tests may detect oxygen desaturation and, in more advanced 
disease, type I respiratory failure is present at rest.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HP is usually based on the characteristic clinical and 
radiological features, together with the identication of a potential source 
of antigen at the patient’s home or place of work (Box 17.82). It may be 
supported by a positive serum antibody (IgG) or precipitin test or by more 
sensitive serological investigations. It is important, however, to be aware 
that the presence of antibodies in the absence of other features does not 
make the diagnosis; the great majority of farmers with positive precipitins 
do not have farmer’s lung, and up to 15% of pigeon breeders may have 
positive serum precipitins yet remain healthy.
Where HP is suspected but the cause is not readily apparent, a visit 
to the patient’s home or workplace should be arranged. Occasionally, 
B
A
Fig. 17.62 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. 
an interstitial inammatory inltrate in the lung, and expanding alveolar walls, with a 
peribronchial distribution. Within the inltrate, there are foci of small, poorly dened 
non-caseating granulomas (inset), which often lie adjacent to the airways. In this 
case, there is little in the way of established lung brosis but this can be marked. 
(A) Courtesy of Dr S. Jackson, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh. (B) Courtesy of 
Dr William Wallace, Department of Pathology, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.
17.81  Examples of lung diseases caused by organic dusts
Disorder
Source
Antigen/agent
Farmer’s lung*
Mouldy hay, straw, 
grain
Saccharopolyspora 
rectivirgula (formerly 
Micropolyspora faeni)
Aspergillus fumigatus
Bird fancier’s lung*
Avian excreta, proteins 
and feathers
Avian serum proteins
Malt worker’s lung*
Mouldy maltings
Aspergillus clavatus
Cheese worker’s 
lung*
Mouldy cheese
Aspergillus clavatus 
Penicillium casei
Maple bark stripper’s 
lung*
Bark from stored maple
Cryptostroma corticale
Saxophone player’s 
lung*
Reed of any wind 
instrument
Fusarium spp.
Penicillium spp.
Cladosporium spp.
Byssinosis
Textile industries
Cotton, ax, hemp dust
Inhalation 
(‘humidier’) fever
Contamination of air 
conditioning
Thermophilic 
actinomycetes
*Presents as hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

[[p591]]
Occupational and environmental lung disease    545
17
such as when an agent previously unrecognised as causing HP is sus-
pected, provocation testing may be necessary to prove the diagnosis; 
if positive, inhalation of the relevant antigen is followed after 3–6 hours 
by pyrexia and a reduction in vital capacity and gas transfer factor. BAL 
uid usually shows an increase in the number of CD8+ T lymphocytes 
and transbronchial biopsy can occasionally provide sufcient tissue for 
a condent diagnosis; however, open lung biopsy may be necessary. In 
up to 40% of patients with HP, the causative antigen remains unknown 
despite extensive investigation.
Management
If it is practical, the patient should cease exposure to the inciting agent. In 
some cases this may be difcult, however, because of either implications 
for livelihood (e.g. farmers) or addiction to hobbies (e.g. pigeon breed-
ers). Dust masks with appropriate lters may minimise exposure and 
may be combined with methods of reducing levels of antigen (e.g. dry-
ing hay before storage). In acute cases, prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg is given 
daily until clinical and radiological resolution, before slowly weaning over 
several months down to 10 mg/day for a further few months. Severely 
hypoxaemic patients may require high-concentration oxygen therapy ini-
tially. Most patients recover completely, but if unchecked, brosis may 
progress to cause severe respiratory disability, hypoxaemia, pulmonary 
hypertension, cor pulmonale and eventually death.
Inhalation (‘humidier’) fever
Inhalation fever shares similarities with HP. It occurs as a result of con-
taminated humidiers or air-conditioning units that release a ne spray 
of microorganisms into the atmosphere. The illness is characterised by 
self-limiting fever and breathlessness; permanent sequelae are unusual. 
An identical syndrome can also develop after disturbing an accumula-
tion of mouldy hay, compost or mulch. So-called ‘hot tub lung’ appears 
to be attributable to Mycobacterium avium. Outbreaks of HP in work-
ers using metalworking uids appear to be linked to Acinetobacter or 
Ochrobactrum
Asbestos-related lung and pleural diseases
Asbestos is a naturally occurring silicate. Asbestos bres may be classi-
ed as either serpentine (chrysotile or white asbestos), which accounts 
for 95% of the world’s production, or amphibole serpentine (crocidolite or 
blue asbestos, and amosite or brown asbestos). The favourable thermal 
and chemical insulation properties led to its extensive use by the ship-
building and construction industries throughout the latter part of the 20th 
century. Exposure to asbestos may be followed, after a lengthy latent 
period, by the development of both pleural and pulmonary disease. With 
the exception of an increased risk of lung cancer in asbestosis, benign 
asbestos-related diseases do not increase the risk of malignancy beyond 
that already resulting from exposure to asbestos.
Pleural plaques
Pleural plaques are the most common manifestation of previous asbes-
tos exposure, being discrete circumscribed areas of hyaline brosis sit-
uated on the parietal pleura of the chest wall, diaphragm, pericardium 
or mediastinum. They are virtually always asymptomatic, usually being 
identied as an incidental nding on a chest X-ray (Fig. 17.63) or thoracic 
CT scan, particularly when partially calcied. They do not cause impair-
ment of lung function and are benign.
Acute benign asbestos pleurisy
Benign asbestos pleurisy is estimated to occur in around 20% of asbes-
tos workers but many episodes are subclinical and pass unreported. 
When symptomatic, patients present with features of pleurisy, including 
mild fever and systemic disturbance. The diagnosis requires the exclu-
sion of other causes of pleurisy, and treatment is with NSAIDs. Repeated 
episodes may be followed by the development of diffuse (visceral) pleural 
thickening.
Benign asbestos-related pleural effusion
Benign asbestos-related pleural effusions are usually small and unilat-
eral. The patient is commonly asymptomatic, though some have symp-
toms of pleurisy or breathlessness, especially if the effusion is moderate 
to large. Diagnosis requires the exclusion of mesothelioma, usually by 
thorascopy. Pleural uid analysis demonstrates an exudate that is often 
haemorrhagic. Treatment is with drainage if symptomatic.
Diffuse pleural thickening
Diffuse pleural thickening (DPT) refers to thickening of the visceral pleura. 
In contrast to pleural plaques, if this is sufciently extensive, it may cause 
restrictive lung function impairment, exertional breathlessness and, 
occasionally, persistent chest pain. The typical appearances of DPT on 
chest X-ray include thickening of the pleura along the chest wall and 
obliteration of the costophrenic angles. Earlier manifestations detected 
by CT scanning include parenchymal bands (Fig. 17.64) and ‘rounded 
atelectasis’. There is no treatment and the condition may be progressive 
in around one-third of individuals. A pleural biopsy may be required to 
exclude mesothelioma.
Asbestosis
Fibrosis of the lung following asbestos exposure generally requires sub-
stantial exposure over several years and is rarely associated with low-
level or bystander exposure (unlike other asbestos-related diseases). In 
common with other brosing lung diseases, asbestosis usually presents 
with exertional breathlessness and ne, late inspiratory crackles over 
the lower zones. Finger clubbing may be present. Pulmonary function 
tests and HRCT appearances are similar to those of UIP. These features, 
17.82  Predictive factors in the identication of hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis
 Exposure to a known offending antigen
 Positive precipitating antibodies to offending antigen
 Recurrent episodes of symptoms
 Inspiratory crackles on examination
 Symptoms occurring 4–8 hours after exposure
 Weight loss
Fig. 17.63 Asbestos-related benign pleural plaques. Chest X-ray showing 
extensive calcied pleural plaques (‘candle wax’ appearance – arrows), particularly 
marked on the diaphragm and lateral pleural surfaces.

[[p592]]
546    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
accompanied by a history of substantial asbestos exposure, are gener-
ally sufcient to establish the diagnosis. In some cases, asbestos bre 
counts may be performed on lung biopsy material to establish the diag-
nosis, but this is rarely appropriate pre-mortem.
Asbestosis is usually slowly progressive and has a better prognosis 
than untreated IPF. In advanced cases respiratory failure, pulmonary 
hypertension and cor pulmonale may still develop, and treatment is sup-
portive. Those with asbestosis have a 10-fold increased risk of develop-
ing lung cancer, with rates even higher amongst those with additional 
smoking history.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a malignant tumour affecting the pleura or, less com-
monly, the peritoneum. Its occurrence almost invariably suggests past 
asbestos exposure, which may be low-level. There is typically a long 
latent interval between rst exposure and the onset of clinical mani-
festations, and this accounts for the continued increasing incidence 
many years after control measures have been implemented. Despite 
regulations, 125 million people are exposed to asbestos in the work-
place. Around 1 in 170 of all British men born in the 1940s will die of 
mesothelioma.
Pleural mesothelioma typically presents with increasing breathless-
ness resulting from pleural effusion or unremitting chest pain, reecting 
involvement of the chest wall. As the tumour progresses, it encases the 
underlying lung and may invade the parenchyma, the mediastinum and 
the pericardium. Metastatic disease, although not often clinically detect-
able in life, is a common nding on postmortem examination.
Mesothelioma is almost invariably fatal. The use of chemotherapy 
may improve quality of life and is accompanied by a small survival ben-
et, typically regarded as being around 3 months. Radiotherapy can be 
used to control pain. A variety of surgical techniques have been trialled, 
but to date these have shown no benet and even possible harm to 
patients. Pleural effusions are managed with drainage (preferably with 
indwelling pleural catheters) with or without pleurodesis. Typical gures 
for survival from onset of symptoms are around 16 months for epithelioid 
tumours, 10 months for sarcomatoid tumours and 15 months for bipha-
sic tumours, with only a minority of patients surviving for longer periods.
Occupational lung cancer
Individuals exposed to substantial quantities of asbestos are at increased 
risk of lung cancer, particularly if they smoke tobacco. Increased risks of 
lung cancer have also been reported in workers who develop silicosis 
and those exposed to radon gas, beryllium, diesel exhaust fumes, cad-
mium, chromium, and dust and fumes from coke plants.
Occupational pneumonia
Occupational and environmental exposures may be linked to the 
development of pneumonia. Pneumococcal vaccine is recommended 
for welders and metal workers. Farm workers, abattoir workers and 
hide factory workers may be exposed to Coxiella burnetii, the caus-
ative agent of Q fever. The organisms are excreted from milk, urine, 
faeces and amniotic uid; they may be transmitted by cattle ticks or 
contaminated dust from the milking oor, or by drinking milk that is 
inadequately pasteurised. Birds (often parrots) or budgerigars infected 
with Chlamydophila psittaci can cause psittacosis. Sewage workers, 
farmers, animal handlers and vets run an increased risk of leptospi-
rosis and leptospiral pneumonia, due to their exposure to Leptospira 
interrogans in rodent urine. Contact with rabbits, hares, muskrats and 
ground squirrels is associated with tularaemic pneumonia, caused by 
Francisella tularensis. Anthrax (wool-sorter’s disease) may occur in 
workers exposed to hides, hair, bristle, bonemeal and animal carcases 
that are contaminated with Bacillus anthracis spores. In some countries, 
COVID-19 is classied as an occupational disease of people whose 
occupations cause them to come into close contact with other people 
(e.g. medical staff, taxi drivers, retail workers etc.). This is potentially a 
contentious issue, however, as the high prevalance of the disease in 
the community makes it difcult to establish the specic source of a 
COVID-19  infection.
Pulmonary vascular disease
Pulmonary embolism
The majority of pulmonary emboli arise from the propagation of lower 
limb deep vein thrombosis (venous thromboembolism, VTE). Rare 
causes include septic emboli (from endocarditis affecting the tricuspid 
or pulmonary valves), tumour (especially choriocarcinoma), fat following 
fracture of long bones (such as the femur), air, and amniotic uid (which 
may enter the mother’s circulation following delivery).
Clinical features
The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) may be aided by asking three 
questions:
 Is the clinical presentation consistent with PE?
 Does the patient have risk factors for PE?
 Are there any alternative diagnoses that can explain the patient’s 
presentation?
Clinical presentation varies, depending on number, size and dis-
tribution of emboli and on underlying cardiorespiratory reserve (Box 
17.83). A recognised risk factor for VTE is present in 80%–90% (see 
Box 25.67). The presence of one or more risk factors increases the risk 
further still.
Investigations
A variety of non-specic radiographic appearances have been described 
(Fig. 17.65) but the chest X-ray is most useful in excluding key differential 
diagnoses, e.g. pneumonia or pneumothorax. Normal appearances in 
an acutely breathless and hypoxaemic patient should raise the suspicion 
of PE, as should bilateral changes in anyone presenting with unilateral 
pleuritic chest pain.
The ECG is often normal but is useful in excluding other important dif-
ferential diagnoses, such as acute myocardial infarction and pericarditis. 
The most common ndings in PE include sinus tachycardia and anterior 
T-wave inversion but these are non-specic; larger emboli may cause 
right heart strain revealed by an S1Q3T3 pattern, ST-segment and T-wave 
changes, or the appearance of right bundle branch block.
Arterial blood gases typically show a reduced PaO2 and a normal or 
low PaCO2, and an increased alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient, but may 
Fig. 17.64 Thoracic CT scan showing right-sided pleural thickening and an 
associated parenchymal band.

[[p593]]
Pulmonary vascular disease    547
17
be normal in a signicant minority. A metabolic acidosis may be seen in 
acute massive PE with cardiovascular collapse.
The 2-level PE Wells score is used to estimate the likelihood of PE 
(Fig.17.66). If a PE is likely, the patient should have denitive imaging 
(as below). If a PE is unlikely, a D-dimer test is performed. An elevated 
D-dimer (see Fig. 9.6) is of limited value, as it may be raised in a variety of 
other conditions, including myocardial infarction, pneumonia and sepsis. 
However, low levels, particularly in the context of a low clinical risk, have 
a high negative predictive value and further investigation is usually unnec-
essary (Fig.17.66). The serum troponin I (see Box 9.3) may be elevated, 
reecting right heart strain.
CTPA is the rst-line diagnostic test (Fig. 17.67). It has the advantage 
of visualising the distribution and extent of the emboli or highlighting an 
alternative diagnosis, such as consolidation, pneumothorax or aortic dis-
section. The sensitivity of CT scanning may be increased by simultan-
eous visualisation of the femoral and popliteal veins, although this is not 
widely practised. As the contrast media may be nephrotoxic, care should 
be taken in patients with renal impairment, and CTPA avoided in those 
with a history of allergy to iodinated contrast media. In these cases, 
either  V/Q  scanning or ventilation/perfusion single photon emission 
computed tomography (V/Q SPECT) may be considered. V/Q scanning 
is of little benet in patients with an abnormal chest X-ray, as perfusion 
abnormalities are likely due to underlying lung disease rather than PE. 
Specic diagnostic and management considerations for PE in pregnancy 
are shown in Box 17.84
Colour Doppler ultrasound of the leg veins may be used in patients 
with suspected PE, particularly if there are clinical signs in a limb, as 
many will have identiable proximal thrombus in the leg veins.
Bedside echocardiography is extremely helpful in the differential diag-
nosis and assessment of acute circulatory collapse. Acute dilatation of 
the right heart is usually present in massive PE, and thrombus (embolism 
in transit) may be visible. Important differential diagnoses, including left 
17.83  Features of pulmonary thromboemboli
Acute massive PE
Acute small/medium PE
Chronic PE
Pathophysiology
Major haemodynamic effects: 
↓cardiac output; acute right heart 
failure
Occlusion of segmental pulmonary 
artery → infarction ± effusion
Chronic occlusion of pulmonary 
microvasculature, right heart failure
Symptoms
Faintness or collapse, crushing central 
chest pain, apprehension, severe 
dyspnoea
Pleuritic chest pain, restricted 
breathing, haemoptysis
Exertional dyspnoea
Late: symptoms of pulmonary 
hypertension or right heart failure
Signs
Major circulatory collapse: 
tachycardia, hypotension, ↑JVP, 
RV gallop rhythm, loud P2, severe 
cyanosis, ↓urinary output
Tachycardia, pleural rub, raised 
hemidiaphragm, crackles, effusion 
(often blood-stained), low-grade fever
Early: may be minimal
Later: RV heave, loud P2
Terminal: signs of right heart failure
Chest X-ray
Usually normal; may be subtle 
oligaemia
Pleuropulmonary opacities, pleural 
effusion, linear shadows, raised 
hemidiaphragm
Enlarged pulmonary artery trunk, 
enlarged heart, prominent right 
ventricle
Electrocardiogram
S1Q3T3 anterior T-wave inversion, 
RBBB
Sinus tachycardia
RV hypertrophy and strain
Arterial blood gases
Markedly abnormal with ↓PaO2 and 
↓PaCO2, metabolic acidosis
May be normal or ↓PaO2 or ↓PaCO2
Exertional ↓PaO2 or desaturation on 
formal exercise testing
Alternative diagnoses
Myocardial infarction, pericardial 
tamponade, aortic dissection
Pneumonia, pneumothorax, 
musculoskeletal chest pain
Other causes of pulmonary 
hypertension
(JVP = jugular venous pressure; PE = pulmonary embolism; RBBB = right bundle branch block; RV = right ventricular)
Pulmonary opacities
(any size or shape,
rarely lobar or segmental,
can cavitate)
Elevated
hemidiaphragm
Horizontal linear opacities
(bilateral and usually in
lower zones)
Pleural effusion
(usually blood-stained
 on aspiration)
Wedge-shaped opacity
Oligaemia of lung field
Enlarged pulmonary
artery
Fig. 17.65 Features of pulmonary thromboembolism/infarction on chest X-ray.

[[p594]]
548    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
considered in patients with an absolute contraindication to thrombolysis, 
but carries a high mortality.
Caval lters
An inferior vena cava lter should be considered in any patient in whom 
anticoagulation is contraindicated or who has had recurrent VTE despite 
anticoagulation. Retrievable caval lters are particularly useful in individu-
als with temporary risk factors. The caval lter should be used only until 
anticoagulation can be safely initiated, at which time the lter should be 
removed if possible.
Further investigations
All patients with an unprovoked PE (those with no risk factors) should 
be assessed for underlying malignancy. A detailed history, examina-
tion (including breast and rectal examination) and review of baseline 
bloods,should elicit any red-ag symptoms, signs or results. Further 
focused investigation is required only if there are any positive ndings.
Thrombophilia screening is only considered for patients with an unpro-
voked PE and a plan to stop anticoagulation. Specialist advice is recom-
mended as test results can be affected by anticoagulation.
Prognosis
Immediate mortality is greatest in those with echocardiographic evidence 
of right ventricular dysfunction or cardiogenic shock. Once anticoagula-
tion is commenced, however, the risk of mortality falls rapidly. The risk of 
recurrence is highest in the rst 6–12 months after the initial event, and at 
10 years around one-third of individuals will have suffered a further event. 
Patients with right ventricular dysfunction at presentation should have a 
Fig. 17.67 CT pulmonary angiogram. The arrow points to a saddle embolism in 
the bifurcation of the pulmonary artery.
17.84  Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy
 Maternal mortality: venous thromboembolism is the leading direct cause in 
the UK.
 CT pulmonary angiography: may be performed safely (0.01–0.06 mGy). It is 
important to consider the risk of radiation to breast tissue (particularly if there is 
a family history of breast carcinoma).
 V/Q scanning: greater radiation dose to fetus (0.11–0.22 mGy) but signicantly 
less to maternal breast tissue.
 In utero radiation exposure: estimated incidence of childhood malignancy is 
about 1 in 16 000 per mGy.
 Warfarin: teratogenic, so pulmonary embolism should be treated with low-
molecular-weight heparin during pregnancy.
ventricular failure, aortic dissection and pericardial tamponade, can also 
be identied.
In the absence of haemodynamic instability and hypoxia, most 
patients can have outpatient investigations for PE, providing they receive 
anticoagulation. The Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index (PESI) predicts 
30-day outcome, and those with a low risk of morbidity and mortality can 
be considered for outpatient management.
Management
General measures
Prompt recognition and treatment are potentially life-saving. Sufcient 
oxygen should be given to hypoxaemic patients to maintain the target 
oxygen saturations specied on p. 195. Opiates may be necessary to 
relieve pain and distress but should be used with caution in the hypo-
tensive patient.
Anticoagulation
The main principle of treatment for PE is anticoagulation, which is dis-
cussed for PE and other forms of venous thromboembolism (VTE) on 
page 985.
Thrombolytic and surgical therapy
Thrombolysis is indicated in any patient presenting with acute massive PE 
accompanied by haemodynamic instability. Patients must be screened 
carefully for haemorrhage risk, as there is a high risk of intracranial haem-
orrhage. Surgical or percutaneous pulmonary embolectomy may be 
Determine 2-level
PE Wells score
PE
suspected
Wells score >4 points
PE likely
Immediate CTPA
or
Interim therapeutic
anticoagulation while
awaiting CTPA
Quantative D-dimer test and
result in 4 hours
or
Interim therapeutic anticoagulation
while awaiting test result
Wells score ≤4 points
PE unlikely
D-dimer positive
D-dimer negative
CTPA positive
Consider outpatient treatment for low-risk PE
Diagnose PE
and offer
or continue
treatment
Consider
proximal leg
vein ultrasound
scan
Stop any anticoagulation
and think about other
diagnoses
CTPA negative
DVT suspected
DVT not suspected
Fig. 17.66 Algorithm for the investigation of patients with suspected 
pulmonary thromboembolism. Clinical risk is based on the presence of risk factors 
for venous thromboembolism and the probability of another diagnosis. (CTPA = 
computed tomography pulmonary angiography; DVT = deep vein thrombosis; PE = 
pulmonary embolism)

[[p595]]
Pulmonary vascular disease    549
17
repeat echocardiogram at 3 months to assess for evidence of chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH).
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is dened as a mean pulmonary artery pres-
sure (PAP) of at least 25 mmHg at rest, as measured by right heart cath-
eterisation. The denition may be further rened by consideration of the 
pulmonary wedge pressure (PWP), the cardiac output and the transpul-
monary pressure gradient (mean PAP 
 mean PWP). The clinical clas-
sication of PH is shown in Box 17.85. Further classication is based on 
the degree of functional disturbance, assessed using the New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) grades I–IV. Although respiratory failure due to intrinsic 
pulmonary disease is the most common cause of PH, severe PH may 
occur as a primary disorder, as a complication of connective tissue disease 
(e.g. systemic sclerosis), left heart disease, or as a result of CTEPH.
Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is a rare but important dis-
ease that predominantly affects women aged between 20 and 30 years. 
Familial disease is rarer still but is known to be associated with patho-
genic variants in the gene encoding type II bone morphogenetic protein 
receptor (BMPR2), a member of the transforming growth factor beta 
(TGF-β) superfamily. Variants in this gene have been identied in some 
patients with sporadic PH. Pathological features include hypertrophy of 
both the media and the intima of the vessel wall and a clonal expansion 
of endothelial cells, which take on the appearance of plexiform lesions. 
There is marked narrowing of the vessel lumen and this, together with the 
frequently observed in situ thrombosis, leads to an increase in pulmonary 
vascular resistance and PH.
Clinical features
PH presents insidiously and is often diagnosed late. Typical symptoms 
include breathlessness, chest pain, fatigue, palpitations, exertional diz-
ziness and syncope. Important signs include elevation of the JVP (with 
a prominent ‘a’ wave if in sinus rhythm), a parasternal heave (right ven-
tricular hypertrophy), accentuation of the pulmonary component of the 
second heart sound, a right ventricular third heart sound, peripheral 
oedema and ascites. Signs of interstitial lung disease or cardiac, liver or 
connective tissue disease may suggest the underlying cause.
Investigations
PH is suspected if an ECG shows a right ventricular ‘strain’ pattern or a 
chest X-ray shows enlarged pulmonary arteries, peripheral pruning and 
right ventricle enlargement (Fig. 17.68). Doppler assessment of the tricus-
pid regurgitant jet by transthoracic echocardiography provides a non-in-
vasive estimate of the PAP, which is equal to 4×(tricuspid regurgitation 
velocity)2. Further assessment should be by right heart catheterisation to 
assess pulmonary haemodynamics, measure vasodilator responsiveness 
and thus guide further therapy. Additional investigations are performed to 
identify the cause of PH, including pulmonary function tests, V/Q scan, CT 
thorax, CTPA, MRI, overnight oximetry and exercise testing.
Management
Specialist centres should direct the management of PH. Diuretic therapy 
should be prescribed for patients with right heart failure. Supplemental 
oxygen should be given to maintain resting PaO2 above 8 kPa (60 mmHg). 
Anticoagulation should be considered unless there is an increased risk 
of bleeding. Digoxin may be useful in patients who develop atrial tachy-
arrhythmias. Pregnancy carries a very high risk of death and women of 
child-bearing age should be counselled appropriately. Excessive physical 
activity that leads to distressing symptoms should be avoided but oth-
erwise patients should be encouraged to remain active. Pneumococcal 
and inuenza vaccination should be offered. Nitrates should be avoided 
owing to the risk of hypotension, and β-blockers are poorly tolerated. 
Cyclizine can aggravate PH and should also be avoided.
Disease-targeted strategies have focused on replacing endogen-
ous prostacyclins with epoprostenol, treprostinil or iloprost; blocking 
endothelin-mediated vasoconstriction with agents such as bosentan, 
ambrisentan or macitentan; or enhancing endogenous nitric oxide- 
mediated vasodilatation with phosphodiesterase V inhibitors such as 
sildenal or tadalal, or the guanylate cyclase stimulator riociguat. High-
dose calcium channel blockers may be appropriate in those with an 
acute vasodilator response.
Selected patients are referred for double-lung transplantation, and 
pulmonary thrombo-endarterectomy may be contemplated in those with 
CTEPH. Atrial septostomy (the creation of a right-to-left shunt) decom-
presses the right ventricle and improves haemodynamic performance; it 
may be used as a bridge to transplantation.
17.85  Classication of pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
 Idiopathic
 Heritable
 Drugs
 Connective tissue disease
 HIV
 Portal hypertension
 Congenital heart disease
 Schistosomiasis
 Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease
 Pulmonary capillary haemaglomatosis
Pulmonary hypertension owing to left heart disease
 Systolic dysfunction
 Diastolic dysfunction
 Valvular disease
Pulmonary hypertension owing to lung disease/hypoxia
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Interstitial lung disease
 Sleep-disordered breathing
Pulmonary hypertension caused by chronic thromboembolic disease
 Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH)
Miscellaneous
 Haematological – chronic haematolytic anaemia, myeloproliferative disease, 
splenectomy
 Systemic disorders – sarcoidosis, Langerhans cells histiocytosis, 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, neurobromatosis, vasculitis
 Metabolic disorders – glycogen storage disease, Gaucher’s disease, thyroid 
disorder
 Others – extrinsic tumour obstruction, brosing mediastinitis, chronic kidney 
disease
Adapted from Kiely DG, Elliot CA, Sabroe I, Condliffe R. Pulmonary hypertension: diagnosis and 
management. BMJ 2013;346:f2028.
Fig. 17.68 Chest X-ray showing the typical appearance in pulmonary 
hypertension.

[[p596]]
550    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Diseases of the upper airway
Diseases of the nasopharynx
Allergic rhinitis
This is a disorder in which there are episodes of nasal congestion, watery 
nasal discharge and sneezing. It may be seasonal or perennial, and is due 
to an immediate hypersensitivity reaction in the nasal mucosa. Seasonal 
antigens include pollens from grasses, owers, weeds or trees. Grass 
pollen is responsible for hay fever, the most common type of seasonal 
allergic rhinitis in northern Europe, which is at its peak between May and 
July. This is a worldwide problem, however, which may be aggravated 
during harvest seasons.
Perennial allergic rhinitis may be a specic reaction to antigens derived 
from house dust, fungal spores or animal dander, but similar symptoms 
can be caused by physical or chemical irritants, e.g. pungent odours or 
fumes, including strong perfumes, cold air and dry atmospheres. The 
phrase ‘vasomotor rhinitis’ is often used in this context, as the term ‘aller-
gic’ is a misnomer.
Clinical features
In the seasonal type, there are frequent sudden attacks of sneezing, with 
profuse watery nasal discharge and nasal obstruction. These attacks last 
for a few hours and are often accompanied by pruritus, watering of the 
eyes and conjunctival irritation. In perennial rhinitis, the symptoms are 
similar but more continuous and usually less severe. Skin hypersensitivity 
tests with the relevant antigen are usually positive in seasonal allergic 
rhinitis but are less useful in perennial rhinitis.
Management
In those sensitised to house dust, simple measures, such as thorough 
dust removal from the bed area, leaving a window open and washing all 
bedding once weekly, are often helpful. Avoidance of pollen and anti-
gens from domestic pets, however desirable and benecial, is usually 
impractical.
The following medications, singly or in combination, are usually effec-
tive in both seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis:
 an antihistamine (such as loratadine or cetirizine)
 sodium cromoglicate nasal spray
 glucocorticoid nasal spray, e.g. beclometasone dipropionate, utica-
sone, mometasone or budesonide.
When symptoms are very severe, resistant to usual treatments and 
seriously interfering with school, business or social activities, immuno-
therapy (desensitisation) is also used but carries the risk of serious reac-
tions and must be managed in specialist centres. Vasomotor rhinitis is 
often difcult to treat but may respond to ipratropium bromide, adminis-
tered into each nostril 3 times daily.
Sleep-disordered breathing
A variety of respiratory disorders affect sleep or are affected by sleep. 
Cough and wheeze disturbing sleep are characteristic of asthma, while 
the hypoventilation that accompanies normal sleep can precipitate res-
piratory failure in patients with disordered ventilation due to chest wall 
restrictive diseases, neuromuscular diseases, or diaphragmatic paralysis.
In contrast, a small but important group of disorders cause problems 
only during sleep. Patients may have normal lungs and daytime respira-
tory function, but during sleep have either abnormalities of ventilatory 
drive (central sleep apnoea) or upper airway obstruction (obstructive 
sleep apnoea). Of these, the obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syn-
drome is by far the most common and important. When this coexists 
with COPD (overlap syndrome), severe respiratory failure can result, even 
if the COPD is mild.
The obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome
Recurrent upper airway obstruction during sleep, sufcient to cause 
sleep fragmentation and daytime sleepiness, is thought to affect 2% of 
women and 4% of men aged 30–60 in populations of predominantly 
European descent. Daytime sleepiness, especially in monotonous situa-
tions, results in a threefold increased risk of road trafc accidents and a 
ninefold increased risk of single-vehicle accidents.
Aetiology
Sleep apnoea results from recurrent occlusion of the pharynx during 
sleep, usually at the level of the soft palate. Inspiration results in negative 
pressure within the pharynx. During wakefulness, upper airway dilating 
muscles, including palatoglossus and genioglossus, contract actively 
during inspiration to preserve airway patency. During sleep, muscle tone 
declines, impairing the ability of these muscles to maintain pharyngeal 
patency. In a minority of people, a combination of an anatomically nar-
row palatopharynx and under-activity of the dilating muscles during sleep 
results in inspiratory airway obstruction. Incomplete obstruction causes 
turbulent ow, resulting in snoring (44% of men and 28% of women aged 
30–60 snore). More severe obstruction triggers increased inspiratory 
effort and transiently wakes the patient, allowing the dilating muscles 
to re-open the airway. These awakenings are so brief that patients have 
no recollection of them. After a series of loud deep breaths that may 
wake their bed partner, the patient rapidly returns to sleep, snores and 
becomes apnoeic once more. This cycle of apnoea and awakening may 
repeat itself many hundreds of times per night and results in severe sleep 
fragmentation and secondary variations in blood pressure, which may 
predispose over time to cardiovascular disease.
Factors that predispose to the obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea 
syndrome (OSAHS) include male gender, which doubles the risk, and 
obesity, which is found in about 70% because parapharyngeal fat depos-
its tend to narrow the pharynx. Nasal obstruction or a recessed mandi-
ble can further exacerbate the problem. Acromegaly and hypothyroidism 
also predispose by causing submucosal inltration and narrowing of 
the upper airway. Sleep apnoea is often familial, where the maxilla and 
mandible are back-set, narrowing the upper airway. Alcohol and sed-
atives predispose to snoring and apnoea by relaxing the upper airway 
dilating muscles. As a result of marked sympathetic activation during 
apnoea, sleep-disordered breathing is associated over time with sus-
tained hypertension and an increased risk of coronary events and stroke. 
Associations have also been described with insulin resistance, the meta-
bolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. In addition to improving symptoms 
and reducing vehicular risk, treatment of sleep apnoea reduces sympa-
thetic drive and blood pressure and may also improve these associated 
metabolic disorders.
Clinical features
Excessive daytime sleepiness is the principal symptom and snoring is vir-
tually universal. The patient usually feels that he or she has been asleep 
all night but wakes unrefreshed, though may recall waking with choking/
gasping episodes. Bed partners report loud snoring in all body positions 
and often have noticed multiple breathing pauses (apnoeas). Difculty 
with concentration, impaired cognitive function and work performance, 
depression, irritability and nocturia are other features. Early morning 
headaches may be a sign of more severe OSAHS.
Investigations
Provided that the sleepiness does not result from inadequate time in bed 
or from shift work, anyone who repeatedly falls asleep during the day when 
not in bed, who complains that their work is impaired by sleepiness, or who 
is a habitual snorer with multiple witnessed apnoeas should be referred for 
a sleep assessment. A more quantitative assessment of daytime tendency 
to fall asleep can be obtained by questionnaire (Box 17.86).
Overnight studies of breathing, oxygenation and sleep quality are 
diagnostic (Fig. 17.69) but the level of investigation depends on local 
resources and the probability of the diagnosis. The severity of OSAHS 

[[p597]]
Diseases of the upper airway    551
17
is determined by the number of apnoeas/hypopnoeas per hour of sleep 
(apnoea/hypopnoea index, AHI). An apnoea is dened as a 10-second 
or longer breathing pause and a hypopnoea is a 10-second or longer 
50% reduction in ventilation that results in a 4% drop in arterial oxygen 
saturation. An AHI of 5–14 indicates mild OSAHS, 15–30 is moderate 
and more than 30 is severe.
Several other conditions can cause daytime sleepiness but can usu-
ally be excluded by a careful history (Box 17.87). Narcolepsy is a rare 
cause of sudden-onset sleepiness, occurring in 0.05% of the population. 
Idiopathic hypersomnolence occurs in younger individuals and is charac-
terised by long nocturnal sleeps.
Management
The major hazard to patients and those around them is trafc accidents. 
Drivers must be strongly advised not to drive until treatment has relieved 
their sleepiness, and have a responsibility to inform their driving licence 
authority if there is sleepiness sufcient to impair driving. Overweight or 
obese patients should be encouraged to lose weight, and be considered 
for bariatric surgery if appropriate. Though rarely resulting in complete 
remission of OSAHS, weight loss decreases the AHI and blood pres-
sure, and improves overall health and quality of life. In a minority, relief 
of nasal obstruction or the avoidance of alcohol or sedating medication 
may prevent obstruction. Mandibular advancement devices that t over 
the teeth and hold the mandible forward, thus opening the pharynx, are 
an alternative that is effective in some patients. There is no evidence that 
palatal surgery is of benet. The gold standard therapy for the major-
ity of patients is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) delivered 
by a mask every night to splint the upper airway open. When CPAP is 
tolerated, the effect is often dramatic (see Fig. 17.69), with relief of som-
nolence and improved daytime performance, quality of life and survival. 
Unfortunately, 30%–50% of patients do not tolerate CPAP or have poor 
adherence. Increasing use of telemedicine to remotely monitor CPAP 
use and overnight oximetry will enable non-adherers to be identied and 
supported to improve adherence. Interventions to promote adherence 
include improving mask t, pressure modication and humidication, 
education and behavioural therapy.
Central sleep apnoea and nocturnal hypoventilation
Episodic reduced ventilation during sleep in the absence of upper airway 
obstruction is called central sleep apnoea (CSA) or nocturnal hypoventi-
lation. CSA is much less prevalent than OSAHS.
Aetiology
CSA or nocturnal hypoventilation occur when there is an altered ventila-
tory drive and/or an inability to adequately expand the chest. Loss of drive 
can be a result of brainstem abnormality, such as in post-polio syndrome 
and brainstem stroke, or ventilatory suppression, such as by opiates 
and alcohol. Cheyne–Stokes breathing is a sinusoidal cycling between 
hypoventilation and compensatory hyperventilation, that occurs most 
often when left ventricular failure inuences ventilatory drive. The nor-
mal ventilatory mechanism can be impaired by neurological conditions, 
including myopathies (e.g. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic 
dystrophy), neuropathies (e.g. motor neurone disease, Guillain–Barré 
syndrome), and neuromuscular junction abnormalities (e.g. myasthenia 
gravis). Chest wall expansion is reduced by conditions such as scoliosis 
and severe ankylosing spondylitis. Severe obstructive airways disease 
also impairs ventilation, and the effect is exacerbated by coexisting OSA, 
obesity and/or muscle weakness.
Clinical features
Patients may present with the same signs and symptoms as those with 
OSAHS, in addition to features of the condition that has caused their 
CSA or hypoventilation. Patients can also present in acute type II res-
piratory failure or with features of cor pulmonale (uid retention due to 
chronic hypoxia). Early morning headaches are common.
17.86  Epworth sleepiness scale
How likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the situations described below? 
Choose the most appropriate number for each situation from the following scale:
0 = would never doze
1 = slight chance of dozing
2 = moderate chance of dozing
3 = high chance of dozing
 Sitting and reading
 Watching TV
 Sitting inactive in a public place (e.g. a theatre or a meeting)
 As a passenger in a car for an hour without a break
 Lying down to rest in the afternoon when circumstances permit
 Sitting and talking to someone
 Sitting quietly after a lunch without alcohol
 In a car, while stopped for a few minutes in the trafc
Normal subjects average 5.9 (SD 2.2) and patients with severe  
obstructive sleep apnoea average 16.0 (SD 4.4).
Time (hrs)
Time (hrs)
Oxygen
saturation
(%)
100
50
0
2400 0100 0200 0300 0400
2400 0100 0200 0300 0400
CPAP night
Baseline night
Fig. 17.69 Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome: overnight oxygen 
saturation trace. The left-hand panel shows the trace of a patient who had 53 
apnoeas plus hypopnoeas/hour, 55 brief awakenings/hour and marked oxygen 
desaturation. The right-hand panel shows the effect of continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) of 10 cm H2O delivered through a tight-tting nasal mask: it 
abolished his breathing irregularity and awakenings, and improved oxygenation. 
Courtesy of Professor N.J. Douglas.
17.87  Differential diagnosis of persistent sleepiness
Lack of sleep
 Inadequate time in bed
 Extraneous sleep disruption (e.g. babies/children)
 Shift work
 Excessive caffeine intake
 Physical illness (e.g. pain)
Sleep disruption
 Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome
 Periodic limb movement disorder (recurrent limb movements during non-REM 
sleep, frequent nocturnal awakenings)
Sleepiness with relatively normal sleep
 Narcolepsy
 Idiopathic hypersomnolence (rare)
 Neurological lesions (e.g. hypothalamic or upper brainstem infarcts or tumours)
 Drugs
Psychological/psychiatric
 Depression

[[p598]]
552    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Investigations
Sleep studies are used to differentiate between OSAHS, CSA and noctur-
nal hypoventilation. Blood gases can demonstrate the presence of type 
II respiratory failure, and PFTs can assess ventilatory muscle strength. 
History and examination will often reveal the underlying cause for CSA 
or hypoventilation, but further targeted investigations may be necessary.
Management
Overnight home NIV improves symptoms and, in many conditions, 
prognosis. Sedating medications (unless palliative) and excessive alco-
hol should be stopped. Optimizing heart failure treatment can reduce 
Cheyne–Stokes breathing, but patients who remain symptomatic may 
benet from CPAP or nocturnal oxygen.
Laryngeal disorders
The larynx is commonly affected by acute self-limiting infections. Other 
disorders include chronic laryngitis, laryngeal tuberculosis, laryngeal 
paralysis and laryngeal obstruction. Tumours of the larynx are relatively 
common, particularly in smokers. For further details, the reader should 
refer to an otolaryngology text.
Chronic laryngitis
The common causes are listed in Box 17.88. The chief symptoms are 
hoarseness or loss of voice (aphonia). There is irritation of the throat and 
a spasmodic cough. The disease pursues a chronic course, frequently 
uninuenced by treatment, and the voice may become permanently 
impaired. Other causes of chronic hoarseness include use of inhaled glu-
cocorticoid treatment, tuberculosis, laryngeal paralysis or tumour.
In some patients, a chest X-ray may reveal an unsuspected lung 
cancer or pulmonary tuberculosis. If these are not found, laryngoscopy 
should be performed to exclude a local structural cause.
When no specic treatable cause is found, the voice must be rested 
completely. This is particularly important for public speakers and singers. 
Smoking should be avoided. Some benet may be obtained from fre-
quent inhalations of steam.
Laryngeal paralysis
Interruption of the motor nerve supply of the larynx is nearly always 
unilateral and, because of the intrathoracic course of the left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve, usually left-sided. One or both recurrent laryngeal nerves 
may be damaged by thyroidectomy, carcinoma of the thyroid or anterior 
neck injury. Rarely, the vagal trunk itself is involved by tumour, aneurysm 
or trauma.
Clinical features and management
Hoarseness always accompanies laryngeal paralysis, whatever its 
cause. Paralysis of organic origin is seldom reversible, but when only one 
vocal cord is affected, hoarseness may improve or even disappear after 
a few weeks, as the normal cord compensates by crossing the midline 
to approximate with the paralysed cord on phonation.
‘Bovine cough’ is a characteristic feature of organic laryngeal paral-
ysis, and lacks the explosive quality of normal coughing because the 
cords fail to close the glottis. Sputum clearance may also be impaired. 
A normal cough in patients with partial loss of voice or aphonia virtually 
excludes laryngeal paralysis. Stridor is occasionally present but seldom 
severe, except when laryngeal paralysis is bilateral.
Laryngoscopy is required to establish the diagnosis of laryngeal paral-
ysis. The paralysed cord lies in a paramedian position, midway between 
abduction and adduction.
The cause of laryngeal paralysis should be treated, if possible, and 
speech and language therapy offered. In unilateral paralysis, persistent 
dysphonia may be improved by the injection of bulking agents into the 
affected vocal cord. In bilateral organic paralysis, tracheal intubation, tra-
cheostomy or surgery to reposition and/or reshape the larynx may be 
necessary.
Psychogenic hoarseness and aphonia
Psychogenic causes of hoarseness or aphonia may be suggested by 
associated symptoms in the history (p. 1242). Laryngoscopy may be 
necessary, however, to exclude a physical cause. In psychogenic apho-
nia, only the voluntary movement of adduction of the vocal cords is seen 
to be impaired. Speech therapy may be helpful.
Laryngeal obstruction
Laryngeal obstruction is more liable to occur in children than in adults 
because of the smaller size of the glottis. Important causes are given in 
Box 17.89. Sudden complete laryngeal obstruction by a foreign body 
produces the clinical picture of acute asphyxia: violent but ineffective 
inspiratory efforts with indrawing of the intercostal spaces and the 
unsupported lower ribs, accompanied by cyanosis. Unrelieved, the 
condition progresses to coma and death within a few minutes. When, 
as in most cases, the obstruction is incomplete at rst, the main clin-
ical features are progressive breathlessness accompanied by stridor 
and cyanosis. Urgent treatment to prevent complete obstruction is 
needed.
Management
Laryngeal obstruction carries a high mortality and demands prompt 
treatment. When a foreign body causes laryngeal obstruction, give up 
to ve sharp back blows using the heel of the hand between the scap-
ulae. If this is ineffective use abdominal thrusts, or, in those aged under 
12 months old or pregnant, give chest thrusts.Tracheostomy must be 
performed without delay if these procedures fail to relieve complete 
obstruction. If the adult patient is stable with only partial obstruction, 
direct laryngoscopy can be used to remove the foreign body or insert a 
tube past the obstruction into the trachea to maintain the airway.
In diphtheria, antitoxin should be administered, and for other infections 
the appropriate antibiotic should be given. In angioedema, complete 
laryngeal occlusion can usually be prevented by treatment with adren-
aline (epinephrine; 0.5–1 mg (0.5–1 mL of 1 : 1000) IM), chlorphenamine 
(10 mg by slow intravenous injection) and intravenous hydrocortisone 
sodium succinate (200 mg).
17.88  Causes of chronic laryngitis
 Excessive use of the voice
 Heavy tobacco smoking
 Heavy alcohol intake
 Gastroesophageal reux disease
 Repeated attacks of acute laryngitis
 Chronic sinusitis with post-nasal drip
 Occupational exposure to irritating chemicals or dusts
 Sarcoidosis
17.89  Causes of laryngeal obstruction
 Inammatory or allergic oedema, or exudate
 Spasm of laryngeal muscles
 Inhaled foreign body
 Inhaled blood clot or vomitus in an unconscious patient
 Tumours of the larynx
 Bilateral vocal cord paralysis
 Fixation of both cords in rheumatoid disease

[[p599]]
Pleural disease    553
17
Tracheal disorders
Tracheal obstruction
External compression by lymph nodes containing metastases, usually due 
to lung cancer, is a more frequent cause of tracheal obstruction than pri-
mary benign or malignant tumours. The trachea may also be compressed 
by a retrosternal goitre (see Fig. 20.12). Rare causes include an aneur ysm 
of the aortic arch and (in children) tuberculous mediastinal lymph nodes. 
Tracheal stenosis is an occasional complication of tracheostomy, pro-
longed intubation, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) or trauma.
Clinical features and management
Stridor can be detected in every patient with severe tracheal narrow-
ing. CT will usually enable the cause to be identied, and bronchoscopic 
examination (if safe) can determine the degree and nature of the obstruc-
tion and enable biopsy.
Localised tumours of the trachea can be resected but reconstruction 
after resection may be technically difcult. Endobronchial laser therapy, 
bronchoscopically placed tracheal stents, chemotherapy and radiother-
apy are alternatives to surgery. The choice of treatment depends on the 
nature of the tumour and the general health of the patient. Benign tra-
cheal strictures can sometimes be dilated but may require resection.
Tracheo-oesophageal stula
Tracheo-oesophageal stula may be present in newborn infants as a 
congenital abnormality. In adults, it is usually due to malignant lesions 
in the mediastinum, such as carcinoma or lymphoma, eroding both the 
trachea and oesophagus to produce a communication between them. 
Swallowed liquids enter the trachea and bronchi through the stula and 
provoke coughing.
Surgical closure of a congenital stula, if undertaken promptly, is usually 
successful. There is usually no curative treatment for malignant stulae, 
and death from overwhelming pulmonary infection rapidly supervenes.
Pleural disease
Pleurisy, pleural effusion, empyema and asbestos-associated pleural dis-
ease have been described above. Specic features of pleural disease in 
old age are shown in Box 17.90
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is the presence of air in the pleural space, which can 
either occur spontaneously, or result from iatrogenic injury or trauma to 
the lung or chest wall (Box 17.91). Primary spontaneous pneumothorax 
occurs in patients with no history of lung disease. Smoking, tall stature 
and the presence of apical subpleural blebs are risk factors. Secondary 
pneumothorax affects patients with pre-existing lung disease and is 
associated with higher mortality rates (Fig. 17.70).
Where the communication between the airway and the pleural space 
seals off as the lung deates and does not re-open, the pneumothorax is 
referred to as ‘closed’ (Fig. 17.71A). The mean pleural pressure remains 
negative, spontaneous re-absorption of air and re-expansion of the 
lung occur over a few days or weeks, and infection is uncommon. This 
contrasts with an ‘open’ pneumothorax, where the communication fails 
to seal and air continues to pass freely between the bronchial tree and 
pleural space (Fig. 17.71B). An example of the latter is a bronchopleural 
stula, which can facilitate the transmission of infection from the airways 
into the pleural space, leading to empyema. An open pneumothorax is 
commonly seen following rupture of an emphysematous bulla, tubercu-
lous cavity or lung abscess into the pleural space.
Occasionally, the communication between the airway and the pleural 
space acts as a one-way valve, allowing air to enter the pleural space 
during inspiration but not to escape on expiration. This is a tension 
pneumothorax. Large amounts of trapped air accumulate progressively 
in the pleural space and the intrapleural pressure rises to well above 
atmospheric levels. This causes mediastinal displacement towards the 
opposite side, with compression of the opposite normal lung and impair-
ment of systemic venous return, causing cardiovascular compromise 
(Fig.17.71C).
Clinical features
The most common symptoms are sudden-onset unilateral pleuritic chest 
pain and/or breathlessness. In those individuals with underlying lung 
disease, breathlessness can be severe and may not resolve spontane-
ously. In patients with a small pneumothorax, physical examination may 
be normal. A larger pneumothorax (>15% of the hemithorax) results in 
decreased or absent breath sounds. The combination of absent breath 
sounds and a resonant percussion note is diagnostic of pneumothorax.
17.90  Pleural disease in old age
 Spontaneous pneumothorax: invariably associated with underlying lung 
disease in old age and has a signicant mortality.
 Rib fracture: common cause of pleural-type pain; may be spontaneous (due to 
coughing), traumatic or pathological. Underlying osteomalacia may contribute to 
poor healing, especially in the housebound with no exposure to sunlight.
 Tuberculosis: should always be considered and actively excluded in older 
patients presenting with a unilateral pleural effusion.
 Mesothelioma: more common in older individuals than younger people due to 
a long latency period between asbestos exposure (often more than 20 years) 
and the development of disease.
 Analgesia: frail older people are particularly sensitive to the respiratory 
depressant effects of opiate-based analgesia and careful monitoring is required 
when using these agents for pleural pain.
17.91  Classication of pneumothorax
Spontaneous
Primary
  No evidence of overt lung disease; air escapes from the lung into the pleural 
space through rupture of a small pleural bleb, or the pulmonary end of a pleural 
adhesion
Secondary
  Underlying lung disease, most commonly chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
and tuberculosis; also seen in asthma, lung abscess, pulmonary infarcts, lung 
cancer and all forms of brotic and cystic lung disease
Traumatic
  Iatrogenic (e.g. following thoracic surgery or biopsy) or chest wall injury
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Patient age (years)
Male
Female
Rate per million population
0
200
400
Fig. 17.70 Bimodal age distribution for hospital admissions for pneumothorax 
in England. The incidence of primary spontaneous pneumothorax peaks in males 
aged 15–30 years. Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs mainly in males 
over 55 years.

[[p600]]
554    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
By contrast, in tension pneumothorax there is rapidly progressive 
breathlessness, associated with a marked tachycardia, hypotension, 
 cyanosis and tracheal displacement away from the side of the silent 
hemithorax. Occasionally, tension pneumothorax may occur with-
out mediastinal shift, if malignant disease or scarring has splinted the 
mediastinum.
Investigations
The chest X-ray shows the sharply dened edge of the deated lung with 
complete translucency (no lung markings) between this and the chest 
wall. Care must be taken to differentiate between a large pre-existing 
emphysematous bulla and a pneumothorax. In general, the lung edge is 
convex in a pneumothorax, whereas the edge of a bulla is concave. X-ray 
ndings should be correlated with the patient’s clinical condition. CT is 
used in difcult cases to avoid iatrogenic bronchopleural stula, caused 
by misdirected attempts at aspiration. X-rays may also show the extent 
of any mediastinal displacement and reveal any pleural uid or underlying 
pulmonary disease.
Management
Spontaneous pneumothoraces are classied as large or small on 
account of the distance between the lung edge and chest wall being 
greater or less than 2 cm (this equates to approximately half the volume 
of the hemithorax). Small primary pneumothoraces usually resolve spon-
taneously, and only require intervention if the patient is breathless. For 
these patients, and those with large primary pneumothoraces, percuta-
neous needle aspiration of air is a simple and well-tolerated alternative to 
intercostal tube drainage, with a 60%–80% chance of avoiding the need 
for a chest drain (Fig. 17.72). Patients who remain breathless or have 
a persistent large pneumothorax despite aspiration will require a chest 
drain. In patients with signicant underlying chronic lung disease, how-
ever, secondary pneumothorax may cause respiratory distress. In these 
individuals, the success rate of aspiration is much lower, and this should 
therefore be attempted only for 1–2 cm pneumothoraces in patients 
who are not breathless. A chest drain is required if the pneumothorax 
remains greater than 1 cm, and in patients who are breathless or have a 
large pneumothorax. All patients with a secondary pneumothorax require 
admission for observation. If there is a tension pneumothorax, life-saving 
immediate release of the positive pressure by insertion of a cannula into 
the pleural space is performed, allowing time to prepare for chest drain 
insertion.
When needed, intercostal drains are inserted in the triangle of safety 
(Fig. 17.73), connected to an underwater seal or one-way Heimlich 
valve, and secured rmly to the chest wall with stitches. Clamping of 
an intercostal drain is potentially dangerous and rarely indicated. The 
drain should be removed the morning after the lung has fully re-inated 
and bubbling has stopped. Continued bubbling after 5–7 days is an 
indication for surgery, though in practice CT and surgical referral occurs 
after 48 hours. If bubbling in the drainage bottle stops before full re-
ination, the tube is either blocked or kinked or displaced. Supplemental 
oxygen may speed resolution, as it accelerates the rate at which nitrogen 
is reabsorbed by the pleura.
Patients with a closed pneumothorax should be advised not to y, 
as the trapped gas expands at altitude. After complete resolution, there 
is no clear evidence to indicate how long patients should avoid ying. 
British Thoracic Society guidelines suggest that ying should be delayed 
until 7 days after X-ray conrmation of full ination. Patients should also 
be advised to stop smoking and informed about the risks of a recur-
rent pneumothorax, which is signicantly reduced by smoking cessation. 
Mediastinal shift
and/or hypotension
(tension pneumothorax)
Chronic lung disease
Pneumothorax
> 15% of
hemithorax
or significant
dyspnoea
> 50 years
of age
Observe
patient
for 6 hours
Outpatient
follow-up3
Intercostal tube drainage attached to underwater seal device
Percutaneous
needle
aspiration2
> 2.5 L air
aspirated or
pneumothorax
persists
Yes1
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fig. 17.72 Management of spontaneous pneumothorax. (1) Immediate 
decompression prior to insertion of the intercostal drain. (2) Aspirate in the 
second intercostal space anteriorly in the mid-clavicular line using a 16 F cannula; 
discontinue if resistance is felt, the patient coughs excessively, or more than 2.5 L 
of air are removed. (3) The post-aspiration chest X-ray is not a reliable indicator 
of whether a pleural leak remains, and all patients should be told to attend again 
immediately in the event of deterioration.
Tension type
Mean pleural pressure
positive, mediastinal shift
to opposite side
Closed type
Mean pleural pressure
negative
Open type
Mean pleural pressure
atmospheric
A
B
C
Fig. 17.71 Types of spontaneous pneumothorax. 

[[p601]]
Diseases of the diaphragm and chest wall    555
17
Diving is contraindicated following a pneumothorax, unless a surgical 
pleurodesis has sealed the lung to the chest wall.
Recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax
After primary spontaneous pneumothorax, recurrence occurs within a 
year of either aspiration or tube drainage in approximately 25% of patients 
and should prompt denitive treatment. Surgical pleurodesis is recom-
mended in all patients following a second pneumothorax and should 
be considered following the rst episode of secondary pneumothorax 
if low respiratory reserve makes recurrence hazardous. Pleurodesis can 
be achieved by pleural abrasion or parietal pleurectomy at thoracotomy 
or thoracoscopy.
Diseases of the diaphragm and chest wall
Disorders of the diaphragm
Congenital disorders
Diaphragmatic hernias
Congenital defects of the diaphragm can allow herniation of abdominal 
viscera. Posteriorly situated hernias through the foramen of Bochdalek 
are more common than anterior hernias through the foramen of Morgagni.
Eventration of the diaphragm
Abnormal elevation or bulging of one hemidiaphragm, more often the 
left, results from total or partial absence of muscular development of 
the septum transversum. Most eventrations are asymptomatic and are 
detected by chance on X-ray in adult life but severe respiratory dis-
tress can be caused in infancy if the diaphragmatic muscular defect is 
extensive.
Acquired disorders
Elevation of a hemidiaphragm may result from paralysis or other struc-
tural causes (Box 17.92). The phrenic nerve may be damaged by lung 
cancer, disease of cervical vertebrae, tumours of the cervical cord, 
shingles, trauma (including road trafc and birth injuries), surgery, and 
stretching of the nerve by mediastinal masses and aortic aneurysms. 
Idiopathic diaphragmatic paralysis occasionally occurs in otherwise t 
patients. Paralysis of one hemidiaphragm results in loss of around 20% 
of ventilatory capacity but may not be noticed by otherwise healthy 
individuals. Supine vital capacity is signicantly reduced compared to 
erect. Ultrasound screening can be used to demonstrate paradoxical 
upward movement of the paralysed hemidiaphragm on snifng. CT of 
the chest and neck is the best way to exclude occult disease affecting 
the phrenic nerve.
Bilateral diaphragmatic weakness occurs in peripheral neuropathies 
of any type, including Guillain–Barré syndrome; in disorders affecting 
the anterior horn cells, e.g. poliomyelitis; in muscular dystrophies; and in 
connective tissue disorders, such as SLE and polymyositis.
Hiatus hernia is common. Diaphragmatic rupture is usually caused 
by a crush injury and may not be detected until years later. Respiratory 
disorders that cause pulmonary hyperination (e.g. emphysema), 
and those that result in small stiff lungs (e.g. diffuse pulmonary 
brosis), compromise diaphragmatic function and predispose to 
fatigue.
Deformities of the chest wall
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis
Abnormalities of alignment of the dorsal spine and their consequent 
effects on thoracic shape may be caused by:
 congenital abnormality
 vertebral disease, including tuberculosis, osteoporosis and ankylos-
ing spondylitis
 trauma
 neuromuscular disease, such as poliomyelitis.
Simple kyphosis (increased anterior curvature of the thoracic spine) 
causes less pulmonary embarrassment than kyphoscoliosis (antero-
posterior and lateral curvature). Kyphoscoliosis, if severe, restricts and 
distorts expansion of the chest wall and impairs diaphragmatic func-
tion, causing ventilation–perfusion mismatch in the lungs. Patients 
with severe deformity may develop type II respiratory failure (initially 
manifest during sleep), pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular 
failure. They can often be successfully treated with non-invasive ven-
tilatory support.
Pectus
Pectus is the result of abnormal costal cartilage growth, causing the 
sternum to protrude (carinatum), or more commonly, to be depressed 
(excavatum). In patients with pectus excavatum the heart is displaced 
to the left and may be compressed between the sternum and the ver-
tebral column but only rarely is there associated disturbance of cardiac 
function. The deformity may restrict chest expansion and reduce vital 
capacity. Operative correction is rarely performed, and then only for 
cosmetic reasons. Although no associated gene has yet been iden-
tied, pectus is likely genetic, and a quarter of those affected have a 
family history of chest wall deformity. Pectus can be associated with 
kyphoscoliosis and is a feature of certain syndromes (including Marfan 
and Poland syndromes).
Lateral edge of
pectoralis major
5th intercostal space
Lateral edge of
latissimus dorsi
Base of axilla
Fig. 17.73 The triangle of safety. The triangle of safety is the anatomical region 
that has the axilla as the apex, the lateral border of the pectoralis major anteriorly, 
the lateral border of the latissimus dorsi posteriorly and, inferiorly, the 5th intercostal 
space.
17.92  Causes of elevation of a hemidiaphragm
 Phrenic nerve paralysis
 Eventration of the diaphragm
 Decrease in volume of one lung (e.g. lobectomy, unilateral pulmonary brosis)
 Severe pleuritic pain
 Pulmonary infarction
 Subphrenic abscess
 Large volume of gas in the stomach or colon
 Large tumours or cysts of the liver

[[p602]]
556    RESPIRATORY MEDICINE
Further information
Websites
brit-thoracic.org.uk British Thoracic Society: access to guidelines on a range of 
respiratory conditions.
ersnet.org European Respiratory Society: provides information on education and 
research, and patient information.
ginasthma.com Global Initiative for Asthma: comprehensive overview of asthma.
goldcopd.org Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease: 
comprehensive overview of COPD.
thoracic.org American Thoracic Society: provides information on education and 
research, and patient information.

[[p603]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 17.1  A 24-year-old woman presents to the Emergency Department 
with sudden onset of left-sided chest pain and breathlessness 
over the preceding 4 hours. The pain is worse on inspiration. She 
smokes 10 cigarettes per day. She has no signicant past medical 
history, and her only regular medication is the oral contraceptive 
pill. She has a temperature of 37.4ºC, BP of 95/60 mmHg and 
pulse rate 120 bpm. Her oxygen saturation is 89% breathing 
air and improves to 96% with oxygen at 40% FiO2. Chest 
examination is normal. Which is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Left lower lobe pneumonia
B. Myocardial infarction
C. Pneumothorax
D. Hyperventilation
E. Pulmonary embolism
Answer: E.
Pulmonary embolism is the most likely diagnosis. She has two risk 
factors for pulmonary embolism – tobacco exposure and oral contracep-
tive pill use. Clinically, she has presented with an acute history that would 
be compatible with pulmonary embolism, but could also be compati-
ble with other diagnoses such as pneumonia or pneumothorax. Normal 
examination ndings would make the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism 
much more likely. It would be anticipated that there would be abnormal 
examination ndings if she was presenting with pneumonia or pneumo-
thorax. Patients with hyperventilation can have normal examination nd-
ings, but are not hypoxic on air and conversely have normal or potentially 
supra-normal oxygen saturations, which would again make this diagno-
sis unlikely. The clinical history is not suggestive of myocardial infarctions, 
and it would be very unusual for a patient of this age to present with a 
myocardial infarction.
 17.2  A 76-year-old woman has presented to the Emergency 
Department with community-acquired pneumonia. She has a 
past medical history of hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. 
She is disorientated, with an AMTS of 6/10. On examination, her 
temperature is 38.3°C, pulse rate 120 bpm, BP 90/61 mmHg, 
respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 
94% on room air. She has bronchial breathing at the left base. 
She has a number of investigations:
Chest X-ray
right lower lobe consolidation
White cell count
13 × 109/L (3.8–10.0)
Urea
9.9 mmol/L (2.5–7.8)
Creatinine
170 μmol/L (60–120)
CRP
60 mg/L (<5)
What is her CURB-65 score?
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. 4
E. 5
Answer: C.
CURB-65, also known as the CURB criteria, is a validated clinical 
scoring tool that has been validated for predicting mortality in people 
with community-acquired pneumonia. The score is an acronym for the 
risk factors measured. Each risk factor scores one point, for a maximum 
score of 5:
Confusion of new onset (dened as an AMTS of 8 or less)
Blood Urea nitrogen greater than 7 mmol/L (19 mg/dL)
Respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute or greater
Blood pressure less than 90 mmHg systolic or diastolic blood  
pressure 60 mmHg or less
Age 65 or older
The scoring system is used to predict 30-day mortality (see below), 
and can be used to guide the need for inpatient or outpatient treatment 
of people with pneumonia as well the appropriate use of treatments such 
as broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics.
CURB-65 
score
30-day 
mortality
Treatment guidance
0
0.7%
Treat as outpatient
1
3.2%
2
13.0%
Consider a short stay in hospital or watch 
very closely as an outpatient
3
17.0%
Requires hospitalisation with consideration 
for referral for critical care
4
41.5%
5
57.0%
 17.3  A 78-year-old attends the respiratory outpatients clinic with  
1 month of increasing shortness of breath, persistent chest wall 
pain and 5 kg weight loss. He has no past medical history and 
is not taking any regular medication. He has a 60 pack-year 
smoking history and is a retired dock worker. He is apyrexial 
and haemodynamically stable. There are no clinical features to 
suggest cardiac failure. On examination of his thorax there is a 
stony dull percussion note at the left base, with absent breath 
sounds. Chest X-ray conrms the presence of a large left pleural 
effusion and numerous bilateral pleural plaques. Which is the 
most appropriate initial investigation?
A. Bronchoscopy
B. CT pulmonary angiography
C. Sputum for microscopy and culture
D. Ultrasound-guided pleural uid aspiration
E. Pulmonary function tests
Answer: D.
The clinical concern for this man would be the possibility of thoracic 
malignancy and specically mesothelioma. He has a heavy smoking his-
tory, and the occupational history of dock working with the presence of 
pleural plaques on chest X-ray would raise a concern with regards to 
possible asbestos exposure.
Diagnostic pleural uid aspiration would be recommended as the rst 
investigation. This should be done under ultrasound guidance to conrm 
the presence of the effusion, and ensure minimisation of risk of complica-
tions of pleural aspiration such as pneumothorax or perforation of other 
organs. Analysis of the uid using Light’s criteria will provide guidance as 
to whether the uid is a transudate or exudate. Samples should also be 
sent for cytological examination – the detection of malignant cells in the 
uid may provide the diagnosis. Samples should also be sent for both 
standard and AAFB microscopy and culture.
Pulmonary function tests are not going to help in this situation as the 
chest X-ray has already identied that the cause of the breathlessness is 
due to the pleural effusion. As this is a pleural-based pathology, sputum 
analysis and bronchoscopy are not going to be helpful. CT scanning 
may need to be undertaken, particularly in view of the suspicion of malig-
nancy, however this should not be a CT pulmonary angiogram. A staging 
CT with contrast would be the appropriate form of CT imaging in this 
clinical situation.

[[p604]]
18
Nephrology and 
urology
Clinical examination of the kidney and urinary tract 558
Functional anatomy and physiology 560
Investigation of renal and urinary tract disease 562
Glomerular ltration rate 562
Urine investigations 562
Blood tests 563
Imaging 564
Renal biopsy 566
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease 566
Oliguria/anuria 566
Polyuria 567
Frequency 567
Nocturia 567
Urinary incontinence 567
Abdominal pain 567
Dysuria 567
Oedema 567
Hypertension 568
Haematuria 568
Proteinuria 569
Glomerular diseases 571
Glomerulonephritis 571
Tubulo-interstitial diseases 576
Genetic renal diseases 577
Inherited glomerular diseases 577
Inherited tubulo-interstitial diseases 578
Isolated defects of tubular function 578
Cystic diseases of the kidney 579
Renal vascular diseases 580
Renal artery stenosis 580
Acute renal infarction 581
Diseases of small intrarenal vessels 582
Renal involvement in systemic conditions 583
Acute kidney injury 584
Chronic kidney disease 588
Renal replacement therapy 593
Conservative treatment 593
Haemodialysis 593
Haemoltration 595
Peritoneal dialysis 595
Renal transplantation 596
Renal disease in pregnancy 597
Renal disease in adolescence 597
Drugs and the kidney 597
Drug-induced renal disease 597
Prescribing in renal disease 598
Infections of the urinary tract 599
Urolithiasis 602
Diseases of the collecting system and ureters 604
Congenital abnormalities 604
Retroperitoneal brosis 606
Tumours of the kidney and urinary tract 606
Urinary incontinence 608
Prostate disease 609
Testicular tumours 611
Erectile dysfunction 611
B Conway
PJ Phelan
GD Stewart

[[p605]]
558    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Clinical examination of the kidney and urinary tract
Many diseases of the kidney and urinary tract are clinically silent, at least in the early stages. Accordingly, it is common for these conditions to be 
detected rst by routine blood tests or on dipstick testing of the urine. Several important abnormalities can also be picked up on physical exami-
nation and these are summarised below.
Blood pressure
Often elevated
Jugular venous pressure
Elevated in fluid overload
Hypertensive changes
‘Brown line’ pigmentation
of nails
Splinter haemorrhages
Lungs
Crepitations in fluid overload
Observation
 Tiredness
 Respiratory rate and depth
  increased in metabolic acidosis
 Pallor*
Abdomen
Renal mass
Local tenderness
Renal or other arterial bruits
in renal vascular disease
Rectal examination — prostate
Heart
Extra heart sounds in fluid
overload
Pericardial friction rub*
*Features of advanced chronic kidney
disease (see also Fig. 18.22)
Phimosis
Skin
Yellow complexion*
Bruising*
Excoriation of pruritus*
Reduced skin turgor in
fluid depletion
Fundoscopy
5
4
3
2
6
7
8
9
Hands
1
13
2
3
1
9
8
7
6
11
10
12
10 Sacral oedema
11 Ankle oedema
12 Peripheral neuropathy*
14
Genitalia
Scrotal swellings
Urinalysis for blood and
protein
Urine microscopy
See Fig. 18.3
4
5

[[p606]]
Clinical examination of the kidney and urinary tract    559
18
Clinical examination techniques to evaluate urological and renal abnormalities. Inset (Dipstick): From Pitkin J, Peattie AB, Magowan BA. Obstetrics and gynaecology: An 
illustrated colour text. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2003.
Blood pressure
measurements
1
6
7
2
3
Blood tests for abnormal
creatinine and electrolytes
Urinalysis for protein, blood, 
nitrites and leucocytes
4
5
Abdominal examination for palpable kidneys
Right kidney
Left kidney
Percussing for tenderness
in renal angle
Digital rectal examination for
Checking sacrum and ankles for pitting oedema
Male lower urinary tract demonstrating the relationship of the bladder, urethra, vas deferens and testes.
Bladder
Pubic bones
Corpus spongiosum
Corpus cavernosum
Urethra
Glans penis
Prepuce
Scrotum
Testis
Epididymis
Vas deferens
Prostate gland
Ejaculatory duct
Anus
Seminal vesicle
Rectum
Ureter

[[p607]]
560    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
This chapter describes the disorders of the kidneys and urinary tract 
that are commonly encountered in routine practice, as well as giving 
an overview of the highly specialised eld of renal replacement therapy. 
Disorders of renal tubular function, which may cause alterations in elec-
trolyte and acid–base balance, are described in Chapter 19
Functional anatomy and physiology
The kidneys
The kidneys play a central role in excretion of many metabolic breakdown 
products, including ammonia and urea from protein, creatinine from mus-
cle, uric acid from nucleic acids, drugs and toxins. They achieve this by 
making large volumes of an ultraltrate of plasma (125mL/min, 180L/24 
hrs) at the glomerulus, and selectively reabsorbing components of this 
ultraltrate at points along the nephron. The rates of ltration and reab-
sorption are controlled by many hormonal and haemodynamic signals to 
regulate uid and electrolyte balance, blood pressure, and acid–base and 
calcium–phosphate homeostasis (all discussed in Ch. 19). In addition, the 
kidneys activate vitamin D and control the synthesis of red blood cells by 
producing erythropoietin. Strategies to replace each of these important 
functions are required when managing patients with kidney failure.
Each kidney is approximately 10–13cm in length in healthy adults; 
they are located retroperitoneally on either side of the aorta and infe-
rior vena cava between the 12th thoracic and 3rd lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 
18.1A). The right kidney is usually a few centimetres lower because the 
liver lies above it. Both kidneys rise and descend several centimetres 
with respiration.
In keeping with their role as efcient blood lters, the kidneys have a 
rich blood supply and receive approximately 20%–25% of cardiac output 
through the renal arteries, which arise from the abdominal aorta. The 
renal arteries undergo various subdivisions within the kidney, eventually 
forming interlobular arteries that run through the renal cortex. These 
eventually give rise to afferent glomerular arterioles that supply the glo-
meruli. The efferent arteriole, leading from the glomerulus, supplies the 
distal nephron and medulla (Fig. 18.1B). This unique arrangement of two 
serial capillary beds reects the role of the afferent and efferent arterioles 
in autoregulation of glomerular ltration.
The nephron
Each kidney contains approximately 1 million individual functional units, 
called nephrons. Each nephron consists of a glomerulus, which is 
responsible for ultraltration of blood, a proximal renal tubule, a loop of 
Henle, a distal renal tubule and a collecting duct, which together are 
responsible for selective reabsorption of water and electrolytes that have 
been ltered at the glomerulus (see Fig. 19.2 and Fig. 18.1B). Under nor-
mal circumstances, approximately 99% of the 180L of glomerular ltrate 
that is produced each day is reabsorbed in the tubules. The remainder 
passes through the collecting ducts of each nephron and drains into the 
renal pelvis and ureters.
The glomerulus
The glomerulus comprises a tightly packed loop of capillaries supplied by 
an afferent arteriole and drained by an efferent arteriole. It is surrounded 
by a cup-shaped extension of the proximal tubule termed Bowman’s 
capsule, which is composed of epithelial cells. The glomerular capillary 
endothelial cells contain pores (fenestrae), through which circulating 
molecules can pass to reach the underlying glomerular basement mem-
brane (GBM), which is formed by fusion of the basement membranes 
of tubular epithelial and vascular endothelial cells (Fig. 18.1C and D). 
Glomerular epithelial cells (podocytes) have multiple long foot processes 
that interdigitate with those of the adjacent epithelial cells, thereby main-
taining a selective barrier to ltration (Fig. 18.1E). Mesangial cells lie in the 
central region of the glomerulus. They have contractile properties similar 
to those of vascular smooth muscle cells and play a role in regulating 
glomerular ltration rate.
Under normal circumstances, the glomerulus is impermeable to proteins 
the size of albumin (67kDa) or larger, while proteins of 20kDa or smaller 
are ltered freely. The ability of molecules between 20 and 67kDa to pass 
through the GBM is variable and depends on the size (smaller molecules 
are ltered more easily) and charge (positively charged molecules are 
ltered more easily). Very little lipid is ltered by the glomerulus.
Filtration pressure in the glomerulus is normally maintained at a con-
stant level in the face of wide variations in systemic blood pressure and 
cardiac output, by alterations in muscle tone within the afferent and 
efferent arterioles and mesangial cells. This is known as autoregulation. 
Reduced renal perfusion pressure increases local production of pros-
taglandins that mediate vasodilatation of the afferent arteriole, thereby 
increasing the intraglomerular pressure (see Fig. 18.1D). In addition, 
renin is released by specialised smooth muscle cells in the juxtaglomer-
ular apparatus in response to reduced perfusion pressure, stimulation 
of sympathetic nerves or low sodium concentration of uid in the distal 
convoluted tubule at the macula densa. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen 
to release angiotensin I, which is further cleaved by angiotensin-con-
verting enzyme (ACE) to produce angiotensin II. This restores glomer-
ular perfusion pressure in the short term by causing vasoconstriction of 
the efferent arterioles within the kidney to raise intraglomerular pressure 
selectively (see Fig. 18.1D), and by inducing systemic vasoconstriction to 
increase blood pressure and thus renal perfusion pressure. In the longer 
term, angiotensin II increases plasma volume by stimulating aldosterone 
release, which enhances sodium reabsorption by the renal tubules (see 
Fig. 20.19). Consumption of non-steroidal anti-inammatory prepara-
tions and renin–angiotensin system inhibitors in the context of volume 
depletion may impair the ability of the kidney to maintain glomerular ltra-
tion and exacerbate pre-renal failure (see Fig. 18.19).
Renal tubules, loop of Henle and collecting ducts
The proximal renal tubule, loop of Henle, distal renal tubule and collecting 
ducts are responsible for reabsorption of water, electrolytes and other 
solutes, as well as regulating acid–base balance, as described in detail 
on page 618 and in Figure 19.2. They also play a key role in regulating 
calcium homeostasis by converting 25-hydroxyvitamin D to the active 
metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D  Fig. 26.62. Failure of this process 
contributes to the pathogenesis of hypocalcaemia and hyperparathy-
roidism that occurs in chronic kidney disease (CKD). Fibroblast-like cells 
that lie in the interstitium of the renal cortex are responsible for produc-
tion of erythropoietin, which is required for production of red blood cells. 
Erythropoietin synthesis is regulated by oxygen tension; anaemia and 
hypoxia increase production, whereas polycythaemia and hyperoxia 
inhibit it. Failure of erythropoietin production plays an important role in 
the pathogenesis of anaemia in CKD.
The ureters and bladder
The ureters drain urine from the renal pelvis (see Fig. 18.1A) and deliver 
it to the bladder, a muscular organ that lies anteriorly in the lower part 
of the pelvis, just behind the pubic bone. The function of the bladder is 
to store and then release urine during micturition. The bladder is richly 
innervated. Sympathetic nerves arising from T10–L2 relay in the pelvic 
ganglia to cause relaxation of the detrusor muscle and contraction of 
the bladder neck (both via α-adrenoceptors), thereby preventing release 
of urine from the bladder. The distal sphincter mechanism is innervated 
by somatic motor bres from sacral segments S2–4, which reach the 
sphincter either by the pelvic plexus or via the pudendal nerves. Afferent 
sensory impulses pass to the cerebral cortex, from where reex-in-
creased sphincter tone and suppression of detrusor contraction inhibit 
micturition until it is appropriate. Conversely, parasympathetic nerves 
arising from S2–4 stimulate detrusor contraction, promoting micturition.
The micturition cycle has a storage (lling) phase and a voiding (mictu-
rition) phase. During the lling phase, the high compliance of the detru-
sor muscle allows the bladder to ll steadily without a rise in intravesical 
pressure. As bladder volume increases, stretch receptors in its wall 
cause reex bladder relaxation and increased sphincter tone. The act of 

[[p608]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    561
18
micturition is initiated rst by voluntary and then by reex relaxation of the 
pelvic oor and distal sphincter mechanism, followed by reex detrusor 
contraction. These actions are coordinated by the pontine micturition 
centre. Intravesical pressure remains greater than urethral pressure until 
the bladder is empty.
The prostate gland
The prostate gland is situated at the base of the bladder, surrounding the 
proximal urethra (p. 559). Exocrine glands within the prostate produce 
uid, which comprises about 20% of the volume of ejaculated seminal 
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Endothelial
cell
Angiotensin II
vasoconstricts
Prostaglandins
vasodilate
Pelvis
Cortex
Calyx
Medulla
Vena cava
Ureter
Bladder
Afferent
arteriole
Glomerulus
Efferent
arteriole
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Collecting
duct
Thick-
walled
segment
 Loop
  of
Henle
Thin-walled
segment
To calyces
and ureter
Renal
artery
Renal
vein
Epithelial cell
(podocyte)
Urinary space
Bowman's
capsule
Parietal
epithelium
Capillary
loops
Efferent arteriole
Afferent
arteriole
Mesangial
cell
Mesangial
matrix
Juxtaglomerular
apparatus
Aorta
Endothelial cell
Epithelial cell
(podocyte)
Foot process
GBM
Macula densa
Renal artery
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 18.1 
Fig. 19.2
of the ltration barrier. (GBM = glomerular basement membrane) (C) Courtesy of Dr J.G. Simpson, Aberdeen Royal Inrmary

[[p609]]
562    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
uid and is rich in zinc and proteolytic enzymes. The remainder of the 
ejaculate is formed in the seminal vesicles and bulbo-urethral glands, 
with spermatozoa arising from the testes.
Smooth muscle bres within the prostate, which are under sympa-
thetic control, play a role in controlling urine ow through the bulbar 
urethra, and also contract at orgasm to move seminal uid through 
ejaculatory ducts into the bulbar urethra (emission). Contraction of the 
bulbocavernosus muscle (via a spinal muscle reex) then ejaculates the 
semen out of the urethra.
The penis
Blood ow into the corpus cavernosum of the penis is controlled by sym-
pathetic nerves from the thoracolumbar plexus, which maintain smooth 
muscle contraction (p. 559). In response to afferent input from the glans 
penis and from higher centres, pelvic splanchnic parasympathetic nerves 
actively relax the cavernosal smooth muscle via neurotransmitters such 
as nitric oxide, acetylcholine, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and 
prostacyclin, with consequent dilatation of the lacunar space. At the 
same time, draining venules are compressed, trapping blood in the lacu-
nar space with consequent elevation of pressure and erection (tumes-
cence) of the penis.
Investigation of renal and urinary tract 
disease
Glomerular ltration rate
The glomerular ltration rate (GFR) is the sum of the ultraltration rates 
from plasma into the Bowman’s space in each nephron and is a measure 
of renal excretory function. It is proportionate to body size and the refer-
ence value is usually expressed after correction for body surface area as 
150 ± 25mL/min/1.73m2. The GFR may be measured directly by inject-
ing and measuring the clearance of compounds such as inulin or radio-
labelled ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), which are completely 
ltered at the glomerulus and are not secreted or reabsorbed by the renal 
tubules (Box 18.1). This is not performed routinely, however, and is usu-
ally reserved for special circumstances, such as the assessment of renal 
function in potential live kidney donors. Instead, GFR is usually assessed 
indirectly in clinical practice by measuring serum levels of endogenously 
produced compounds that are excreted by the kidney. The most widely 
used is serum creatinine, which is produced by muscle at a constant 
rate, is almost completely ltered at the glomerulus, and is not reab-
sorbed. Although creatinine is secreted to a small degree by the proximal 
tubule, this is only usually signicant in terms of GFR estimation in severe 
renal impairment, where it accounts for a larger proportion of the cre-
atinine excreted. Accordingly, provided muscle mass remains constant, 
changes in serum creatinine concentrations closely reect changes in 
GFR. The relationship between serum creatinine and GFR is not linear, 
however, and a modest elevation in serum creatinine above the normal 
range may therefore reect a substantial decline in GFR (Fig. 18.2). For 
this reason, several methods have been developed to estimate GFR from 
serum creatinine measurements (see Box 18.1) but the most widely used 
are the Modication of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) and Chronic Kidney 
Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equations. Routine 
reporting by laboratories of estimated GFR (eGFR) has increased rec-
ognition of moderate kidney damage and encouraged early deployment 
of protective therapies; however, some limitations remain (Boxes 18.2
and 18.3). In particular, the MDRD formula is based on the serum cre-
atinine value and so is heavily inuenced by muscle mass; eGFR may 
therefore be misleading in individuals whose muscle bulk is outside the 
normal range for their sex and age. Measurement of other endogenous 
metabolites, such as cystatin C, may provide a more accurate estimate 
of GFR in this setting, though this test is not yet widely available in routine 
clinical practice.
Direct measurement of creatinine clearance by collecting a 24-hour 
urine sample and relating serum creatinine levels to urinary creatinine 
excretion (see Box 18.1) is now less commonly performed due to the 
difculty in obtaining accurate 24-hour urine collections. It may still have 
a role in assessing renal function in patients at extremes of muscle mass, 
where the creatinine-based equations perform poorly.
Urine investigations
Screening for the presence of blood, protein, glucose, ketones, nitrates 
and leucocytes, and assessment of urinary pH and osmolality can be 
achieved by dipstick testing. The presence of leucocytes and nitrites in 
urine is indicative of renal tract infection. Urine pH can provide diagnostic 
information in the assessment of renal tubular acidosis and urinary tract 
stones (p. 630).
Urine microscopy (Fig. 18.3) may detect dysmorphic erythrocytes or 
red cell casts, which suggest the presence of glomerular disease. White 
cell casts are strongly suggestive of pyelonephritis but may also occur 
in other forms of inammation such as interstitial nephritis. Microscopy 
may also detect the presence of bacteria in those with urinary infection 
and crystals in patients with renal stone disease. It should be noted that 
calcium oxalate and urate crystals can sometimes be found in normal 
urine that has been left to stand, due to crystal formation ex vivo.
Urine collection over a 24-hour period may be performed to measure 
excretion of solutes, such as calcium, oxalate and urate, in patients with 
recurrent renal stone disease (p. 602). Proteinuria can also be measured 
18.1  How to estimate glomerular ltration rate (GFR)
Measuring GFR
 Direct measurement using labelled ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) or 
inulin
 Creatinine clearance (CrCl):
Minor tubular secretion of creatinine causes CrCl to exaggerate GFR 
when renal function is poor; can be affected by drugs (e.g. trimethoprim, 
cimetidine)
Needs 24-hr urine collection (inconvenient and often unreliable)
CrCl(mL/min) = 
urine creatinine concentration (micromol/L) × volume (mL) 
plasma creatinine concentration (micromol/L) × time (min)
Estimating GFR with equations
  The Modication of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) study equation (see www.
renal.org/eGFR):
Requires knowledge of age and sex only; it can therefore be reported 
automatically by laboratories
For limitations, see Box 18.2
eGFR = 175* × (creatinine in micromol/L 88.4)−1.154 ×(age in yrs)−0.203 
×(0.742 if female) × (1.21 if Black)
 The Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equation:
More accurately estimates the actual GFR than the MDRD eGFR in those with 
relatively preserved renal function
eGFR = 141 × min (SCr/κ, 1)α ×max (SCr/κ, 1)−1.206 × 0.993Age 
×(1.018 if female) × (1.21 if Black)
Where SCr = serum creatinine in micromol/L
κ = 61.9 if female and 79.6 if male
α = − 0.329 if female and  0.411 if male
min = whichever is the minimum of serum creatinine/κ or 1
max = whichever is the maximum of serum creatinine/κ or 1
 No equations perform well in unusual circumstances, such as extremes of body 
(and muscle) mass or in acutely unwell patients (see Box 18.2)
*A correction factor of 175 is used for isotope dilution mass spectrometry traceable creatinine 
measurements. To convert creatinine in mg/dL to µmol/L, multiply by 88.4.

[[p610]]
Investigation of renal and urinary tract disease    563
18
on 24-hour collections but is usually now quantied by protein:creatinine 
ratio on single urine samples.
Other dynamic tests of tubular function, including concentrating ability 
(p. 700), ability to excrete a water load (p. 624), ability to excrete acid 
(p. 588) and calculation of fractional calcium, phosphate or sodium excre-
tion are valuable in some circumstances but are usually performed in very 
specic contexts. The fractional excretion of these ions can be calculated 
by the general formula: 100×  (urine concentration of analyte × serum cre-
atinine) / (serum concentration of analyte × urinary creatinine). Calculation 
of fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) can help in the setting of acute 
kidney injury (AKI) to differentiate pre-renal failure, when the intact tubules 
are avidly conserving sodium in response to volume depletion (FENa typi-
cally <1.0%), from acute tubular necrosis, when the tubules are damaged 
and are less able to conserve sodium (FENa typically >1.0%). In clinical 
practice this is seldom required.
Blood tests
Haematology
A normochromic normocytic anaemia is common in CKD and is due 
in part to deciency of erythropoietin and bone marrow suppression 
secondary to toxins retained in CKD. Other causes of anaemia include 
iron deciency from urinary tract bleeding, and haemolytic anaemia 
secondary to disorders such as haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) 
and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). Other abnormalities 
may be observed that reect underlying disease processes, such as 
neutrophilia and raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) in vasculitis 
or sepsis, and lymphopenia and raised ESR in systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE). Fragmented red cells on blood lm and low platelets 
may be observed in thrombotic microangiopathies such as HUS/TTP 
and malignant hypertension. Pancytopenia may occur in SLE or bone 
marrow suppression due to myeloma.
Biochemistry
Abnormalities of routine biochemistry are common in renal disease. Serum 
levels of creatinine may be raised, reecting reduced GFR (see above), 
as may serum potassium. Serum levels of urea are often increased in 
kidney disease but this analyte has limited value as a measure of GFR 
since levels are dependent on factors other than renal function. Serum 
urea increases with high protein intake, following gastrointestinal haem-
orrhage and in catabolic states. Conversely, urea levels may be reduced 
in patients with chronic liver disease and in patients who are anorexic 
or malnourished. In the absence of the other causes mentioned above, 
an elevated urea:creatinine ratio is indicative of volume depletion and 
pre-renal failure (see AKI section). Serum calcium tends to be reduced 
and phosphate increased in CKD, in association with high parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) levels caused by reduced production of 1,25-dihydroxy-
vitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) by the kidney (secondary hyperparathyroidism). 
In some patients, this may be accompanied by raised serum alkaline 
phosphatase levels, which are indicative of renal osteodystrophy. Serum 
bicarbonate may be low in renal failure and also in renal tubular acido-
sis independently of renal function. Serum albumin may be low in mal-
nutrition/malabsorption, in liver disease, or as a negative acute phase 
response, however, if it is a new nding it should prompt urinalysis to 
exclude nephrotic syndrome. Other biochemical abnormalities that may 
reect underlying disease processes include: raised glucose and HbA1c
in diabetes mellitus (p. 711) and raised serum C-reactive protein (CRP) 
in sepsis and vasculitis.
Immunology
Antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens and anti-
double-stranded DNA antibodies may be detected in patients with renal 
disease secondary to SLE (Ch. 26). Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
00
200
400
GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2GFR (mL/min/1.73 m
2)
600
800
35
70
105
140
A
00
200
400
Serum creatinine  (µmol/L)
Serum creatinine  (µmol/L)
600
800
35
70
105
140
25-year-old male
80-year-old female
B
Fig. 18.2 Serum creatinine and the glomerular ltration rate (GFR). 
relationship between serum creatinine and estimated GFR (eGFR) is non-linear: small 
increases above the normal range (e.g. 80–100 µmol/L; green lines) can indicate a 
substantial decline in renal function (e.g. 105–80 mL/min/1.73 m2); conversely, in the 
high range, large changes in creatinine (e.g. 400–600 µmol/L; blue lines) can occur 
with only small declines in renal function (e.g. 20–15 mL/min/1.73m2
is dependent on muscle mass; the same creatinine value may therefore reect very 
different levels of renal function depending on the age and sex of the individual. To 
convert creatinine in mg/dL to µmol/L, multiply by 88.4.
18.2  Limitations of estimated glomerular ltration rate (eGFR)
 It is only an estimate, with wide condence intervals (90% of patients will have 
eGFR within 30% of their measured GFR, and 98% within 50%)
 It is based on serum creatinine, and so may overestimate actual GFR in patients 
with low muscle mass (e.g. those with cachexia, amputees) and underestimate 
actual GFR in individuals taking creatine supplements (creatinine is a metabolite 
of creatine) or trimethoprim (inhibits secretion of creatinine)
 Creatinine level must be stable over days; eGFR is not valid in assessing acute 
kidney injury
 It tends to underestimate true GFR at normal or near-normal function, so slightly 
low values should not be over-interpreted
 In older adults, who constitute the majority of those with low eGFR, there is 
controversy about categorising people as having chronic kidney disease (see 
Box 18.3) on the basis of eGFR alone, particularly at stage 3A, since there is 
little evidence of adverse outcomes when eGFR is >45 mL/min/1.73 m2 unless 
there is also proteinuria
 eGFR is not valid in under-18s or during pregnancy
 Ethnicity is not taken into account in routine laboratory reporting; the laboratory 
eGFR value should therefore be multiplied by 1.21 for Black people
 Few patients will understand eGFR in terms of mL/min/1.73 m2; it may therefore 
be helpful to assume that a GFR of 100 mL/min/1.73 m2 is approximately 
normal and to discuss eGFR values in terms of a percentage of normal, e.g. 
25 mL/min/1.73 m2= 25% of normal kidney function

[[p611]]
564    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
(ANCAs) may be detected in patients with glomerulonephritis secondary 
to systemic vasculitis (Ch. 26), as may antibodies to GBM in patients with 
Goodpasture’s disease, and low levels of complement may be observed in 
a number of kidney diseases (see Box 18.17). Antibodies directed against 
M-type phospholipase A2 receptor (anti-PLA2R) are positive in about 
70%–80% of cases of primary membranous nephropathy.
Imaging
Ultrasound
Renal ultrasound is a valuable non-invasive technique that may be per-
formed to assess renal size and to investigate patients suspected of hav-
ing urinary tract obstruction (Fig. 18.4), renal tumours, cysts or stones. 
Ultrasound can also be used to provide images of the prostate gland 
and bladder, and to estimate the completeness of bladder emptying in 
patients with suspected bladder outow obstruction. Increased echo-
genic signal in the renal cortex on ultrasonography with loss of distinction 
between cortex and medulla is characteristic of intrinsic renal disease, 
but not specic for any particular pathology. Doppler imaging can be 
used to study blood ow in extrarenal and larger intrarenal vessels, and 
to assess the resistivity index (peak systolic velocity 
 end-diastolic 
velocity/peak systolic velocity in the intrarenal arteries), which may be 
elevated (>0.7) in various diseases, including acute tubular necrosis and 
rejection of a renal transplant. However, renal ultrasound is operator-de-
pendent and the results are often less clear in obese patients.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography urography (CTU) is used to evaluate cysts and 
mass lesions in the kidney or lling defects within the collecting system. 
It usually entails an initial scan without contrast medium, and subsequent 
scans following injection of contrast to obtain a nephrogram image and 
images during the excretory phases. CTU has largely replaced the previous 
gold-standard investigation of intravenous urography (IVU) for investigation 
of the upper urinary tract, having the advantage of providing complete 
staging information and details of surrounding organs. Contrast enhance-
ment is particularly useful for characterising mass lesions within the kidney 
and differentiating benign from malignant lesions (see Fig. 18.32A). CT 
without contrast gives clear denition of retroperitoneal anatomy regard-
less of obesity and is superior to ultrasound in this respect. Non-contrast 
CT of kidneys, ureters and bladder (CTKUB) is the method of choice for 
demonstrating stones within the kidney or ureter (see Fig. 18.28). For 
investigation of patients with renal trauma, a triple-phase CT scan with 
a delayed phase, to assess the integrity of the collecting system, is per-
formed. Drawbacks of contrast-enhanced CT scans include the signicant 
radiation dose required and the fact that contrast medium may cause AKI. 
The incidence of contrast nephropathy is probably lower than previously 
thought and the AKI is typically mild and reversible, therefore this potential 
risk should not preclude CT scanning when indicated (Box 18.4).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers excellent resolution and dis-
tinction between different tissue types (see Fig. 18.15). It is very use-
ful for local staging of prostate, bladder and penile cancers. Magnetic 
resonance angiography (MRA) provides an alternative to CT for imaging 
renal vessels but involves administration of gadolinium-based contrast 
media, which may carry risks for patients with impaired renal function 
18.3 Stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Stage1
Denition2
Description
Prevalence4
Clinical presentation5
1
Kidney damage3 with normal or 
high GFR (>90)
Normal function
3.5%
Asymptomatic
2
Kidney damage and GFR 60–89
Mild CKD
3.9%
Asymptomatic
3A
GFR 45–59
Mild to moderate CKD
7.6% (3A and 3B 
combined)
Usually asymptomatic
3B
GFR 30–44
Moderate to severe CKD
Anaemia in some patients at 3B
Most are non-progressive or progress very slowly
4
GFR 15–29
Severe CKD
0.4%
First symptoms often at GFR <20
Electrolyte problems likely as GFR falls
5
GFR <15 or on dialysis
Kidney failure
0.1%
Signicant symptoms and complications usually 
present
Dialysis initiation varies but usually at GFR <10
1Stages of CKD 1–5 were originally dened by the US National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Quality Outcomes Initiative 2002. In the 2013 Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI) 
CKD guideline update, the sufces A1, A2 and A3 are recommended, indicating the presence of albuminuria of <30, 30–300 and >300 mg/24 hrs respectively, in view of the prognostic importance 
of albuminuria. 2Two glomerular ltration rate (GFR) values 3 months apart are required to assign a stage. All GFR values are in mL/min/1.73 m 2 3Kidney damage means pathological abnormalities or 
markers of damage, including abnormalities in urine tests or imaging studies. 4From Hill NR, Fatoba ST, Oke JL, et al. Global prevalence of chronic kidney disease – a systematic review and meta-
analysis. PLoS One 2016; 11:e0158765. 5For further information, see page 588.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 18.3 Urine microscopy. 
the urinary tract (×
(×
glomerulonephritis (×100). Panels A–C are phase contrast images; D is a bright eld 
image. (A, B) Courtesy of Dr G.M. Iadorola and Dr F. Quarello, B. Bosco Hospital, Turin 
(from www.sin-italia.org/imago/sediment/sed.htm)

[[p612]]
Investigation of renal and urinary tract disease    565
18
(see Box 18.4). Whilst MRA provides good images of the main renal ves-
sels, stenosis of small branch arteries may be missed.
Renal arteriography
Renal arteriography involves obtaining X-rays following an injection of 
contrast medium directly into the renal artery via a catheter that is usu-
ally inserted into the femoral artery. The main indication is to investigate 
renal artery stenosis (p. 580) or haemorrhage following renal trauma. 
Renal angiography can be combined with therapeutic balloon dilatation 
or stenting of the renal artery. It can be used to occlude bleeding vessels 
and arteriovenous stulae by the insertion of thin platinum wires (coils), 
which promote thrombosis, thereby securing haemostasis.
Pyelography
Pyelography involves direct injection of contrast medium into the 
collecting system from above (antegrade) or below (retrograde). It offers 
the best views of the collecting system and upper tract, and is often 
used to identify the cause of urinary tract obstruction. Antegrade pye-
lography requires the insertion of a ne needle into the pelvicalyceal sys-
tem under ultrasound or radiographic control. In addition to visualising 
the cause of obstruction, percutaneous nephrostomy drainage can be 
established and an antegrade stent can be passed through any obstruc-
tion. Retrograde pyelography can be performed by inserting a ureteric 
catheter into the ureteric orice at cystoscopy (Fig. 18.5) and again a 
stent can be inserted to bypass any obstruction.
Radionuclide studies
These are functional studies requiring the injection of gamma ray-emit-
ting radiopharmaceuticals that are taken up and excreted by the kidney, 
a process that can be monitored by an external gamma camera.
Dynamic radionuclide studies are performed with mercaptoacetyltri-
glycine labelled with technetium (99mTc-MAG3), which is ltered by the 
glomerulus and excreted into the urine. Imaging following 99mTc-MAG3 
injection can provide valuable information about the perfusion of each 
kidney but is not a reliable method for identifying renal artery stenosis. 
In patients with signicant obstruction of the outow tract, 99mTc-MAG3 
persists in the renal pelvis and a loop diuretic fails to accelerate its disap-
pearance. This study can be useful in determining the functional signi-
cance of a collecting system that appears obstructed on imaging.
AS
T
K
K
L
P
C
C
C
RP U
RC
RS
Normal kidney
A
Simple renal cyst
B
Hydronephrosis
C
Renal stone
D
Renal tumour T1b
E
Fig. 18.4 Renal ultrasound. 
= posterior acoustic shadow; C = calyx; K = kidney; L = liver;  
RC = renal cortex; RP = renal pelvis; RS = renal sinus – calyx, renal pelvis, blood vessels, sinus fat; T = tumour; U = ureter) (A–E) Courtesy of Dr Tobias Klatte, 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge
18.4  Renal complications of radiological investigations
Contrast nephrotoxicity
 Acute deterioration in renal function commencing <48 hrs after administration 
of IV radiographic contrast media. Typically modest and reversible AKI
Risk factors
 Pre-existing renal impairment (eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73m2)
 Use of ionic contrast media and repetitive dosing in short time periods
 Diabetes mellitus and myeloma
Prevention
 Provide hydration with free oral uids plus IV isotonic saline 500 mL, then 
250 mL/hr during procedure
 Withhold NSAIDs. Omit metformin for 48 hrs after the procedure, in moderate or 
high-risk patients
 If the risks are high (eGFR <30mL/min/1.73m2), consider alternative methods 
of imaging, but proceed if benet of imaging exceeds risk of nephropathy, which 
is often the case
Cholesterol atheroembolism
 Typically follows days to weeks after intra-arterial investigations or interventions
Nephrogenic sclerosing brosis after MRI contrast agents
 Chronic progressive sclerosis of skin, deeper tissues and other organs, 
associated with gadolinium-based contrast agents
 Only reported in patients with renal impairment, typically on dialysis or with 
GFR <15 mL/min/1.73 m2, but caution is advised in patients with GFR <30 mL/
min/1.73 m2
 Rare since switch to more stable gadolinium-based agents
(AKI = acute kidney injury; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate; IV = intravenous; 
NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
Fig. 18.5 Retrograde pyelography. The best views of the collecting system are 
obtained by pyelography. A catheter has been passed into the left renal pelvis at 
cystoscopy. In the image shown the calyces are sharp-edged and normal. Courtesy of 
Dr A.P. Bayliss and Dr P. Thorpe, Aberdeen Royal Inrmary.

[[p613]]
566    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Formal measurements of GFR can be made by radionuclide studies 
following the injection of diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid (99mTc-
DPTA) or 51Cr-EDTA.
Static radionuclide studies are performed with dimercaptosuccinic 
acid labelled with technetium (99mTc-DMSA), which is taken up by prox-
imal tubular cells. Following intravenous injection, images of the renal 
cortex are obtained to show the shape, size and relative function of each 
kidney (Fig. 18.6). This is a sensitive method for demonstrating cortical 
scarring in reux nephropathy and a way of assessing the individual func-
tion of each kidney.
Radionuclide bone scanning following the injection of methylene 
diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP) can assess the presence and extent of bone 
metastases in men with prostate cancer (p. 610).
Renal biopsy
Renal biopsy is used to establish the diagnosis and severity of renal dis-
ease in order to judge the prognosis and need for treatment (Box 18.5). 
Renal tumour biopsy may be performed to determine the aetiology of 
a renal mass. The procedure is performed percutaneously under local 
anaesthetic with ultrasound guidance to ensure accurate needle place-
ment into a renal pole. Light microscopy, electron microscopy and immu-
nohistological assessment of the specimen may all be required.
Presenting problems in renal and urinary 
tract disease
It is important to recognise that many forms of kidney disease and uro-
logical diseases are asymptomatic. For example, most causes of chronic 
kidney disease do not present with symptoms until kidney function is 
severely impaired (GFR <20 mL/min/1.73 m2), and even then the symp-
toms are non-specic, such as lethargy, swelling and loss of appetite and 
weight. Hence, for many patients kidney disease will only be detected 
through investigations such as serum creatinine or urinalysis. People at 
high risk of disease, for example those with diabetes, hypertension or 
SLE, should therefore be screened regularly using these tests, as should 
people presenting with symptoms such as oedema. Patients with renal 
or prostate cancer often have no relevant symptoms and the diagnosis 
is made serendipitously.
Oliguria/anuria
Oliguria and anuria are dened as a urine output of less than 400 mL/day 
or 100 mL/day, respectively. The volume of urine produced represents a 
balance between the amount of uid ltered at the glomerulus and that 
reabsorbed by the renal tubules. When GFR is low, urine volumes may 
still be normal if tubular reabsorption is also reduced; hence patients 
with advanced kidney disease may not report a reduction in urinary out-
put. Complete anuria, particularly when sudden in onset, may indicate 
a structural problem such as complete urinary obstruction or vascular 
occlusion, though it may occur with severe renal disease of any cause 
(Box 18.6).
Oliguria is common in pre-renal AKI, as the intravascular volume 
depletion activates the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system to pro-
mote sodium retention and stimulates release of ADH to promote water 
retention. Indeed, oliguria may precede and predict the onset of AKI and 
hence urinary output <0.5 mL/kg/hr should prompt assessment of uid 
status and correction of volume depletion where present. Urine volume 
may remain normal in pre-renal failure when there is an osmotic diuresis 
as occurs in diabetic ketoacidosis with marked glycosuria.
Urine volumes are variable in AKI due to intrinsic renal disease, but a 
rapid decline in urine volume may be observed. Marked oliguria predicts 
L
LEFT  =    61%   RIGHT =    39%
POSTERIOR
R
Fig. 18.6 DMSA radionuclide scan. A posterior view is shown of a normal left 
kidney and a small right kidney (with evidence of cortical scarring at upper and lower 
poles) that contributes only 39% of total renal function.
18.5  Renal biopsy
Indications
 Acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease of uncertain aetiology
 Nephrotic syndrome or glomerular proteinuria (protein:creatinine ratio 
>100 mg/mol) in adults
 Nephrotic syndrome in children that has atypical features or is not responding to 
treatment
 Nephritic syndrome
 Renal transplant dysfunction
 Rarely performed for isolated haematuria or isolated low-grade proteinuria in 
the absence of impaired renal function or evidence of a multisystem disorder
Contraindications
 Disordered coagulation or thrombocytopenia. Aspirin and other antiplatelet 
agents increase bleeding risk
 Uncontrolled hypertension
 Kidneys <60% predicted size
 Solitary kidney* (except transplants)
Complications
 Pain, usually mild
 Bleeding into urine, usually minor but may produce clot colic and obstruction
 Bleeding around the kidney, occasionally massive and requiring angiography 
with intervention, or surgery
 Arteriovenous stula, rarely signicant clinically
*Relative contraindication.
18.6  Causes of anuria (<100 mL urine output per day)
Condition
Examples
Urinary obstruction 
(complete)
Urinary retention due to prostatic enlargement, 
urethral stenosis, bladder tumour
Bilateral ureteric obstruction due to 
retroperitoneal brosis, cancer, bilateral ureteric 
stones, radiation injury
Bilateral renal stones (usually staghorn calculi)
Massive crystalluria obstruction of tubules (rare)
Lack of renal perfusion 
(bilateral)
Aortic dissection involving renal arteries
Severe acute tubular necrosis
Severe functional hypoperfusion (cardiorenal, 
hepatorenal)
Rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis
Anti-glomerular basement membrane disease, 
severe antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody 
(ANCA) vasculitis (100% glomerular crescents 
on biopsy)

[[p614]]
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease    567
18
poor renal outcome in those with glomerulonephritis and poor patient 
survival in those with acute tubular necrosis in ICU.
Obstruction of the renal tract can result in oliguria and anuria; how-
ever, for this to occur the obstruction must be complete and affect both 
kidneys, unless the patient has a single functioning kidney. Hence, the 
obstruction is most likely to occur at the level of the bladder outlet, for 
example in benign prostatic hypertrophy (see Fig. 18.18). It is less com-
mon for both ureters to become obstructed simultaneously, though this 
can occur with retroperitoneal brosis or bilateral renal calculi. Partial 
obstruction can be associated with normal or even high urine volume 
due to chronic tubular injury, which causes loss of tubular concentrating 
ability.
Polyuria
Polyuria is dened as a urine volume in excess of 3 L/24 hrs. Various 
underlying conditions, both renal and extrarenal, may be responsible, as 
outlined in Box 18.7
Investigation of polyuria includes measurement of urea, creatinine, 
sodium, potassium, osmolarity, glucose and calcium. A 24-hour urine 
collection may be helpful to conrm the severity of polyuria. The pres-
ence of nocturnal polyuria suggests a pathological cause. Investigation 
and management of suspected diabetes insipidus are described in 
Chapter 20.
Frequency
Frequency describes daytime micturition more often than a patient would 
expect. It may be a consequence of polyuria, when urine volume is nor-
mal or high, but is also found in patients with urinary infection and pros-
tatic diseases, when small amounts of urine are passed each time and 
the total daily urine volume is normal.
Nocturia
Nocturia is dened as waking to pass urine during the main sleep period. 
Nocturia occurs in the recovery phase of AKI and in many patients with 
CKD due to loss of urine-concentrating ability due to tubular injury. It may 
also be due to prostatic enlargement when it is associated with other 
lower urinary tract symptoms such as poor stream, hesitancy, incom-
plete bladder emptying, terminal dribbling and urinary frequency due to 
partial urethral obstruction (p. 609). Nocturia may be exacerbated by 
increased uid intake or diuretic use in the late evening (including caf-
feine). It may also occur due to sleep disturbance without any functional 
abnormalities of the urinary tract.
Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is dened as any involuntary leakage of urine. It 
may occur in patients with a normal urinary tract, as the result of demen-
tia or poor mobility, or transiently during an acute illness or hospitalisa-
tion, especially in older people (see Box 18.52). The pathophysiology, 
investigation and management of urinary incontinence are discussed in 
detail later in the chapter.
Abdominal pain
Loin pain is more often musculoskeletal in origin but can be a manifes-
tation of urinary tract disease; in the latter case, it may arise from renal 
stones, ureteric stones, renal tumours, acute pyelonephritis and urinary 
tract obstruction. Acute loin pain radiating to the groin is termed renal 
colic. This is typical of ureteric obstruction due to calculi and is often 
accompanied by haematuria. Precipitation of dull loin pain by a large 
uid intake (Dietl’s crisis) suggests upper urinary tract obstruction such 
as caused by a congenital pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction (p. 604). 
Obstruction at the bladder neck is associated with lower midline abdom-
inal discomfort. Chronic obstruction rarely produces pain but may give 
rise to a dull ache.
Dysuria
Dysuria refers to painful urination, often described as burning or stinging, 
and is commonly accompanied by suprapubic pain. It is often associated 
with frequency of micturition and a feeling of incomplete emptying of 
the bladder. By far the most common cause is urinary tract infection, as 
described on page 599. Other diagnoses that need to be considered in 
patients with dysuria include sexually transmitted infections (Ch. 15) and 
bladder stones (p. 602).
Oedema
Oedema is caused by an excessive accumulation of uid within the inter-
stitial space. Clinically, this can be detected by persistence of an indent-
ation in tissue following pressure on the affected area (pitting oedema). 
Non-pitting oedema is typical of lymphatic obstruction and may also 
occur as the result of excessive matrix deposition in tissues: for example, 
in hypothyroidism (Ch. 20) or systemic sclerosis (Ch. 26). Oedema may 
be due to a number of causes (Box 18.8).
Clinical assessment
Dependent areas, such as the ankles and lower legs, are typically 
affected rst but oedema can be restricted to the sacrum in bed-bound 
18.7  Causes of polyuria
 Excess uid intake (characterised by low serum osmolarity)
 Osmotic diuresis: hyperglycaemia, hypercalcaemia, sodium-glucose transporter 
inhibitors
 Cranial diabetes insipidus
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus:
 Rare inherited mutations in vasopressin receptor or aquaporin 2 genes
 Vasopressin receptor antagonists (tolvaptan)
 Lithium
 Interstitial nephritis
 Hypokalaemia
 Transiently following recovery from acute tubular necrosis (ATN) or relief of 
urinary obstruction
18.8  Causes of oedema
Increased total extracellular uid
 Congestive heart failure
 Renal failure
 Liver disease
High local venous pressure
 Deep venous thrombosis or venous insufciency
 Pregnancy
 Pelvic tumour
Low plasma oncotic pressure/serum albumin
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Liver failure
 Malnutrition/malabsorption
Increased capillary permeability
 Local infection/inammation
 Severe sepsis
 Calcium channel blockers
Lymphatic obstruction
 Infection: lariasis, lymphogranuloma venereum
 Malignancy
 Radiation injury
 Congenital abnormality

[[p615]]
568    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
patients. Pitting oedema tends to accumulate in the ankles during 
the day and improves overnight as the interstitial uid is reabsorbed. 
Conversely, facial oedema on waking is common. With increasing sever-
ity, oedema spreads to affect the upper parts of the legs, the genitalia 
and abdomen. Ascites is common and often an earlier feature in chil-
dren or young adults, and in liver disease. Pleural effusions are common, 
particularly on the right side. Raised JVP and pulmonary oedema are 
uncommon in patients with low oncotic pressure such as nephrotic syn-
drome, but common in the context of increased total extracellular uid 
such as in cardiac and renal failure. Features of intravascular volume 
depletion (tachycardia, postural hypotension) may occur when oedema 
is due to decreased oncotic pressure or increased capillary permeability. 
If oedema is localised – for example, to one ankle but not the other – then 
local inammation, venous thrombosis or lymphatic disease should be 
suspected.
Investigations
Blood should be taken for measurement of creatinine and electrolytes, 
liver function and serum albumin, and the urine tested for protein. 
Further imaging of the liver, heart or kidneys may be indicated, based 
on history and clinical examination. Where ascites or pleural effusions 
occur in isolation, measurement of protein, glucose and LDH, and 
microscopy for cells in the aspirate will usually differentiate a transu-
date (typical of oedema) from an exudate (more suggestive of local 
pathology, p. 494).
Management
Mild oedema usually responds to elevation of the legs, compression 
stockings, or a thiazide or a low dose of a loop diuretic. In nephrotic 
syndrome, renal failure and severe cardiac failure, very large doses of 
diuretics, sometimes in combination, may be required to achieve a neg-
ative sodium and uid balance. Restriction of sodium and uid intake 
may be required. Diuretics are not helpful in the treatment of oedema 
caused by increased capillary permeability or by venous or lymphatic 
obstruction. Specic causes of oedema, such as venous thrombosis, 
should be treated.
Hypertension
Hypertension is a very common feature of renal disease. Additionally, the 
presence of hypertension identies a population at risk of developing CKD 
and current recommendations are that hypertensive patients should have 
renal function checked annually. Control of hypertension is very important 
in patients with renal impairment because of its close relationship with fur-
ther decline of renal function (p. 593) and increased cardiovascular risk. 
Pathophysiology and management are discussed in Chapter 16
Haematuria
Healthy individuals may have occasional red blood cells in the urine (<3 
red blood cells/high power eld), but the presence of visible (macro-
scopic) haematuria or non-visible (microscopic, only detectable on dip-
stick testing) haematuria is indicative of bleeding from somewhere in the 
urinary tract (Fig. 18.7). Once infection, menstruation and causes of a 
positive urinary dipstick in the absence of red cells (haemoglobinuria/
myoglobinuria) have been excluded (Box 18.9), both visible and persis-
tent non-visible haematuria require investigation, as they may be caused 
by malignancy or indicate glomerulonephritis.
Visible haematuria is most likely to be caused by malignancy (14% of 
patients present with visible haematuria), which can affect any part of 
the urogenital tract (see Fig. 18.7). Patients with visible haematuria must 
therefore be referred to urology for imaging (ultrasound or CT scan) and 
cystoscopy (Fig. 18.8). Other common causes of visible haematuria are 
urine infection and stones. Visible haematuria may also be encountered 
in patients with IgA nephropathy, typically following an upper respiratory 
tract infection.
Non-visible haematuria may also indicate an underlying cancer, and 
although guidelines vary, current UK guidelines are that all patients over 
60 years old with persistent (detected on at least two of three consec-
utive dipstick tests) non-visible haematuria and either dysuria or an 
elevated serum white cell count should therefore undergo imaging and 
cystoscopy. In younger patients, an underlying tumour is much less likely, 
and if a glomerular cause is not suspected (see below), it may be appro-
priate to manage them by periodic observation in primary care, although 
occasionally these individuals develop signicant overt renal disease dur-
ing follow-up.
Glomerular bleeding occurs when inammatory, destructive or degen-
erative processes disrupt the GBM, permitting passage of red blood cells 
into the urine. A characteristic feature of glomerular bleeding is an ‘active 
urinary sediment’ (the presence of dysmorphic red blood cells or red cell 
casts on microscopy); this is not always present, however. Patients with 
visible and non-visible haematuria should also be assessed for hyperten-
sion, proteinuria, reduced/declining renal function, family history of renal 
Polyarteritis
nodosa
Vascular
malformation
Renal infarction
Coagulation
disorders
Cysts
Renal tumour
Glomerulonephritis
Small-vessel
vasculitis
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Other glomerular
diseases
Interstitial nephritis
Pyelonephritis
Calculus
Calculus
Cystitis
Bladder tumour
Benign prostatic
enlargement
Prostate cancer
Trauma
Urethritis
Trauma
Trauma
Ureteric tumour 
Fig. 18.7 Causes of haematuria.
18.9  Interpretation of non-visible haematuria
Dipstick test 
positive
Urine microscopy
Suggested cause
Haematuria
White blood cells
Abnormal epithelial cells
Red cell casts
Dysmorphic erythrocytes 
(phase contrast 
microscopy)
Infection
Tumour
Glomerular bleeding*
Haemoglobinuria
No red cells
Intravascular 
haemolysis
Myoglobinuria 
(brown urine)
No red cells
Rhabdomyolysis
*Glomerular bleeding implies that the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is ruptured. It 
can occur physiologically following very strenuous exertion but usually indicates intrinsic renal 
disease and is an important feature of the nephritic syndrome.

[[p616]]
Presenting problems in renal and urinary tract disease    569
18
disease or features of systemic disease (see Fig. 18.8). The presence of 
any of these features raises the possibility of intrinsic renal pathology and 
warrants referral to nephrology for further investigation, including consid-
eration of renal biopsy.
Nephritic syndrome
The nephritic syndrome is characterised by the presence of haema-
turia in association with hypertension, oliguria, uid retention and 
reduced/declining renal function. Many patients with glomeruloneph-
ritis, particularly those with milder disease, do not exhibit all of these 
features; however, their combined presence is typical of a rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis and warrants urgent investigation. In 
many cases, investigation will include a renal biopsy to conrm diag-
nosis and guide management, but less invasive investigations may 
also be useful (Box 18.10).
Patients with nephritic syndrome may also exhibit varying degrees 
of proteinuria, including nephrotic-range proteinuria; the prominence 
of haematuria on dipstick should, however, alert the physician to the 
possibility of a glomerulonephritis. Indeed, it is important to recognise 
that the characteristic features of nephritic syndrome and nephrotic 
syndrome do not always present in isolation, but should be considered 
to be the extreme phenotypes at either end of a spectrum of presenta-
tions (Fig. 18.9).
Proteinuria
While small amounts of high-molecular-weight proteins and moderate 
amounts of low-molecular-weight proteins pass through the healthy GBM, 
these proteins normally are completely reabsorbed by tubular cells. Hence, 
in healthy individuals, less than 150 mg of protein is excreted in the urine 
each day, much of which is derived from tubular cells. This includes Tamm–
Horsfall protein (uromodulin), encoded by the UMOD gene, mutations 
in which have been linked to tubulo-interstitial disease (see Box 18.20). 
The presence of larger amounts of proteinuria indicates signicant renal 
disease, with greater than 1g/day indicative of glomerular pathology.
Proteinuria is usually asymptomatic and is often picked up by uri-
nalysis, although large amounts of protein may make the urine frothy. 
Transient proteinuria can occur after vigorous exercise, during fever, in 
heart failure and in people with urinary tract infection. Patients should be 
assessed for the presence of these conditions and urine testing repeated 
once the potential trigger has been treated or resolved.
Testing for proteinuria is best done on an early morning sample, as 
some individuals exhibit orthostatic proteinuria. In these patients, urinary 
dipstick is positive only when upright, with the rst morning sample being 
negative. Orthostatic proteinuria is regarded as a benign disorder that 
does not require treatment.
Moderately elevated albuminuria (microalbuminuria)
In healthy individuals, there is virtually no urinary excretion of large-mol-
ecular-weight serum proteins, such as albumin, in contrast to modest 
urinary excretion of tubule-derived proteins. The presence of even mod-
erate amounts of albuminuria (previously referred to as microalbuminuria) 
is therefore abnormal, and is the most sensitive marker of early glomer-
ular pathology, when the standard dipstick test remains negative (Box 
18.11). Screening for moderately elevated albuminuria should be per-
formed regularly in patients with diabetes, as persistently high levels war-
rant therapy with inhibitors of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, 
Persistent non-visible haematuria
2 of 3 positive dipsticks
Exclude menstruation/UTI
Refer to nephrology
Consider renal biopsy
Refer to urology
Ultrasound/CT renal tracts
Cystoscopy
Observation
Annual: urinalysis, BP,
ACR, eGFR
*Symptomatic NVH
Assess: BP, eGFR, ACR
Abnormal
OR
Normal
<
60 years
>60 years
Family history of renal disease
Evidence of systemic disease
Visible haematuria
Exclude menstruation/UTI
Check BP, eGFR
Fig. 18.8 Investigation of haematuria. *Symptomatic: lower urinary tract voiding symptoms such as hesitancy, frequency, urgency and dysuria. (ACR = albumin:creatinine 
ratio; BP = blood pressure; CT = computed tomography; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate; NVH = non-visible haematuria; UTI = urinary tract infection)
18.10  Investigation of nephritic syndrome
Cause
Investigations
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN)
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis
ASOT, C3, C4
Anti-GBM disease
Anti-GBM antibody
Small-vessel vasculitis
p-ANCA, c-ANCA
Lupus nephritis
ANA, dsDNA, C3, C4
Mild glomerulonephritic presentation
IgA nephropathy
Serum IgA (polyclonal rise in 50% of 
patients)
Mesangioproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
C3, C4, hepatitis B, C + HIV serology, 
ANA, dsDNA, immunoglobulins, PPE
Alport syndrome*
Genetic screening, hearing test
*Not a glomerulonephritis but may present in a similar manner with haematuria, variable 
proteinuria, hypertension and slowly declining renal function.
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASOT = anti-
streptolysin O titre; C3, C4 = complement proteins 3, 4; dsDNA = double-stranded DNA; GBM = 
glomerular basement membrane; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; IgA = immunoglobulin 
A; PPE = plasma protein electrophoresis)

[[p617]]
570    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
even in normotensive individuals (see Box 21.30). Persistent moderately 
increased albuminuria has also been associated with cardiovascular 
mortality.
Overt (dipstick-positive) proteinuria
Urinary dipstick testing is a valuable screening tool for the detection of pro-
teinuria; it is only semi-quantitative, however, as it is highly dependent on 
the concentration of the urine. Typically, standard dipsticks test positive for 
protein once the urinary protein exceeds approximately 0.5 g/24 hrs; how-
ever, trace to 1+ may be observed on dipstick in very concentrated urine 
from healthy individuals. After urinary tract infection has been excluded, all 
patients with persistent proteinuria on dipstick should have the amount of 
protein quantied to guide further investigations (Fig. 18.10). When more 
than 1 g of protein per day is excreted, glomerular disease is likely and 
this is an indication for renal biopsy. Since 24-hour urine collection is often 
inaccurate, the protein:creatinine ratio (PCR) in a single sample of urine 
is preferred. This makes an allowance for the variable degree of urinary 
dilution and can be used to extrapolate to 24-hour values (see Box 18.11). 
Changes in PCR also give valuable information about the progression of 
renal disease and response to therapy in CKD. It is possible to measure 
albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR), but this requires a more expensive immu-
noassay and is usually reserved for situations when high sensitivity is 
required, such as detection of moderately elevated albuminuria in the early 
stages of diabetic nephropathy (p. 749).
It is sometimes helpful to identify the type of protein in the urine. Large 
amounts of low-molecular-weight proteins, such as β2-microglobulin 
(molecular weight 12 kDa), in the urine suggest renal tubular damage and 
are referred to as tubular proteinuria. This rarely exceeds 1.5–2 g/24 hrs 
(maximum PCR 150–200 mg/mmol; see Box 18.11 for conversion of 
mg/mmol to mg/dL).
Free immunoglobulin light chains (molecular weight 25 kDa) are ltered 
freely at the glomerulus but are poorly identied by dipstick tests. Their 
presence may also be indicated by a ‘protein gap’, where the PCR is 
markedly greater than the ACR (i.e. by more than the normal gap of 
30 mg/mmol, see Box 18.11). In this context, electrophoresis of the urine 
and specic immunodetection methods are required to detect immuno-
globulin light chains, known as ‘Bence Jones protein’. This may occur in 
AL amyloidosis (Ch. 4) and in plasma-cell dyscrasias such as myeloma 
(Ch. 25).
Nephrotic
Mechanism
 Injury to podocytes
 Changed architecture
 
Scarring
 
Deposition of matrix or other elements
Clinical features
 Overt proteinuria: usually > 3.5 g/24 hrs
   (urine may be frothy)
 Hypoalbuminaemia < 30 g/L
 Oedema and generalised fluid retention
 Possible intravascular volume depletion with
   hypotension, or intravascular expansion
   with hypertension
Nephritic
Mechanism
 Inflammation
 Reactive cell proliferation
 Breaks in GBM
 Crescent formation
Clinical features
 Haematuria (red or brown urine)
 Oedema and generalised fluid retention
 Hypertension
 Oliguria
 Reduced renal function
Haematuria
Proteinuria
SLE
IgA nephropathy
Minimal change
nephropathy
Diabetic
nephropathy
MCGN
Anti-GBM
disease
FSGS
Membranous
nephropathy
Amyloid
Small-
vessel
vasculitis
Post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis
Fig. 18.9 Nephritic and nephrotic syndrome. At one extreme, specic injury to podocytes causes proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome. The histology to the left shows 
diabetic nephropathy. At the other end of the spectrum, inammation leads to cell damage and proliferation, breaks form in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and 
blood leaks into urine. In its extreme form, with acute sodium retention and hypertension, such disease is labelled nephritic syndrome. The histology to the right shows a 
glomerulus with many extra nuclei from proliferating intrinsic cells, and inux of inammatory cells leading to crescent formation (arrows) in response to severe post-infectious 
glomerulonephritis. (FSGS = focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis; IgA = immunoglobulin A; MCGN = mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus)
18.11  Quantifying proteinuria in random urine samples
ACR1 mg/mmol
PCR1 mg/mmol
Typical dipstick results2
Signicance
<3.5 (female)
<2.5 (male)
<  25
–
Normal
3.5–30
25–50
–
Moderately elevated
30–70
50–100
+ to ++
Dipstick positive
70–300
100–350
++ to +++
Glomerular disease more likely; equivalent to >1 g/24 hrs
>300
>350
+++ to ++++
Nephrotic range: almost always glomerular disease, equivalent to >3.5 g/24 hrs
1Values are given for mg/mmol; if urine creatinine is measured in mg/dL, reference values for PCR and ACR can be derived by dividing by 11.31. 2Dipstick results are affected by urine concentration and 
are occasionally weakly positive on concentrated samples from healthy individuals.

[[p618]]
Glomerular diseases    571
18
Nephrotic syndrome
Nephrotic syndrome is characterised by very heavy proteinuria 
(>3.5 g/24 hrs), hypoalbuminaemia and oedema. Blood volume may be 
normal, reduced or increased. Renal sodium retention is an early and 
universal feature; the mechanisms of this are shown in Figure 19.4. The 
diseases that cause nephrotic syndrome all affect the glomerulus (see 
Fig. 18.9), either directly, by damaging podocytes, or indirectly, by caus-
ing scarring or deposition of exogenous material such as amyloid into 
the glomerulus.
Investigation of nephrotic syndrome usually involves renal biopsy, 
although non-invasive tests may also be helpful in suggesting the under-
lying cause (Box 18.12). In children, minimal change disease is by far the 
most common cause of nephrotic syndrome and therefore renal biopsy 
is not usually required unless the patient fails to respond to high-dose 
glucocorticoid therapy. Similarly, most patients with diabetes presenting 
with nephrotic syndrome will have diabetic nephropathy, and so renal 
biopsy is usually not performed unless the course of the disease is 
atypical (rapidly increasing proteinuria or rapid decline in renal function; 
p. 749).
Management of nephrotic syndrome should be directed at the 
underlying cause. In addition, nephrotic syndrome is associated with 
a number of complications (Box 18.13), which may require supportive 
management unless the nephrosis is expected to resolve rapidly, such 
as in glucocorticoid-responsive minimal change disease. Diuretics 
are often required to reduce oedema. ACE inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor blockade are indicated to reduce intraglomerular pressure 
and proteinuria, which may lead to an increase in serum albumin 
concentration.
Glomerular diseases
Glomerular diseases account for a signicant proportion of acute and 
chronic kidney disease. Most patients with glomerular disease do not 
present acutely and are asymptomatic until abnormalities are detected 
on routine screening of blood or urine samples.
There are many causes of glomerular damage, including immunologi-
cal injury, inherited diseases such as Alport syndrome (p. 577), metabolic 
diseases such as diabetes mellitus (Ch. 21), and deposition of abnormal 
proteins such as amyloid in the glomeruli (Ch. 4). The glomerular cell 
types that may be the target of injury are shown in Fig. 18.11. Proteinuria 
is the hallmark of glomerular disease; however, the response of the 
glomerulus to injury and hence the predominant clinical features vary 
according to the nature of the insult, ranging from fulminant nephrotic 
syndrome when the primary target is usually the podocyte to rapidly pro-
gressive glomerulonephritis (see Fig. 18.9). Several prognostic indicators 
are common to all causes of glomerulonephritis (Box 18.14) and may be 
helpful in assessing the need for immunosuppressive therapy.
Glomerulonephritis
While glomerulonephritis literally means ‘inammation of glomeruli’, the 
term is often used more broadly to describe all types of glomerular dis-
ease, even though some of these (e.g. minimal change nephropathy) are 
not associated with inammation.
Most types of glomerulonephritis are immunologically mediated and sev-
eral respond to immunosuppressive drugs. Deposition of antibody occurs 
in many types of glomerulonephritis and testing for circulating or glomerular 
deposition of antibodies may aid diagnosis (see Fig. 18.11 and Boxes 18.10
and 18.12). In small-vessel vasculitis, no glomerular antibody deposition is 
observed (pauci-immune), but the antibodies may be indirectly pathogenic 
by activating neutrophils to promote endothelial injury (see Fig. 18.11).
Glomerulonephritis is generally classied in terms of the histopatho-
logical appearances, as summarised in Box 18.15 and Fig. 18.12. 
Many non-specialists nd the terminology used in describing glomer-
ulonephritis confusing, therefore some denitions are provided in Box 
18.16. It is important to stress that the histological appearance rarely 
conrms a specic renal disease but rather suggests a limited range of 
Substantial
Total 24-hr
protein > 1 g
PCR > 100 mg/mmol
ACR > 70 mg/mmol
Yes
Quantify
Repeated proteinuria on dipstick
2 of 3 positive dipsticks
Exclude UTI
Features of significant renal
disease?
Hypertension
Abnormal renal function
Family history of renal disease
Signs of systemic disease
No
Consider renal biopsy
Observation
Urinalysis, blood pressure,
creatinine every 6 – 12 mths
Re-assess if anything changes
Moderate or low-grade
Total 24-hr
protein < 1 g
PCR < 100 mg/mmol
ACR < 70 mg/mmol
Fig. 18.10 Investigation of proteinuria. (ACR = albumin:creatinine ratio; PCR = 
protein:creatinine ratio; UTI = urinary tract infection)
18.12  Investigation of nephrotic syndrome
Cause
Typical age group
Investigations
Minimal change 
disease
Children, young adults, 
occasionally seen in 
older patients
None specic
Primary focal 
segmental 
glomerulosclerosis
Young adults
None specic
Membranous 
nephropathy
Middle-aged to older 
patients
Anti-phospholipase 
A2 receptor antibody 
(primary disease)
Hepatitis B, C + HIV 
serology, ANA, dsDNA
Amyloid
Older patients
Immunoglobulins, PPE, 
Bence Jones protein, 
serum free light chains
Diabetic nephropathy
Any age, but rarely 
<10 years from 
diagnosis of type 1 
diabetes
Glucose, glycosylated 
haemoglobin
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; dsDNA = double-stranded DNA; HIV = human immunodeciency 
virus; PPE = plasma protein electrophoresis)

[[p619]]
572    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
diagnoses, which may be conrmed by further investigation. Conversely, 
some diseases, such as lupus, are associated with more than one his-
tological pattern of injury. The most common histological subtypes may 
be categorised according to their typical clinical presentation, as dis-
cussed below. Genetic disorders associated with glomerular disease are 
described later in this chapter.
Diseases typically presenting with nephrotic 
syndrome
In these diseases, the injury is focused on the podocyte and there is little 
histological evidence of inammation or cell proliferation in the glomeru-
lus (non-proliferative, see Fig. 18.12). Minimal change and primary focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) typically present with fulminant 
nephrotic syndrome, whereas in membranous nephropathy and sec-
ondary FSGS, the nephrosis tends to be more indolent. Other causes of 
nephrotic syndrome due to systemic disease are discussed elsewhere, 
including diabetic nephropathy (p. 749) and amyloid (p. 77).
Minimal change nephropathy
Minimal change disease can occur at all ages but accounts for most cases 
of nephrotic syndrome (see Box 18.15) in children and about one-quarter 
of adult cases. It is caused by reversible dysfunction of podocytes. On 
light microscopy, the glomeruli appear normal (Fig. 18.12A), but fusion 
of podocyte foot processes is observed on electron microscopy. The 
presentation is with nephrotic syndrome, which typically is severe. High-
dose glucocorticoid therapy (1 mg/kg prednisolone for 6 weeks) usually 
promotes rapid remission of nephrosis, though the response to therapy 
is often less satisfactory in older patients. Some patients who respond 
incompletely (glucocorticoid-resistant) or relapse frequently need mainte-
nance glucocorticoids (glucocorticoid dependence) or additional agents 
such as cytotoxics or calcineurin inhibitors. Glucocorticoid resistance in 
children warrants a biopsy to exclude an alternative diagnosis, but if mini-
mal change is conrmed, a genetic cause should be considered. Minimal 
change disease typically does not progress to CKD but can present with 
problems related to the nephrotic syndrome (see Box 18.11) and com-
plications of treatment.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) (Fig. 18.12B) can 
occur in all age groups and is thought to be due to an as yet undis-
covered circulating factor. Histological analysis shows sclerosis initially 
 18.13  Consequences of the nephrotic syndrome and their management
Feature
Mechanism
Consequence
Management
Hypoalbuminaemia
Urinary protein losses exceed synthetic 
capacity of liver
Reduced oncotic pressure
Oedema
Treatment of underlying cause
Avid sodium retention
Secondary hyperaldosteronism
Additional poorly characterised intrarenal 
mechanisms
Oedema
Diuretics and a low-sodium diet*
Hypercholesterolaemia
Non-specic increase in lipoprotein synthesis 
by liver in response to low oncotic pressure
High rate of atherosclerosis
Statins, ezetimibe
Hypercoagulability
Relative loss of inhibitors of coagulation 
(antithrombin III, protein C and S) and increase 
in liver synthesis of procoagulant factors
Venous thromboembolism
Consideration of prophylaxis in 
chronic or severe nephrotic syndrome
Infection
Hypogammaglobulinaemia due to urinary loss 
of immunoglobulins
Pneumococcal and meningococcal 
infection
Consideration of vaccination
*Severe nephrotic syndrome may need very large doses of combinations of diuretics acting on different parts of the nephron (e.g. loop diuretic plus thiazide plus amiloride). Over-diuresis risks secondary 
impairment of renal function through hypovolaemia.
Endothelium (indirectly)
Small-vessel vasculitis
ANCA (serum)
GBM
Goodpasture's disease
Anti-GBM antibody (serum + IF on biopsy; 
see Fig.18.12H)
Podocyte
Membranous nephropathy
Anti-phosphilipase A2 receptor 1
(serum + IF on biopsy; see Fig.18.12F)
Planted
antigens
SLE – ANA, 
anti-dsDNA (serum)
Post-infectious
glomerulonephritis
Circulating immune complexes
Cryoglobulinaemia (Cryoglobulins in serum)
Serum sickness
Endocarditis
Mesangium
IgA nephropathy (polyclonal rise in serum
IgA in 50% patients; IF on biopsy; 
see Fig.18.12G)
Fig. 18.11 Glomerulonephritis associated with antibody production. Antibodies 
and antigen–antibody (immune) complexes may target or be deposited in specic 
components of the glomerulus, resulting in different patterns of histological injury 
and clinical presentation. Testing for antibody deposition in the glomerulus by 
immunouorescence (IF) on renal biopsy tissue or for antibodies in the serum may 
aid diagnosis. Diagnostic tests are shown in italics. (ANA = antinuclear antibody; 
ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; dsDNA = double-stranded DNA; GBM = 
glomerular basement membrane; IgA = immunoglobulin A; SLE = systemic lupus 
erythematosus)
18.14  Poor prognostic indicators in glomerular disease
 Male sex
 Hypertension
 Persistent and severe proteinuria
 Elevated creatinine at time of presentation
 Rapid rate of decline in renal function
 Tubulo-interstitial brosis observed on renal biopsy

[[p620]]
Glomerular diseases    573
18
18.15  Glomerulonephritis categorised by clinical presentation and histological classication
Histology
Immune deposits
Pathogenesis
Associations
Comments
Nephrotic presentation
Minimal change
Normal, except on electron 
microscopy, where fusion 
of podocyte foot processes 
is observed (non-specic 
nding)
None
Unknown; probable circulating 
factor promoting podocyte 
injury
Some cases are genetic  
(p. 577)
Atopy
Drugs, most commonly 
NSAIDs
Haematological malignancies
Acute and often severe nephrotic 
syndrome
Good response to glucocorticoids
Dominant cause of idiopathic 
nephrotic syndrome in childhood
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)
Segmental scars in some 
glomeruli
No acute inammation
Podocyte foot process fusion 
seen in primary FSGS
Non-specic trapping 
in focal scars
Unknown; circulating factors 
may increase glomerular 
permeability
Injury to podocytes may be 
common feature
Some cases are genetic  
(p. 577)
APOL1 variant in people of 
West African descent
Causes of secondary FSGS 
include:
 Healing of previous local 
glomerular injury
HIV infection
Heroin misuse
Morbid obesity
Chronic hypertension
Primary FSGS presents as 
idiopathic nephrotic syndrome but 
is less responsive to treatment 
than minimal change; may 
progress to renal impairment, and 
can recur after transplantation
Secondary FSGS presents with 
variable proteinuria and outcome
Membranous nephropathy
Thickening of GBM
Progressing to increased 
matrix deposition and 
glomerulosclerosis
Granular subepithelial 
IgG
Antibodies to a podocyte 
surface antigen (commonly 
phospholipase A2 receptor 1), 
with complement-dependent 
podocyte injury
HLA-DQA1 (for idiopathic)
Drugs:
 Penicillamine, NSAIDs, 
heavy metals
Hepatitis B virus
Malignancy
Lupus1
Common cause of adult idiopathic 
nephrotic syndrome
One-third progress, one-third 
spontaneously remit and 
one-third remain stable; may 
respond to glucocorticoids and 
immunosuppressants
Mild glomerulonephritic presentation
IgA nephropathy
Increased mesangial matrix 
and cells
Focal segmental nephritis in 
acute disease
Mesangial IgA (and C3)
Unknown
Mucosal infections (e.g. 
helminths) may be involved
Usually idiopathic, ares 
triggered by upper 
respiratory infection
Liver disease
Coeliac disease
Common disease with range of 
presentations, usually including 
haematuria and hypertension
Henoch–Schönlein purpura is 
an acute IgA variant common in 
children
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Immunoglobulin type
Immunoglobulins
Deposition of circulating 
immune complexes or ‘planted’ 
antigens
Infections, autoimmunity or 
monoclonal gammopathies
Most common pattern found 
in association with subacute 
bacterial infection, but also with 
cryoglobulinaemia ± hepatitis C 
virus, and others
Complement type
Complement 
components
Complement abnormalities, 
inherited or acquired
Dense deposit disease is 
associated with abnormal 
activation of alternative 
complement pathway
Complement gene mutations
C3 nephritic factor and 
partial lipodystrophy
In dense deposit disease, 
intramembranous deposits
No proven treatments
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis presentation
Focal necrotising glomerulonephritis
Segmental inammation and/
or necrosis in some glomeruli 
± crescent formation
Variable according 
to cause but typically 
negative (or ‘pauci-
immune’)
Small-vessel vasculitis, often 
ANCA-mediated
Primary or secondary small-
vessel vasculitis
Often occurs in systemic disease
Responds to treatment 
with glucocorticoids and 
immunosuppressants
Diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis2
Infection-related diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis3
Diffuse proliferation of 
endothelial and mesangial 
cells
Inltration by neutrophils and 
macrophages ± crescent 
formation
Subendothelial and 
subepithelial
Immune complex-mediated 
(e.g. to streptococcal infection 
with presumed cross-reactive 
epitopes)
Post-streptococcal
Concurrent infection with 
staphylococci, endocarditis
Presents with severe sodium 
and uid retention, hypertension, 
haematuria, oliguria
Usually resolves spontaneously
Continued

[[p621]]
574    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
limited to segments of the glomeruli, which may also show positive stain-
ing for deposits of C3 and IgM on immunouorescence. Since FSGS is a 
focal process, abnormal glomeruli may not be detected on renal biopsy if 
only a few are sampled, leading to an initial diagnosis of minimal change 
nephropathy.
In most cases the underlying cause is unknown (primary FSGS) and 
these patients typically present with abrupt onset of severe nephrotic 
syndrome. Primary FSGS may respond to high-dose glucocorticoid ther-
apy (0.5–2.0 mg/kg/day) but the response is rarely as rapid as in minimal 
change disease. Immunosuppressive drugs, such as calcineurin inhib-
itors, cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate mofetil, have also been 
used but their efcacy is uncertain. Progression to CKD is common in 
patients who do not respond to glucocorticoids and the disease fre-
quently recurs after renal transplantation.
FSGS is particularly common in people of West African descent, 
who, compared with other ethnicities, have a much higher carriage rate 
of apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) gene variants that are associated with 
increased risk of FSGS. In addition, mutations in other podocyte proteins 
may cause FSGS (see Genetic renal diseases section below). FSGS may 
also be secondary to other diseases such as human immunodeciency 
virus (HIV) renal disease (particularly in African Americans), morbid obe-
sity or chronic hypertension. In addition, it may reect scarring from pre-
vious focal glomerular injury resulting from HUS, cholesterol embolism 
or vasculitis. Patients with secondary FSGS typically present with more 
modest proteinuria than those with primary disease and rarely exhibit full-
blown nephrotic syndrome. Management of secondary FSGS is focused 
on treating the underlying cause and reducing proteinuria by inhibiting 
the renin–angiotensin system.
Membranous nephropathy
Membranous nephropathy is the most common cause of nephrotic 
syndrome in people of European descent. It is caused by antibodies 
Histology
Immune deposits
Pathogenesis
Associations
Comments
Anti-glomerular basement membrane disease
Usually crescentic nephritis
Linear IgG along GBM
Autoantibodies to α3 chain of 
type IV collagen in GBM
HLA-DR15 (previously known 
as DR2)
Associated with lung haemorrhage 
but renal or lung disease may 
occur alone
Treat with glucocorticoids, 
cyclophosphamide and plasma 
exchange
1Systemic lupus erythematosus can cause almost any histological injury pattern, most commonly membranous nephropathy or diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. 2In addition to the association with 
infection and anti-GBM disease, a diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis picture may also be seen with lupus and occasionally IgA nephropathy. 3Infection may also present with mesangioproliferative 
glomerulonephritis and membranous nephropathy (HIV).
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; APOL1 = apolipoprotein L1; FSGS = focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; GBM = glomerular basement membrane; HLA = 
human leucocyte antigen; IgA = immunoglobulin A; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
18.15 Glomerulonephritis categorised by clinical presentation and histological classication—continued
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Normal glomerulus
Focal segmental GS
Membranous GN
Focal necrotising GN
Crescentic GN
Membranous GN
IgA nephropathy
Anti-GBM disease
C
N
I
Cr
M
Fig. 18.12 Histopathology of glomerular disease. (
– 
Light microscopy)
glomerulonephritis (GN). A portion of the glomerulus (N = focal necrotising lesion) is replaced by bright pink material with some ‘nuclear dust’. Neutrophils may be seen 
elsewhere in the glomerulus. There is surrounding interstitial inammation (I). This is most commonly associated with small-vessel vasculitis and may progress to crescentic 
space is occupied by a semicircular formation (‘crescent’, Cr) of large pale cells, compressing the glomerular tuft. This is seen in aggressive inammatory glomerulonephritis. 
Direct immunouorescence)
glomerular basement membrane in Goodpasture’s disease. The glomerular structure is well preserved in all of these examples. (A, C, D, E) Courtesy of Dr J.G. Simpson, 
Aberdeen Royal Inrmary; (F, G, H) Courtesy of Dr R. Herriot

[[p622]]
Glomerular diseases    575
18
(usually autoantibodies) directed at antigen(s) expressed on the surface 
of podocytes, including the M-type phospholipase A2 receptor 1, and is 
characterised by thickening of the glomerular basement membrane on 
light microscopy (see Fig. 18.12). While most cases are idiopathic, a pro-
portion are associated with other causes, such as heavy metal poison-
ing, drugs, infections, lupus and tumours (see Box 18.15). Approximately 
one-third of patients with idiopathic membranous nephropathy undergo 
spontaneous remission, one-third remain in a nephrotic state, and 
one-third develop progressive CKD. Management includes tight blood 
pressure control, in particular with inhibitors of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system. In idiopathic disease immunosuppression treatment 
may improve both the nephrotic syndrome and the long-term prognosis 
and regimens include steroids with either cyclophosphamide or rituxi-
mab. However, because of the toxicity of these regimens, many nephrol-
ogists reserve such treatment for those with severe nephrotic syndrome 
or deteriorating renal function. Treatment of secondary membranous 
nephropathy is directed at the underlying cause.
Diseases typically presenting with mild nephritic 
syndrome
Patients with mild glomerulonephritis typically present with non-visible 
haematuria and modest proteinuria, and their renal disease tends to fol-
low a slowly progressive course. IgA nephropathy and mesangiocapillary 
glomerulonephritis (MCGN) typically fall in this category. However, their 
presentation is highly variable: IgA nephropathy occasionally presents 
with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis while MCGN may present with 
nephrotic syndrome. Other diseases that present with haematuria, modest 
proteinuria and slow progression include Alport syndrome.
IgA nephropathy
This is one of the most common types of glomerulonephritis and can 
present in many ways. Haematuria is the earliest sign and non-visible 
haematuria is almost universal, while hypertension is also very common. 
These are often detected during routine screening: for example, at occu-
pational medical examinations. Proteinuria can also occur but is usually 
a later feature. In many cases, there is slowly progressive loss of renal 
function leading to end-stage renal disease (ESRD), though in others, 
renal function is persistently normal. A particular hallmark of IgA nephro-
pathy in young adults is the occurrence of acute self-limiting exacerba-
tions, often with visible haematuria, in association with minor respiratory 
infections. This may be so acute as to resemble acute post-infectious 
glomerulonephritis, with uid retention, hypertension and oliguria with 
dark or red urine. Characteristically, the latency from clinical infection to 
nephritis is short, in contrast to post-infectious glomerulonephritis, which 
typically occurs after the infection has resolved. Asymptomatic presenta-
tions dominate in older adults, with non-visible haematuria, hypertension 
and reduced GFR. Occasionally, IgA nephropathy progresses rapidly in 
association with crescent formation on biopsy. Management is largely 
directed towards the control of blood pressure, with renin–angiotensin 
system inhibitors preferable in those with proteinuria. There is some evi-
dence for additional benet from several months of high-dose gluco-
corticoid treatment in those at high risk of progressive disease (see Box 
18.14), but no strong evidence for other immunosuppressive agents. A 
role for other therapies, such as sh oil, remains uncertain.
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
This condition most commonly occurs in children but can also be 
observed in adults. It is a systemic vasculitis that often arises in response 
to an infectious trigger. It presents with a tetrad of features:
 a characteristic petechial rash typically affecting buttocks and lower 
legs
 abdominal pain due to vasculitis involving the gastrointestinal tract
 arthralgia
 renal disease characterised by visible or non-visible haematuria, with 
or without proteinuria.
Renal biopsy shows mesangial IgA deposition and appearances 
that are indistinguishable from acute IgA nephropathy (Fig. 18.12G). 
Treatment is supportive in nature; in most patients, the prognosis is 
good, with spontaneous resolution, though relapses are common. Some 
patients, particularly adults and those with severe or persistent proteinu-
ria, progress to develop ESRD.
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis (MCGN), also known as mem-
branoproliferative glomerulonephritis, is a pattern of injury seen on renal 
biopsy that is characterised by an increase in mesangial cellularity with 
thickening of glomerular capillary walls. The typical presentation is with 
proteinuria and haematuria. Several underlying causes have been iden-
tied, as summarised in Box 18.15. It can be classied into two main 
subtypes. The rst is characterised by deposition of immunoglobulins 
within the glomeruli. This subtype is associated with chronic infections, 
autoimmune diseases and monoclonal gammopathy. The second is 
characterised by deposition of complement in the glomeruli and is asso-
ciated with inherited or acquired abnormalities in the complement path-
way. This category comprises ‘dense deposit disease’, which is typied 
by electron-dense deposits within the GBM, and C3 glomerulonephritis 
that shows deposits of C3 in the glomerulus.
Treatment of MCGN associated with immunoglobulin deposits con-
sists of the identication and treatment of the underlying disease, if 
possible, and the use of immunosuppressive drugs such as mycophe-
nolate mofetil or cyclophosphamide. There are few specic treatments 
for MCGN associated with complement dysregulation, although eculi-
zumab, the anti-C5 inhibitor that prevents formation of the membrane 
attack complex, has shown promise.
Diseases typically presenting with rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) is characterised by rapid 
loss of renal function over days to weeks, usually in association with 
hypertension and oedema. Non-visible haematuria is almost always 
present, with variable amounts of proteinuria, while characteristic red 
cell casts and dysmorphic red cells may be observed on urine micros-
copy (see Fig. 18.3). Renal biopsy typically shows crescentic lesions (Fig. 
18.12E), often associated with necrotising lesions within the glomerulus 
(Fig. 18.12C), particularly in small-vessel vasculitides.
This pattern of presentation is typical of post-infectious glomerulone-
phritis, anti-GBM disease and small-vessel vasculitides (Ch. 26). It can 
18.16  Terminology used in glomerulonephritis
Light microscopy
 Focal: affecting some but not all glomeruli
 Diffuse: affecting > 50% of glomeruli
 Segmental: affecting a portion of a glomerulus
 Global: affecting all of the glomerulus
 Necrotising: severe injury leading to an area of necrosis, usually associated with 
vasculitis
 Crescentic: a crescent-shaped area of inammatory cells responding to severe 
glomerular injury
Electron microscopy
 Subendothelial immune deposits: found between the endothelial cell and the 
GBM – often found in nephritic presentations
 Intramembranous immune deposits: found within the GBM – found in the dense 
deposit variant of mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
 Subepithelial immune deposits: found between the epithelial cell and the GBM – 
often found in nephrotic presentations, including membranous presentation of 
lupus
(GBM = glomerular basement membrane)

[[p623]]
576    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
also be observed in SLE and occasionally in IgA and other nephropathies 
(see Fig. 18.9).
Anti-glomerular basement membrane disease
Anti-GBM disease is a rare autoimmune disease in which antibodies 
develop against the α3 chain of type 4 collagen in the GBM. Expression 
of the α3 chain is largely restricted to the basement membranes of 
glomeruli and lungs, and hence the disease may present with rapidly 
progressive glomerulonephritis, lung haemorrhage, or disease of both 
organs, when it is known as Goodpasture’s disease. Goodpasture’s dis-
ease is more common in younger patients, while older adult patients 
often present with renal-limited disease. Patients with anti-GBM disease 
should be treated with plasma exchange combined with glucocorticoids 
and immunosuppressants, but early diagnosis is essential, as renal func-
tion is rarely recoverable in those requiring dialysis at presentation.
The combination of glomerulonephritis and pulmonary haemorrhage 
may also be observed with small-vessel vasculitis (particularly granu-
lomatosis with polyangiitis, previously known as Wegener’s granuloma-
tosis) and lupus.
Infection-related glomerulonephritis
RPGN may occur either during or following an infection. In both cases, 
circulating immune complexes are present and activation of the comple-
ment system promotes consumption of complement factors, resulting 
in low serum C3 and C4 concentration, as observed in many causes of 
glomerulonephritis (Box 18.17).
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis is observed most commonly in chil-
dren and young adults, and typically presents 10 days after a streptococ-
cal throat infection or longer after a skin infection. The clinical presentation 
ranges from mild abnormalities on urinalysis to RPGN with severe AKI. 
The anti-streptolysin (ASO) test is positive in up to 95% of patients with 
streptococcal throat infections. Treatment is supportive, with control of 
blood pressure and uid overload with salt restriction, diuretics and dial-
ysis if required. Antibiotic therapy is rarely needed, as the renal disease 
occurs after the infection has subsided. The medium-term prognosis for 
children and most adults is good, with recovery of renal function typical 
even in those requiring dialysis therapy. Some patients may develop CKD 
20–30 years after the original presentation.
An immune complex-mediated disease may also be observed during
an infection, typically a staphylococcal infection such as endocarditis, 
skin infection or pneumonia, but also with subacute endocarditis due 
to Streptococcus viridans. This occurs more commonly in older adults 
and the presentation tends not to be as fulminant as with post-strepto-
coccal disease. In addition to supportive measures, antibiotic therapy is 
required, as infection is usually concurrent with renal disease.
Tubulo-interstitial diseases
These diseases primarily affect the renal tubules and interstitial compo-
nents of the renal parenchyma. They are characterised by tubular dys-
function with electrolyte abnormalities, moderate levels of proteinuria and 
varying degrees of renal impairment. Often the urinary output may be 
relatively preserved for any given GFR, and indeed there may be polyuria 
and nocturia due to loss of concentrating ability in damaged tubules.
Acute interstitial nephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) is an immune-mediated disorder, char-
acterised by acute inammation affecting the tubulo-interstitium of the 
kidney. It is commonly drug-induced, typically due to antibiotics and pro-
ton pump inhibitors (PPIs), but can be caused by other toxins, and can 
complicate a variety of systemic diseases and infections (Box 18.18). 
Ingestion of mushrooms within the Cortinarius genus can cause a devas-
tating and irreversible AIN. It is encountered occasionally in Scandinavia 
and Scotland.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is typically with AKI and it may cause a rapid 
deterioration in renal function. AIN should always be considered in 
patients with non-oliguric AKI. In some patients with drug-induced AIN 
there may be signs of a generalised drug hypersensitivity reaction with 
fever and rash. Eosinophilia occurs in 20%–30% of cases, so its absence 
does not rule out AIN, but its presence should prompt a drug history. 
Proteinuria is generally modest (PCR <100 mg/mmol; see Box 18.11 for 
conversion of mg/mmol to mg/dL). The urine may contain white blood 
cells and white cell casts but is sterile on culture. Leucocytes are com-
monly present on urinalysis.
Investigations
Renal biopsy is usually required to conrm the diagnosis (Fig. 18.13D). 
This typically shows evidence of intense inammation, with inltration of 
the tubules and interstitium by lymphocytes. The presence of eosino-
phils may suggest drug-induced AIN and a predominant neutrophil inl-
tration suggests infection. Often granulomas may be evident, especially 
in drug-induced AIN. The degree of chronic inammation in a biopsy is 
a useful predictor of long-term renal function. Eosinophiluria may be 
present but is not a good discriminator for AIN.
Management
Some patients with drug-induced AIN recover following withdrawal of the 
drug alone, but high-dose glucocorticoids (prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) 
may accelerate recovery and prevent long-term scarring. Other specic 
causes (see Box 18.18) should be treated, if possible.
Chronic interstitial nephritis
Chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN) is characterised by renal dysfunction. 
It may follow on from AIN that does not resolve, or may be asso-
ciated with ingestion of various toxins and drugs, particularly those 
taken chronically, such as lithium or non-steroidal anti-inamma-
tory drugs (NSAIDs). In addition, it is associated with metabolic and 
chronic inammatory diseases, as summarised in Box 18.19. In many 
patients, CIN presents at a late stage and no underlying cause can be 
identied.
18.17  Causes of glomerulonephritis associated with low 
serum complement
 Post-infectious glomerulonephritis
 Subacute bacterial infection, especially endocarditis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Cryoglobulinaemia
 Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis, usually complement type
18.18  Causes of acute interstitial nephritis
Allergic
Many drugs but particularly:
 Penicillins
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
 Proton pump inhibitors
 Mesalazine (delayed)
Immune
 Autoimmune nephritis ± uveitis
 Transplant rejection
Infections
 Acute bacterial pyelonephritis
 Leptospirosis
 Tuberculosis
 Hantavirus
Toxic
 Myeloma light chains
 Mushrooms (Cortinarius)

[[p624]]
Genetic renal diseases    577
18
Pathophysiology
Genetic causes may underlie many of these cases (p. 577) while autoim-
mune mechanisms are also common. Toxins that have been associated 
with CIN include those contained within the plant Aristolochia clematitis
(birthwort). These are probably responsible for the severe nephrotoxi-
city that can be associated with treatment with herbal medicines in Asia 
and for Balkan nephropathy, which affects isolated rural communities in 
Bosnia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Serbia, possibly through con-
taminated our. The nephropathy is commonly linked with tumours of 
the collecting system and is probably due to the mutagenic effects of 
the plant toxin on the urothelial epithelium. Chronic interstitial nephritis in 
agricultural communities (also known as CKD of unknown cause, CKDu) 
is observed in central American countries and Sri Lanka. The cause is 
unknown, but is likely to reect a toxin used in agriculture exacerbated by 
episodes of dehydration due to heat exposure.
Clinical features
Most patients with CIN present in adult life with CKD. A minority have 
salt-losing nephropathy due to impairment of urine-concentrating abil-
ity and sodium conservation. This presents with polyuria, nocturia and 
hypotension and puts them at risk of AKI during an acute illness. Renal 
tubular acidosis (p. 631) may complicate CIN but is seen most often in 
myeloma, sarcoidosis, cystinosis, amyloidosis and Sjögren syndrome. 
Typically, urinalysis is unremarkable and small kidneys are observed 
on ultrasound scan. Renal biopsy demonstrates inltration of the renal 
parenchyma by lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages, in associ-
ation with tubular atrophy and interstitial brosis.
Management
Management is to identify and withdraw or treat the primary cause. 
Otherwise, treatment is supportive in nature, with correction of acidosis 
and hyperkalaemia; replacement of uid and electrolytes, as required; 
and renal replacement therapy if irreversible renal damage has occurred.
Papillary necrosis
The renal papillae lie within a hypoxic and hypertonic environ-
ment in the renal medulla, at the end of the vasa recta. They are 
susceptible to ischaemic damage because of this and can undergo necrosis 
when their vascular supply is impaired as the result of diabetes melli-
tus, sickle-cell disease or long-term ingestion of NSAIDs. The condition 
may occasionally occur in other diseases. There is an association with 
pyelonephritis but it is difcult to determine whether this is a cause of 
papillary necrosis or a complication. The clinical presentation is varia-
ble. Some patients are asymptomatic and clinically silent, whereas oth-
ers present with renal colic and renal impairment as necrosed papillae 
slough off and cause ureteric obstruction. Urinalysis may be normal but 
more frequently haematuria and sterile pyuria are present. Signicant 
proteinuria is unusual. The imaging method of choice to make the diag-
nosis is CTU or intravenous pyelography. Management is based on 
relieving obstruction, where present, and withdrawal of the offending 
drugs.
Genetic renal diseases
The advent of modern genetic techniques such as next-generation 
sequencing has allowed us to understand the breadth of inherited renal 
diseases on a much deeper level than before.
Inherited glomerular diseases
Alport syndrome
A number of uncommon diseases may involve the glomerulus in child-
hood but the most important one affecting adults is Alport syndrome. 
Most cases arise from a mutation or deletion of the COL4A5 gene on 
the X chromosome, which encodes the alpha 5 subunit of type IV col-
lagen, resulting in inheritance as an X-linked recessive disorder (Ch. 3). 
Mutations in COL4A3 or COL4A4 genes are less common and cause 
autosomal disease, which may be recessive or dominant and affect 
males and females equally. The accumulation of abnormal collagen 
results in a progressive degeneration of the GBM (Fig. 18.14). Affected 
patients progress from haematuria to ESRD in late adolescence or their 
twenties. Female carriers of COL4A5 mutations usually have haema-
turia but less commonly develop signicant renal disease. Some other 
A
B
C
D
T
G
T
I
B
Normal tubular histology
Acute tubular necrosis
Acute pyelonephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis
Fig. 18.13 Tubular histopathology. 
The tubules are densely packed with minimal space between. Brush 
borders can be seen on the luminal borders of cells in the proximal 
tubular basement membranes, swelling and vacuolation of tubular cells, 
and, in places, apoptosis and necrosis of tubular cells with shedding of 
cells into the lumen. During the regenerative phase, there is increased 
tubular mitotic activity. The interstitium (I) is oedematous and inltrated 
widespread inammatory inltrate that includes many neutrophils. 
Granulocyte casts (G) are forming within some dilated tubules (T). Other 
tubules are scarcely visible because of the extent of the inammation 
received a non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug (NSAID), an extensive 
mononuclear cell inltrate (no neutrophils) in the tubule-interstitium (T) is 
seen. Sometimes eosinophils are prominent.

[[p625]]
578    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
basement membranes containing the same collagen isoforms are simi-
larly involved, notably in the cochlea, so that Alport syndrome is associ-
ated with sensorineural deafness and ocular abnormalities.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors may slow but not 
prevent loss of kidney function. Patients with Alport syndrome are good 
candidates for renal replacement therapy (RRT), as they are young and 
usually otherwise healthy. They can develop an immune response to 
the normal collagen antigens present in the GBM of the donor kidney 
and, in a small minority, anti-GBM disease develops and destroys the 
allograft.
Thin glomerular basement membrane disease
In thin glomerular basement membrane disease there is non-visible 
 haematuria without associated hypertension, proteinuria or a reduction 
in GFR. The glomeruli appear normal by light microscopy but, on electron 
microscopy, the GBM is abnormally thin. The condition may be familial 
and some patients are carriers of Alport mutations. This does not appear 
to account for all cases, and in many patients the cause is unclear. 
Monitoring of these patients is advisable, as proteinuria may develop in 
some and there appears to be an increased rate of progressive CKD in 
the long term.
Hereditary nephrotic syndrome
Many genes have been discovered that cause early-onset nephrotic syn-
drome, often with an FSGS pattern of injury on histology. Inheritance 
may be autosomal dominant or recessive, the former conditions having 
a less severe and later-onset phenotype and often exhibiting incomplete 
penetrance. The involved genes almost all code for podocyte proteins, 
including nephrin (‘Finnish-type’ nephropathy) and podocin, which both 
cause early congenital nephrotic syndrome. Autosomal dominant muta-
tions in various genes may cause FSGS as part of systemic syndromes; 
the genes include INF2 (Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease), LMX1B (nail–
patella syndrome) and WT1 (abnormal genitalia, Wilms’ tumour, mental 
retardation).
Inheriting certain polymorphisms in the APOL1 gene, which occur 
predominantly in people of West African ancestry, leads to a greatly 
increased risk of kidney disease in adults, including FSGS.
Inherited tubulo-interstitial diseases
It has become evident in recent years that a signicant number of cases 
of CKD with low or absent proteinuria have genetic causes, which may 
be inherited in an autosomal dominant or recessive pattern and include 
genes predominantly expressed in tubular cells (Box 18.20). This is a 
heterogeneous group of inherited disorders. Small cysts are some-
times evident, explaining the previous name of medullary cystic kidney 
disease, but tubulo-interstitial nephritis is the predominant pattern of 
injury. Many of these conditions, especially those formerly known as 
nephronoph thisis, are associated with retinal dystrophies and brain or 
other abnormalities, and some may be associated with hyperuricaemia 
or gout (UMOD or HNF1-beta mutations). Many patients will progress 
to ESRD in later life. Modern genetics have brought clarity to a disease 
spectrum comprising many different conditions with previous descrip-
tive names.
Isolated defects of tubular function
An increasing number of disorders have been identied that are caused 
by specic defects in transporter molecules expressed in renal tubular 
cells. Only the most common are mentioned here. Renal glycosuria is a 
18.19  Causes of chronic interstitial nephritis
Acute interstitial nephritis
 Any of the causes of acute interstitial nephritis, if persistent (see Box 18.18)
Glomerulonephritis
 Varying degrees of interstitial inammation occur in association with most types 
of inammatory glomerulonephritis
Immune/inammatory
 Sarcoidosis
 Sjögren syndrome
 Chronic transplant rejection
 Systemic lupus erythematosus, primary autoimmune
Toxic
 Aristolochia in herbal medicines
 Lead
 Balkan nephropathy
 Chronic interstitial nephritis in agriculture communities (CKDu)
Drugs
 All drugs causing acute interstitial nephritis
 Tenofovir
 Lithium toxicity
 Analgesic nephropathy
 Ciclosporin, tacrolimus
Infection
 Consequence of severe pyelonephritis
Congenital/developmental
 Vesico-ureteric reux: associated but causation not clear
 Renal dysplasias: often associated with reux
 Inherited: now well recognised but mechanisms unclear
 Other: Wilson’s disease, sickle-cell nephropathy, medullary sponge kidney 
(nephrocalcinosis)
Metabolic and systemic diseases
 Calcium phosphate crystallisation after excessive phosphate administration  
(e.g. phosphate enemas in patients with chronic kidney disease)
 Hypokalaemia
 Hyperoxaluria
Urinary space
Foot process
of podocyte
Endothelial
cell
Glomerular
capillary
GBM
A
B
C
Fig. 18.14 Alport syndrome. 
the tissue-specic (α3, α4 and α
α1 and α2 chains. Although the GBM appears 
structurally normal in early life, in time thinning appears, progressing to thickening, splitting and degeneration. (B, C) Courtesy of Dr J. Collar, St Mary’s Hospital, London.

[[p626]]
Genetic renal diseases    579
18
benign autosomal recessive defect of tubular reabsorption of glucose, 
caused by mutations of the sodium/glucose co-transporter SGLT2. 
Glucose appears in the urine in the presence of a normal blood glu-
cose concentration. Notably, SGLT2 inhibitors have been developed as 
a treatment for diabetes mellitus.
Cystinuria is a rare condition, in which reabsorption of ltered cystine, 
ornithine, arginine and lysine is defective. It is caused by mutations in the 
SLC3A1 amino acid transporter gene. The high concentration of cystine 
in urine leads to cystine stone formation (p. 602).
Other uncommon tubular disorders include hereditary hypophospha-
taemic rickets, in which reabsorption of ltered phosphate is reduced; 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (Ch. 20), in which the tubules are resist-
ant to the effects of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH). In Bartter 
and Gitelman syndromes, there are inactivating mutations in the genes 
that encode the Na-K-2Cl and NaCl transporters, the targets of loop 
and thiazide diuretics respectively. Hence, both disorders present with 
sodium-wasting and hypokalaemia (Ch. 19).
The term ‘Fanconi syndrome’ is used to describe generalised proxi-
mal tubular dysfunction. The condition typically presents with low blood 
phosphate and uric acid concentrations, glycosuria, aminoaciduria and 
proximal renal tubular acidosis. In addition to the causes of interstitial 
nephritis described above, some congenital metabolic disorders are 
associated with Fanconi syndrome, notably Wilson’s disease, cystinosis 
and hereditary fructose intolerance.
Renal tubular acidosis describes the common end-point of a vari-
ety of diseases affecting distal (classical or type 1) or proximal (type 2) 
renal tubular function. These syndromes may also be inherited and are 
described in Chapter 19.
Cystic diseases of the kidney
It is common to encounter patients with a single renal cyst or even 
multiple cysts as an incidental nding, especially in those aged 50 years 
and over. Usually, these cysts are of no clinical consequence and are 
asymptomatic, but occasionally they can cause pain or haematuria. 
In addition, several specic diseases are recognised as being caused 
by the formation of multiple renal cysts. These are discussed in more 
detail below.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a common 
condition, with a prevalence of approximately 1:1000. Small cysts lined 
by tubular epithelium develop from infancy or childhood and enlarge 
slowly and irregularly. The surrounding normal kidney tissue is com-
pressed and progressively damaged. Mutations in the PKD1 gene 
account for 80% of cases and those in PKD2 for about 15% (coding 
for polycystin 1 and 2 genes, respectively) with some other rare genes 
accounting for the remainder. The median age of ESRD is approxi-
mately 52 years with a PKD1 mutation and 70 years with a PKD2 muta-
tion. It has been estimated that between 5% and 10% of patients with 
ESRD have PKD.
Clinical features
Common clinical features are shown in Box 18.21. Affected people are 
usually asymptomatic until later life but hypertension occurs from the age 
of 20 onwards. One or both kidneys may be palpable and the surface 
may feel nodular. About 30% of patients with PKD also have hepatic 
cysts (see Fig. 24.39) but disturbance of liver function is rare. Sometimes 
(almost always in women) the cysts cause massive and symptomatic 
hepatomegaly, usually concurrent with renal enlargement but occasion-
ally with only minor renal involvement. Berry aneurysms of cerebral ves-
sels are an associated feature in about 5% of patients with PKD. This 
feature appears to be largely restricted to certain families (and presum-
ably specic mutations). Mitral and aortic regurgitation is frequent but 
rarely severe, and colonic diverticula and abdominal wall hernias may 
occur.
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually based on family history, clinical ndings and 
ultrasound examination. Ultrasound demonstrates cysts in approxi-
mately 95% of affected patients over the age of 20 and is the screening 
method of choice, but may not detect small developing cysts in younger 
subjects. Cysts may also be identied by other imaging modalities, such 
as MRI (Fig. 18.15). Simple renal cysts may occur in normal individu-
als but are uncommon below the age of 30. The following criteria exist 
for an ultrasound diagnosis of PKD in patients with a family history but 
unknown genotype:
 15–39 years of age: at least three unilateral or bilateral kidney cysts
 40–59 years of age: at least two cysts in each kidney
 60 years or older: at least four cysts in each kidney.
It is possible to make a molecular diagnosis by next-generation 
sequencing of PKD1 or PKD2. This is used in cases with an uncertain 
18.20  Hereditary tubulo-interstitial kidney diseases
Inheritance
Gene(s)
Other name(s)
Clinical features
Autosomal dominant
UMOD
MCKD type 2
Juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy
Gout
MUC1
MCKD type 1
Progressive CKD without other manifestations
HNF1 beta
Juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy
Cystic kidneys, solitary kidney; gout; MODY; abnormal 
LFTs; pancreatic atrophy; hypomagnesaemia
REN (codes for renin)
Juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy
Gout; hyperkalaemia; salt-losing nephropathy
Autosomal recessive
NPHP genes (>20 genes discovered 
so far)
Nephronophthisis
Part of many syndromes (Bardet–
Biedl)
Common cause of paediatric ESRD
Occurs earlier than AD interstitial nephritis
Extrarenal manifestation common (learning difculty, 
eye/limb problems)
(AD = autosomal dominant; CKD = chronic kidney disease; ESRD = end-stage renal disease; LFTs = liver function tests; MCKD = medullary cystic kidney disease; MODY = maturity-onset diabetes of 
the young)
18.21  Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: 
common clinical features
 Vague discomfort in loin or abdomen due to increasing mass of renal tissue
 Acute loin pain or renal colic due to cyst rupture, haemorrhage into a cyst or 
ureteric stones
 Hypertension
 Haematuria – often visible, but with little or no proteinuria
 Urinary tract or cyst infections
 Renal failure

[[p627]]
580    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
diagnosis (young patients, few cysts, lack of family history), for workup 
of living kidney donors, or for screening for mutations associated with a 
worse prognosis (see below). Screening for intracranial aneurysms is not 
generally indicated but can be done by MR angiography in families with a 
history of subarachnoid haemorrhage. The yield of screening is low, how-
ever, and the risk:benet ratio of intervention in asymptomatic aneurysms 
in this disease is not clear.
Management
Blood pressure control is important because cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality are so common in renal disease, but evidence is lacking 
that controlling blood pressure to generally recommended CKD targets 
(e.g. <130/80 mmHg) inuences renal outcomes. There are data sug-
gesting that targeting a very low blood pressure (<110/75 mmHg) with 
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARBs) leads to slower 
increases in kidney volume, but no improvements in eGFR decline were 
observed and these targets are often not tolerated. This tight blood pres-
sure target did lead to a greater decline in left ventricular mass index, 
which may have implications for improved cardiovascular risk later in life.
The vasopressin V2 receptor antagonist tolvaptan slows the increase 
in kidney volume and the rate of GFR decline. It has been licensed in 
many countries for patients at high risk of progression. Risk factors for 
progression include large kidneys (more specically height-adjusted 
kidney volume), truncating PKD1 mutations, and family history of early 
progression, as well as male sex, hypertension, proteinuria and develop-
ment of early symptomatic cysts.
Patients with PKD are usually good candidates for dialysis and trans-
plantation. Sometimes kidneys are so large that one or both have to be 
removed to make space for a renal transplant. Otherwise, they are usu-
ally left in situ unless they are a source of pain or infection.
Other cystic diseases
Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome is caused by HNF1-beta mutations; 
it has a varying renal phenotype that often causes cysts but also may 
cause a tubulo-interstitial pattern of injury or congenital anomalies of the 
kidneys. It also causes a form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY).
Autosomal recessive PKD is caused by mutations in the PKHD1 gene, 
encoding brocystin. It is less common than autosomal dominant PKD 
(about 1:20 000 live births). Patients often present in infancy or young 
childhood with renal cysts and congenital hepatic brosis.
Some uncommon autosomal dominantly inherited conditions are 
associated with multiple renal cysts and tumours in adult life. In tuber-
ous scler osis, replacement of renal tissue by multiple angiomyolipomas 
may occasionally cause renal failure in adults. Patients may also develop 
renal cysts and have a higher risk of renal cell carcinoma. Other organs 
affected include the skin (adenoma sebaceum on the face) and brain 
(causing seizures and mental retardation). von Hippel–Lindau syndrome 
is associated with multiple renal cysts, renal adenomas and renal cell 
carcinoma. Other involved organs include the central nervous system 
(haemangioblastomas), pancreas (serous cystadenomas) and adrenals 
(phaeochromocytoma).
A number of other rarer inherited cystic diseases are recognised that 
have some similarities to PKD but distinct genetic causes. Multicystic 
dysplastic kidneys are often unilateral and are a developmental abnor-
mality found in children. Most of these seem to involute during growth, 
leaving a solitary kidney in adults.
Acquired cystic kidney disease can develop in patients with a very 
long history of renal failure, so it is not an inherited cystic disease. It is 
associated with increased erythropoietin production and sometimes with 
the development of renal cell carcinoma. The kidneys are usually normal 
or small in size and with a smooth outline, which can be useful to distin-
guish acquired from genetic disease.
Renal vascular diseases
Diseases that affect renal blood vessels may cause renal ischaemia, 
leading to acute or chronic kidney disease or secondary hypertension. 
The rising prevalence of atherosclerosis and diabetes mellitus in age-
ing populations has made renovascular disease an important cause of 
ESRD.
Renal artery stenosis
A stenosis of more than 50% may be observed on imaging of the renal 
arteries in up to 20% of older patients with advanced kidney disease; how-
ever, a haemodynamically signicant effect will be present in only a rela-
tively small proportion. Renal artery stenosis is the most common cause 
of secondary hypertension, with an estimated prevalence of about 2% in 
unselected patients, but this may increase to 4% in older patients who have 
evidence of atherosclerotic disease elsewhere. Most cases of renal artery 
stenosis are caused by atherosclerosis but bromuscular dysplasia involv-
ing the vessel wall may be responsible in younger patients. Rare causes 
include vasculitis, thromboembolism and aneurysms of the renal artery.
Pathophysiology
Renal artery stenosis results in a reduction in renal perfusion pressure, 
which activates the renin–angiotensin system, leading to increased 
A
B
Fig. 18.15 MRI images of the kidneys. 

[[p628]]
Renal vascular diseases    581
18
circulating levels of angiotensin II. This results in hypertension by provok-
ing vasoconstriction and increasing aldosterone production by the adre-
nal, causing sodium retention by the renal tubules (p. 619). Signicant 
reduction of renal blood ow occurs when there is more than 70% 
narrowing of the artery, and this is commonly associated with distal, 
post-stenotic dilatation. Atherosclerotic lesions are typically ostial and 
are associated with more widespread atherosclerosis within the aorta 
and other vessels, particularly the iliac vessels. There is often concurrent 
small-vessel disease in affected kidneys, due to subclinical atheroemboli. 
As the stenosis becomes more severe, global renal ischaemia leads to 
shrinkage of the affected kidney and may cause renal failure if bilateral or 
if unilateral in the presence of a single kidney (ischaemic nephropathy).
In younger patients, bromuscular dysplasia is a more likely cause of 
renal artery stenosis. This is an uncommon disorder of unknown cause. 
It is characterised by hypertrophy of the media (medial broplasia), 
which narrows the artery but rarely leads to total occlusion. It may be 
associated with disease in other arteries; for example, those who have 
carotid artery dissections are more likely to have renal arteries with this 
appearance. It most commonly presents with hypertension in patients 
aged 15–30 years, and women are affected more frequently than men. 
Irregular narrowing (beading) may occur in the distal renal artery and this 
sometimes extends into the intrarenal branches of the vessel. Rarely, 
renal artery stenosis may occur as a complication of large-vessel vas-
culitis, such as Takayasu’s arteritis and polyarteritis nodosa (see Ch. 26).
Untreated, atheromatous renal artery stenosis is thought to pro-
gress to complete arterial occlusion in about 15% of cases. This gure 
increases with more severe degrees of stenosis. If the progression is 
gradual, collateral vessels may develop and some function may be pre-
served, preventing infarction and loss of kidney structure. Conversely, at 
least 85% of patients with renal artery stenosis will not develop progres-
sive renal impairment, and many patients die from coronary, cerebral or 
other vascular disease rather than renal failure. Unfortunately, methods of 
predicting which patients are at risk of progression or who will respond to 
treatment are still imperfect.
Clinical features
Renal artery stenosis can present in various ways, including hyperten-
sion, acute pulmonary oedema, progressive renal failure (with bilateral 
disease) or a deterioration in renal function when ACE inhibitors or ARBs 
are administered. Although many patients experience a slight drop in 
GFR when commencing these drugs, an increase in serum creatinine 
of 30% or more raises the possibility of renal artery stenosis. Acute pul-
monary oedema is particularly characteristic of bilateral renovascular 
disease. It typically occurs at night and is associated with severe hyper-
tension, often in the context of normal or only mildly impaired renal and 
cardiac function. Clinical evidence of generalised vascular disease may 
be observed, particularly in the legs and in older patients with atheroscle-
rotic renal artery stenosis. Clinical features associated with an increased 
risk of renal artery stenosis in hypertensive patients are summarised 
in Box 18.22. However, given the risk of imaging and angiography in 
patients with renal disease (see Box 18.4), further investigation should be 
performed only if intervention is being contemplated (see below).
Investigations
When appropriate, imaging of the renal vasculature with either CT angi-
ography or MR angiography should be performed to conrm the diag-
nosis (Fig. 18.16). Both give good views of the main renal arteries, the 
vessels most amenable to intervention. Biochemical testing may reveal 
impaired renal function and an elevated plasma renin activity, sometimes 
with hypokalaemia due to hyperaldosteronism. Ultrasound may also 
reveal a discrepancy in size between the two kidneys, although this is 
insufciently sensitive or specic to be of value in diagnosis of renovas-
cular disease in hypertensive patients.
Management
The rst-line management in patients with renal artery stenosis is medical 
therapy with antihypertensive drugs, supplemented, where appropriate, 
by statins and low-dose aspirin in those with atherosclerotic disease. 
Interventions to correct the vessel narrowing should be considered in:
 young patients (age below 40) suspected of having renal artery 
stenosis
 those whose blood pressure cannot easily be controlled with anti-
hypertensive agents
 those who have a history of ‘ash’ pulmonary oedema
 those with accelerated phase (malignant) hypertension
 those whose renal function is deteriorating.
The most commonly used technique is angioplasty. The best results 
are obtained in non-atheromatous bromuscular dysplasia, where cor-
rection of the stenosis has a high chance of success in improving blood 
pressure and protecting renal function. Beyond the indications above, 
angioplasty and stenting is now rarely performed in atherosclerotic 
disease, as randomised trials such as ASTRAL and CORAL have pro-
duced no convincing evidence for overall benet in terms of renal func-
tion, blood pressure control or cardiovascular outcomes. The risks of 
angioplasty and stenting include renal artery occlusion, renal infarction 
and atheroemboli (see below) from manipulations in a severely diseased 
aorta. Small-vessel disease distal to the stenosis may preclude substan-
tial functional recovery.
Acute renal infarction
This is an uncommon condition that occurs as the result of sudden 
occlusion of the renal artery. The presentation is typically with loin pain 
18.22  Presentation and clinical features of renal artery 
stenosis
Renal artery stenosis is more likely if:
 hypertension is severe, of recent onset or difcult to control
 kidneys are asymmetrical in size
 ash pulmonary oedema occurs repeatedly*
 there is peripheral vascular disease of the lower limbs
 there is renal impairment*
 renal function has deteriorated on angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or 
angiotensin II receptor blockers
*Particularly with bilateral disease.
Fig. 18.16 Renal artery stenosis. A magnetic resonance angiogram following 
injection of contrast. The abdominal aorta is severely irregular and atheromatous. The 
left renal artery is stenosed (arrow).

[[p629]]
582    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
of acute onset, usually in association with non-visible haematuria, but 
pain may be absent in some cases. Severe hypertension is common but 
not universal. Blood levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and CRP are 
commonly raised. The condition may be caused by thrombosis of a renal 
artery or by thromboemboli from a distant source, when occlusion may 
occur in branch arteries distal to the main renal artery. This can cause 
multiple infarcts within the renal parenchyma of both kidneys, which may 
be visualised by CT scanning. If occlusion of the main renal arteries is 
bilateral or if there is occlusion in a single functioning kidney, the pres-
entation is with AKI and the patient is typically anuric. Patients with bilat-
eral occlusion usually have evidence of widespread vascular disease and 
may show evidence of aortic occlusion, with absent femoral pulses and 
reduced lower limb perfusion. Management is largely supportive, and 
includes anticoagulation if a source of thromboembolism is identied. It 
is sometimes possible to perform stenting of an acutely blocked main 
renal artery to try to restore renal blood ow; in most cases, however, 
presentation is too late to salvage renal function.
Diseases of small intrarenal vessels
Thrombotic microangiopathies
A number of conditions are associated with acute damage and occlusion 
of small blood vessels (arterioles and capillaries) in the kidney (Box 18.23) 
and other organs. A common feature of these syndromes is microan-
giopathic haemolytic anaemia (MAHA), in which haemolysis and red 
cell fragmentation arise as a consequence of damage incurred to red 
blood cells during passage through the abnormal vessels. The red blood 
cell fragments (schistocytes) may be observed on blood lms, together 
with laboratory features of intravascular haemolysis (p. 955), including 
an elevated unconjugated bilirubin level, raised serum LDH concentra-
tion and decreased circulating levels of haptoglobin. A reticulocytosis is 
often seen. Endothelial injury is pronounced, leading to increased platelet 
adherence and a marked reduction in the platelet count. These abnormal 
blood parameters should alert the physician to the possibility of a throm-
botic microangiopathy and may also be useful in monitoring response to 
treatment. The key is to distinguish between the various aetiologies, as 
the management differs according to the primary cause (see Box 18.23).
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) is characterised by thrombotic 
microangiopathy that predominantly affects the renal microcirculation, 
with involvement of other organs (including the brain) observed in more 
severe cases.
The most common cause of HUS is infection with organisms that pro-
duce enterotoxins called Shiga-like toxin or verotoxins. The organisms 
most commonly implicated are enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli and 
Shigella dysenteriae. The E. coli O157:H7 serotype is the best known 
but other serotypes that produce verotoxins may also be responsible. 
Although these bacteria live as commensals in the gut of cattle and other 
livestock, they can cause haemorrhagic diarrhoea in humans when the 
infection is contracted from contaminated food products, water or other 
infected individuals. In a proportion of cases, verotoxin produced by the 
organisms enters the circulation and binds to specic glycolipid recep-
tors that are expressed on the surface of microvascular endothelial cells. 
Most cases are sporadic but large outbreaks related to poor sanitation 
may occur. In developed countries, Shiga-like toxin-associated HUS is 
now the most common cause of AKI in children. Recovery is good in 
most patients but sometimes RRT may be required, usually temporarily. 
Some patients may initially recover, but develop CKD in later life. No spe-
cic treatments have been shown to accelerate renal recovery.
In the absence of bloody diarrhoea, other (atypical) causes of HUS 
should be considered, in particular, abnormalities of the complement 
system. Familial forms are due to mutations in various genes that encode 
components or regulators of the complement cascade, including factor 
H (CFH), factor I (CFI), factor B (CFB), membrane co-factor protein (MCP) 
and complement component 3 (C3). The penetrance of familial HUS is 
incomplete, indicating that environmental triggers are also involved: often 
infection, including diarrhoea. Sporadic cases may be associated with 
the development of autoantibodies to complement factor H. In addition 
to supportive care, including RRT if necessary, management of comple-
ment-mediated HUS includes plasma exchange to replace complement 
18.23  Thrombotic microangiopathies associated with acute renal damage
Condition
Typical features
Management
Primary thrombotic microangiopathies
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome:
Renal failure prominent in all causes
Shiga toxin +ve HUS
Bloody diarrhoea; check stool for Escherichia coli
O157:H7
Supportive therapy
Complement-mediated
Positive family history; screen for complement factor 
mutations
Plasma exchange, eculizumab
Drug-induced: quinine, calcineurin and VEGF-A 
inhibitors
Drug exposure, fever with quinine
Cessation of offending drug
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Neurological manifestations prominent; check 
ADAMTS-13 activity
Plasma exchange
Thrombotic microangiopathy associated with systemic disorders
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Clotting system involvement: elevated D-dimers, low 
brinogen, prolonged PT and APTT
Treatment of primary cause
Malignancy
May occur with breast, prostate, lung, pancreas and 
GI tumours
Treatment of tumour where possible
Systemic sclerosis
Cutaneous features of systemic sclerosis
Blood pressure control with ACE inhibitors
Pre-eclampsia and HELLP syndrome
Typically in third trimester; abnormal LFTs
Resolution with delivery
Malignant hypertension
Blood pressure typically very high; evidence of 
hypertensive retinopathy including papilloedema
Blood pressure control
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ADAMTS-13 = a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13; APTT = activated partial thromboplastin time; GI = 
gastrointestinal; HELLP = haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets; HUS = haemolytic uraemic syndrome; LFTs = liver function tests; PT = prothrombin time; VEGF = vascular endothelial 
growth factor)

[[p630]]
Renal involvement in systemic conditions    583
18
components and remove pathogenic autoantibodies. Impressive results 
have been reported with the anti-C5 monoclonal antibody, eculizumab, 
which binds to C5, thereby preventing activation of the terminal comple-
ment cascade.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Like HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is characterised 
by microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia; in con-
trast, however, the brain is more commonly affected in TTP and involve-
ment of the kidney is usually less prominent. TTP is an autoimmune 
disorder caused by antibodies against ADAMTS-13, which is involved 
in regulating platelet aggregation, and a low (<10%) serum ADAMTS-13 
activity level may be useful in distinguishing TTP from HUS. This distinc-
tion is important, as early therapy with plasma exchange is crucial in TTP. 
More details are provided on page 988.
Cholesterol emboli
These present with renal impairment, haematuria, proteinuria and 
sometimes eosinophilia with inammatory features that can mimic 
a small-vessel vasculitis. The symptoms are provoked by showers of 
cholesterol-containing microemboli, arising in atheromatous plaques in 
major arteries. The diagnosis should be suspected when these clinical 
features occur in patients with widespread atheromatous disease, who 
have undergone interventions such as surgery or arteriography. They 
may also be precipitated by anticoagulants and thrombolytic agents. 
On clinical examination, signs of large-vessel disease and microvascular 
occlusion in the lower limbs (ischaemic toes, livedo reticularis) are com-
mon but not invariable (Fig. 18.17). There is no specic treatment.
Small-vessel vasculitis
Renal disease caused by small-vessel vasculitis usually presents with 
a clinical picture typical of a glomerulonephritis (see Figs. 18.9 and 
18.12C). More information is given below.
Renal involvement in systemic conditions
The kidneys may be directly involved in a number of multisystem dis-
eases or secondarily affected by diseases of other organs. Involvement 
may be at a pre-renal, renal (glomerular or interstitial) or post-renal level. 
Many of the diseases are described in other sections of this chapter or in 
other chapters of the book.
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetic nephropathy is the most common cause of CKD in developed 
countries. In patients with diabetes, there is a steady advance from 
moderately elevated albuminuria (microalbuminuria) to dipstick-posi-
tive proteinuria, in association with evolving hypertension and progres-
sive renal failure, as described on page 749. Few patients require renal 
biopsy to establish the diagnosis, but atypical features such as very rapid 
progression of proteinuria/decline in renal function or the absence of 
microvascular disease in other organs, including retinopathy, should lead 
to suspicion that an alternative condition could be present.
Management with ACE inhibitors and ARBs to slow progression is 
described on page 749. In some patients, proteinuria may be eradicated 
and progression completely halted, although most still have progressive 
disease, albeit at a slower rate. SGLT2 inhibitors, reduce cardiovascular 
mortality and progression of kidney disease at the expense of increased 
risk of genital infections.
Multiple myeloma
In myeloma, a malignant clone of plasma cells produces a paraprotein, 
often a monoclonal light chain. Renal manifestations are dominated by 
these toxic light chains, which may cause a variety of insults (Box 18.24). 
Hypercalcaemia may also occur due to bony metastases.
Hepatic–renal disease
Severe hepatic dysfunction may cause a haemodynamically mediated 
type of renal failure, hepatorenal syndrome (HRS), described on page 
877. Patients with chronic liver disease are also predisposed to develop 
AKI (acute tubular necrosis) in response to relatively minor insults, includ-
ing bleeding, diuretic therapy and infection. Differentiating true HRS 
from acute tubular necrosis (ATN) can be difcult, but in HRS the urinary 
sodium is typically low. Patients with true HRS are often difcult to treat 
by dialysis and have a poor prognosis. Where treatment is justied – for 
example, if there is a good chance of recovery or of a liver transplant – 
slow or continuous renal replacement therapy treatments are less likely 
to precipitate or exacerbate hepatic encephalopathy. IgA nephropathy 
(p. 575) is more common in patients with chronic liver disease.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis may lead to a granulomatous interstitial nephritis, sometimes 
presenting acutely, where renal function may improve with glucocorticoid 
therapy. Postmortem examinations reveal a chronic interstitial nephritis 
in 15%–30% of patients with sarcoidosis but clinically relevant disease 
appears to be much less common.
Fig. 18.17 The foot of a patient who suffered extensive atheroembolism 
following coronary artery stenting.
18.24  Renal manifestations of multiple myeloma
Condition
Presentation
Pathogenesis
Cast nephropathy 
(‘myeloma kidney’)
AKI
Little/no proteinuria
Light chains combine 
with Tamm–Horsfall 
protein precipitating in 
tubules
Fanconi syndrome
Aminoaciduria, 
phosphaturia, 
glycosuria
Proximal (type II) RTA
Proximal tubular injury 
due to light chain 
deposition in tubular 
epithelium
AL (primary) 
amyloidosis*
Proteinuria/nephrotic 
syndrome
Renal impairment
Misfolded light chains 
(usually lambda) form 
amyloid, which is 
deposited in glomeruli
Monoclonal 
immunoglobulin 
deposition disease*
Proteinuria (may be in 
nephrotic range)
Renal impairment
Usually light chains 
(frequently kappa) are 
deposited in glomeruli, 
causing a nodular 
glomerulosclerosis
Hypercalcaemia
Thirst, polyuria, bony 
and abdominal pain, 
headache
Bony destruction from 
metastases
*These may also occur as primary conditions without myeloma being present.
(AKI = acute kidney injury; RTA = renal tubular acidosis)

[[p631]]
584    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Systemic vasculitis
Small-vessel vasculitis (Ch. 26) commonly affects the kidneys, with rapid 
and profound impairment of glomerular function. Histologically, there is 
a focal inammatory glomerulonephritis, usually with focal necrosis (see 
Box 18.15 and Fig. 18.12C) and often with crescentic changes (see Fig. 
18.12C). Typically, the patient is systemically unwell with an acute phase 
response, weight loss and arthralgia. In some patients, it presents as 
a kidney-limited disorder, with rapidly deteriorating renal function and 
crescentic nephritis (a rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis). In others, 
pulmonary haemorrhage may occur, which can be life-threatening.
The most important cause is ANCA vasculitis (Ch. 26). Two subtypes 
are recognized: microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) and granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis. Both may present with constitutional symptoms and glom-
erulonephritis, though lung and ENT involvement is more common with 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Gastrointestinal involvement, arthritis, 
scleritis/uveitis, purpuric rash and neuropathy may also occur. Serological 
testing for antibodies to myelo peroxidase (MPO) and proteinase 3 (PR3) is 
usually positive (see Box 18.10) but these are not specic and a biopsy of 
affected tissue should be obtained, if possible, to conrm the diagnosis.
The standard treatment of glomerulonephritis associated with sys-
temic vasculitis is high-dose glucocorticoids combined with cyclophos-
phamide, or mycophenolate mofetil (p. 1012). Recent studies indicate 
that rituximab is as effective as oral cyclophosphamide, when combined 
with high-dose glucocorticoids. Plasma exchange can offer additional 
benet in patients with progressive renal damage who are not respond-
ing adequately to immunosuppressive therapy.
Glomerulonephritis secondary to vasculitis may rarely be seen in rheu-
matoid arthritis, SLE and cryoglobulinaemia, although SLE can affect the 
kidney in several different ways (see below).
Medium- to large-vessel vasculitis, such as polyarteritis nodosa 
(Ch. 26), does not cause glomerulonephritis but can cause hypertension, 
renal aneurysms and infarction if the renal vessels are involved.
Systemic sclerosis
Renal involvement is a serious complication of systemic sclerosis, which 
is more likely to occur in diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (DCSS) 
than in limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (LCSS). The renal lesion is 
caused by intimal cell proliferation and luminal narrowing of intrarenal 
arteries and arterioles. There is intense intrarenal vasospasm and plasma 
renin activity is markedly elevated. Renal involvement usually presents 
clinically with severe hypertension, microangiopathic features and pro-
gressive oliguric renal failure (‘scleroderma renal crisis’). Use of ACE 
inhibitors to control the hypertension has improved the 1-year survival 
from 20% to 75% but about 50% of patients continue to require RRT. 
Onset or acceleration of the syndrome after glucocorticoid use or cessa-
tion of ACE inhibitors is well described.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Subclinical renal involvement, with non-visible haematuria and proteinuria 
but minimally impaired or normal renal function, is common in systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Usually, this is due to glomerular disease, 
although interstitial nephritis may also occur, particularly in patients 
with overlap syndromes such as mixed connective tissue disease and 
Sjögren syndrome.
Almost any histological pattern of glomerular disease can be observed 
in SLE and the clinical presentation ranges from orid, rapidly progres-
sive glomerulonephritis to nephrotic syndrome (see Fig. 18.9). The most 
common presentation is with subacute disease and inammatory fea-
tures (haematuria, hypertension, variable renal impairment), accompa-
nied by heavy proteinuria that often reaches nephrotic levels. In severely 
affected patients, the most common histological pattern is a proliferative 
glomerulonephritis with substantial deposits of immunoglobulins and 
complement on immunouorescence. Randomised controlled trials have 
shown that high-dose glucocorticoids administered in combination with 
either cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil is effective in both 
induction and maintenance treatment of lupus nephritis and lowers the 
risk of progression to ESRD.
Many patients with SLE who develop ESRD go into remission, possi-
bly because of immunosuppression related to the ESRD. Patients with 
ESRD caused by SLE are usually good candidates for dialysis and trans-
plantation. Although it may recur in renal allografts, the immunosuppres-
sion required to prevent allograft rejection usually controls SLE.
Sickle-cell nephropathy
Improved survival of patients with sickle-cell disease means that a high 
proportion now live to develop chronic complications of microvascular 
occlusion. In the kidney, these changes are most pronounced in the 
medulla, where the vasa recta are the site of sickling because of hypoxia 
and hypertonicity. Loss of urinary concentrating ability and polyuria are 
the earliest changes; distal renal tubular acidosis and impaired potas-
sium excretion are typical. Papillary necrosis may also occur (p. 577). A 
minority of patients develop ESRD. This is managed according to the 
usual principles, but response to recombinant erythropoietin is poor 
because of the haemoglobinopathy. Patients with sickle trait have an 
increased incidence of unexplained non-visible haematuria.
Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is not a diagnosis, rather it describes the sit-
uation where there is a sudden and often reversible loss of renal func-
tion, which develops over days or weeks and is often accompanied by a 
reduction in urine volume. Approximately 7% of all hospitalised patients 
and 20% of acutely ill patients develop AKI. In uncomplicated AKI mor-
tality is low, however when it is associated with sepsis and multiple organ 
failure mortality is 50%–70% and the outcome is usually determined by 
the severity of the underlying disorder and other complications, rather 
than by kidney injury itself. Older patients are at higher risk of developing 
AKI and have a worse outcome (Box 18.25).
Pathophysiology
There are many causes of AKI and it is frequently multifactorial. It is help-
ful to classify it into three subtypes as these have different presentations 
and treatment (Fig. 18.18):
 ‘pre-renal’, when perfusion to the kidney is reduced
 ‘renal’, when the primary insult affects the kidney itself
 ‘post-renal’, when there is obstruction to urine ow at any point from 
the tubule to the urethra.
Pre-renal AKI results from a reduction in renal perfusion, typically due 
to a reduction in systemic blood pressure. The drop in renal perfusion 
activates the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, which promotes 
18.25  Acute kidney injury in old age
 Physiological change: nephrons decline in number with age and average GFR 
falls progressively, so many older patients will have established CKD and less 
functional reserve. Small acute declines in renal function may therefore have a 
signicant impact.
 Creatinine: as muscle mass falls with age, less creatinine is produced each 
day. Serum creatinine can therefore underestimate the severity of renal failure.
 Renal tubular function: declines with age, leading to loss of urinary 
concentrating ability.
 Drugs: increased drug prescription in older people (diuretics, ACE inhibitors and 
NSAIDs) may contribute to the risk of AKI.
 Causes: infection, renal vascular disease, prostatic obstruction, myeloma and 
severe cardiac dysfunction are common.
 Mortality: rises with age, primarily because of comorbid conditions.

[[p632]]
Acute kidney injury    585
18
sodium retention in the kidney and systemic vasoconstriction (see Fig. 
20.19), in order to restore blood pressure. Angiotensin also preferen-
tially constricts the glomerular efferent arteriole, while prostaglandins are 
released locally to vasodilate the afferent arteriole (see Figs. 18.1D and 
18.19). The combined effect increases glomerular pressure to maintain 
GFR, however if the blood pressure is very low, autoregulation fails and 
the GFR falls. Importantly, in pre-renal AKI, the kidney is not damaged, 
therefore GFR can improve rapidly if the renal perfusion is restored.
If the drop in renal perfusion is severe or sustained, pre-renal AKI may 
progress to renal AKI as ischaemic injury causes ATN, the most extreme 
example being with renal arterial or venous occlusion. Histologically, the 
kidney shows inammatory changes, focal breaks in the tubular base-
ment membrane and interstitial oedema (see Fig. 18.13B). Dead tubular 
cells may also be shed into the tubular lumen, leading to tubular obstruc-
tion. While ischaemia is the most common cause of ATN in hospital, it 
may also be caused by toxins and nephrotoxic drugs (see Boxes 18.26
and 18.42). Drugs can also cause allergic interstitial nephritis. The other 
common ‘renal’ cause of AKI is glomerulonephritis, in which there is 
direct inammatory damage to the glomeruli. COVID-19 infection is also 
associated with AKI in a signicant proportion of patients.
Post-renal AKI occurs as the result of obstruction to the renal tract (see 
Box 18.6). This leads to elevation of intraluminal ureteral pressure trans-
mitted to the nephrons, with a subsequent fall in GFR. The obstruction 
needs to be bilateral to cause renal failure, therefore it is unusual for renal 
stones to cause AKI, while obstruction of the bladder outlet is a much 
more common cause. If the obstruction is not relieved, the low GFR is 
maintained by a drop in renal perfusion via thromboxane A2 and angio-
tensin II. This leads to chronic renal injury over several weeks. If obstruc-
tion is reversed, the extent of recovery of renal function is dependent on 
the duration of obstruction and the pre-morbid GFR.
Clinical features
All emergency admissions to hospital should have renal function, blood 
pressure, temperature and pulse checked on arrival and undergo risk 
assessment for the likelihood of developing AKI. Those with coexisting 
diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular, liver disease and existing 
CKD are at greater risk and need more regular assessment of renal func-
tion. If a patient is found to have a high serum creatinine, it is important 
to establish whether this is an acute or acute-on-chronic phenomenon, 
or a sign of CKD. Previous measurements of renal function are the best 
guide, but clinical features of AKI include short duration of symptoms, 
and an absence of markers of CKD such as anaemia, elevated PTH and 
small kidneys observed on imaging (see Fig. 18.22). Early recognition of 
AKI, assessment of volume status and prompt action to treat the under-
lying cause is required to prevent rapid progression of renal injury and to 
facilitate recovery as the damage may be potentially reversible if detected 
at an early stage. Importantly, eGFR is not accurate in AKI (see Box 18.2) 
and it may overestimate renal function in early AKI when creatinine is 
increasing rapidly.
Clinical features and pertinent investigations for the different causes of 
AKI are shown in Box 18.26 and are discussed below.
Pre-renal AKI
Tachycardia and postural hypotension (a fall in blood pressure of 
>20/10 mmHg from lying to standing) are valuable early signs of intra-
vascular volume depletion. More signicant hypovolaemia is associ-
ated with hypotension and signs of poor peripheral perfusion, such as 
cold peripheries and delayed capillary return. Warm peripheries in the 
presence of hypotension may indicate sepsis, as peripheral vasodil-
atation may be triggered by bacterial toxins and immune mediators. 
Pre-renal AKI may also occur without systemic hypotension, particu-
larly in patients who are dehydrated or who are taking NSAIDs or ACE 
inhibitors (Fig. 18.19).
The cause of hypotension is often obvious, but concealed blood 
loss can occur into the gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneum, follow-
ing trauma (particularly with pelvic and femoral fractures) and into the 
pregnant uterus. Large volumes of intravascular uid may also be lost 
into tissues after crush injuries or burns, following abdominal surgery, in 
severe inammatory skin diseases or sepsis.
While diagnosis of pre-renal failure is usually based on history and 
assessment of volume status, the most helpful investigations reect 
activation of hormonal systems due to intravascular volume deple-
tion. Activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system promotes 
sodium and urea reabsorption in the proximal tubule, leading to a low 
urinary sodium and a high serum urea:creatinine ratio; ADH release pro-
motes water reabsorption leading to a high specic gravity on urinalysis.
Renal AKI
Factors that can help differentiate the various causes of intrinsic renal AKI 
are summarised in Box 18.26. Patients with glomerulonephritis demon-
strate haematuria and proteinuria, and may have clinical manifestations 
of an underlying disease, such as SLE or systemic vasculitis. Although 
blood tests, including an immunological screen, should be performed 
to clarify the diagnosis in glomerulonephritis, a renal biopsy is usually 
required. Drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis should be suspected 
in a previously well patient if there is an acute deterioration of renal func-
tion coinciding with introduction of a new drug treatment. Drugs that 
are commonly implicated include PPIs, NSAIDs and many antibiotics. 
Vascular disease is included here as diseases of the large and small renal 
vessels typically present with hypertension and volume expansion, in 
contrast to the volume depletion observed in pre-renal failure.
Post-renal AKI
Patients should be examined clinically to look for evidence of a distended 
bladder and should also undergo imaging with ultrasound to detect evi-
dence of obstruction above the level of the bladder. Post-renal AKI is 
usually accompanied by hydronephrosis.
Management
Management options common to all forms of AKI are discussed in more 
detail below and summarised in Box 18.27
RENAL
Glomerulonephritis
Small-vessel vasculitis
Acute tubular necrosis
 Drugs
 Toxins
 Prolonged hypotension
Interstitial nephritis
 Drugs
 Toxins
 Inflammatory disease
 Infection, including COVID-19
PRE-RENAL
Impaired perfusion:
 Cardiac failure
 Sepsis
 Blood loss
 Dehydration
 Vascular occlusion
POST-RENAL
Urinary calculi (bilateral)
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Benign prostatic
hypertrophy
Bladder cancer
Prostate cancer
Cervical cancer
Urethral stricture/valves
Meatal stenosis/phimosis
Fig. 18.18 Causes of acute kidney injury.

[[p633]]
586    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Optimisation of volume status
Regular assessment of volume status is essential to guide ongoing uid 
requirements. Where clinical assessment is challenging, such as in obe-
sity, invasive monitoring of central venous pressure may be of value. If 
hypovolaemia is present, it should be corrected by prompt replacement 
of intravenous uid or blood. When large volumes of uid are required, 
balanced crystalloid solutions, such as Plasma-Lyte or Hartmann’s, may 
be preferable to isotonic saline (0.9% NaCl) in order to avoid hyperchlo-
raemic acidosis. Once the patient is volume replete, uid intake should 
be matched to urine output plus 500 mL per day to cover insensible 
losses, unless additional losses are anticipated, such as with diarrhoea 
or high nasogastric aspirates. Excessive administration of uid should 
be avoided, since this can provoke pulmonary oedema. In situations 
where vasodilatation is a prominent cause of relative intravascular vol-
ume depletion, such as sepsis or liver failure, inotropes may be required 
to restore an effective blood pressure.
In patients with volume expansion, diuretics may be used, but in those 
with AKI high doses may be required and they are not always effective. 
If pulmonary oedema (Fig. 18.20) is present and urine output cannot 
be rapidly restored, treatment with dialysis may be required to remove 
excess uid.
Treatment of underlying cause
In pre-renal failure, rapid uid resuscitation may be sufcient for reso-
lution of AKI, though it is important to identify and manage underlying 
causes such as blood loss, sepsis and cardiac events.
18.26  Categorising acute kidney injury based on history, examination and investigations
Type of AKI
History
Examination
Investigations
Pre-renal
Volume depletion (vomiting, diarrhoea, 
burns, haemorrhage)
Sepsis
Cardiac disease
Liver disease
Drugs (diuretics, ACE inhibitors, 
ARBs, NSAIDs, calcineurin inhibitors, 
iodinated contrast)
Low BP relative to normal for patient 
(including postural drop)
Tachycardia
Weight decrease
Dry mucous membranes  
Decreased skin turgor
JVP not visible even when lying down
Urine Na <20 mmol/L
Fractional excretion Na <  1%
High serum urea:creatinine ratio
Urinalysis bland
Renal
ATN
Ischaemic injury due to severe or 
prolonged pre-renal state
Toxic ATN: drugs (aminoglycosides, 
cisplatin, tenofovir, methotrexate, 
iodinated contrast)
Other (rhabdomyolysis, snake bite, 
Amanita mushrooms)
Vital signs
Fluid assessment
Limbs for compartment syndrome
Urine Na >40 mmol/L
Fractional excretion Na ≥ 1%
Dense granular (‘muddy brown’) casts
Creatine kinase
Glomerular
Rash, weight loss, arthralgia, ENT and 
chest symptoms (pulmonary renal 
syndromes)
IV drug use
Recent infection
Hypertension
Oedema
Purpuric rash, uveitis, arthritis
Proteinuria, haematuria
Red cell casts, dysmorphic red cells
ANCA, anti-GBM, ANA, C3 and C4
Viral hepatitis screen, HIV
Renal biopsy
Tubulo-interstitial
Interstitial nephritis: drugs (PPIs, 
penicillins, NSAIDs)
Sarcoidosis
Fever
Rash
Leucocyturia
White cell casts
Minimal proteinuria
Tubular obstruction:
Myeloma (cast nephropathy)
Paraprotein, Bence Jones protein 
Calcium (myeloma, sarcoidosis)
Tubular crystal nephropathy:
Drugs (aciclovir, indinavir, triamterene, 
methotrexate)
Oxalate (fat malabsorption, ethylene 
glycol)
Urate (tumour lysis)
Urine microscopy for crystals
Serum urate
Urine collection for oxalate
Vascular (including renal infarction, 
renal vein thrombosis, cholesterol 
emboli, malignant hypertension)
Flank pain, trauma
Anticoagulation
Recent angiography (cholesterol 
emboli)
Nephrotic syndrome (renal vein 
thrombosis)
Systemic sclerosis (renal crisis)
Diarrhoea (HUS)
Hypertension
Hypertensive changes on fundoscopy
Livedo reticularis (cholesterol emboli)
Sclerodactyly
Normal urinalysis or some haematuria
CT angiography
Doppler renal ultrasound
C3 and C4 (cholesterol emboli)
Platelets, haemolytic screen, LDH 
(HUS)
Consider ADAMTS13 and complement 
genetics (if TMA)
Post-renal
Bladder outlet symptoms
History of BPH or prostate, bladder or 
cervical cancer
Retroperitoneal brosis
Neurogenic bladder
Rectal examination (prostate and anal 
tone)
Distended bladder
Pelvic mass
Urinalysis frequently normal (may 
reveal haematuria depending on 
cause)
Renal ultrasound (hydronephrosis)
Isotope renogram (delayed excretion) 
if ultrasound inconclusive
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ARBs = angiotensin receptor blockers; ATN = acute tubular necrosis; BP = blood 
pressure; BPH = benign prostatic hypertrophy; GBM = glomerular basement membrane; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; HUS = haemolytic uraemic syndrome; IV = intravenous; JVP = jugular 
venous pulse; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs; PPIs = proton pump inhibitors; TMA = thrombotic microangiopathy)

[[p634]]
Acute kidney injury    587
18
In those with suspected ATN, volume status should be optimised, 
offending drugs should be discontinued, conditions such as sepsis, 
compartment syndrome or myeloma identied and treated. However, 
once ATN is established, even if the underlying cause has been cor-
rected, regeneration of necrotic tubules and recovery of renal function 
may take days or even weeks and the patient may need support with 
renal replacement therapy in the interim.
In post-renal AKI, the obstruction should be relieved as soon as possi-
ble. This may involve urinary catheterisation for bladder outow obstruc-
tion, or relief of ureteric obstruction with ureteric stents or percutaneous 
nephrostomies.
Electrolyte and acid–base disturbances
Hyperkalaemia is common, particularly in patients with rhabdomyoly-
sis, burns, haemolysis or metabolic acidosis or in those taking medi-
cations that inhibit the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. If serum 
K+ concentration is >6.5 mmol/L, an electrocardiogram (ECG) should be 
performed, and if there are changes consistent with hyperkalaemia, this 
should be treated immediately, as described in Box 19.17, to prevent 
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias.
Severe acidosis can be ameliorated by treatment with sodium bicar-
bonate if volume status allows. This may also be helpful in lowering 
serum potassium.
Dilutional hyponatraemia may occur if the patient has continued to 
drink freely despite oliguria or has received inappropriate amounts of 
intravenous dextrose. This can be corrected by uid restriction. Modest 
hypocalcaemia is common but rarely requires treatment. Serum phos-
phate levels are usually high but may fall in patients on daily or con-
tinuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), necessitating phosphate 
replacement.
Dietary measures
Adequate nutritional support may be required to ensure sufcient calorie 
and protein intake. This is particularly important in patients in catabolic 
states such as with sepsis and burns. Enteral or parenteral nutrition may 
be required.
Infection
Sepsis may either be the cause of AKI or a consequence of the depres-
sion of humoral and cellular immune mechanisms found in patients with 
AKI. Regular clinical examination, supplemented by microbiological 
investigation where appropriate, is required to diagnose infection. If infec-
tion is discovered, it should be treated promptly according to standard 
principles (see Ch. 6).
Medications
Patients with drug-induced kidney injury (see Box 18.42) should have the 
offending drug withdrawn. Additionally, NSAIDs and drugs that block the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system should be discontinued, as they 
may reduce GFR (see Fig. 18.19) and exacerbate hyperkalaemia. Other 
drug treatments should be reviewed and the doses adjusted if neces-
sary, to take account of reduced renal function (see p. 31). Non-essential 
drug treatments should be stopped.
Renal replacement therapy (RRT)
Conservative management can be successful in AKI with meticulous 
attention to uid balance, electrolytes and nutrition, but RRT may be 
required in patients who are not showing signs of recovery with these 
measures (see Box 18.27). No specic cut-off values for serum urea or 
creatinine have been identied at which RRT should be commenced, and 
clinical trials of earlier versus later initiation of RRT have not shown differ-
ences in outcome in patients with AKI. Furthermore, RRT can be a risky 
intervention, since it requires the placement of central venous catheters 
that may become infected and it may represent a major haemodynamic 
Afferent arteriole
Prostaglandins
maintain blood
flow by
vasodilating
NSAIDs inhibit
prostaglandins
Angiotensin II
vasoconstricts,
maintaining
intraglomerular
pressure
ACE inhibitors/
ARBs inhibit this
Efferent arteriole
Fig. 18.19 Renal haemodynamics and autoregulation of glomerular ltration 
rate (GFR). It is evident from this gure how angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) may be associated with profound 
drops in GFR in the context of bilateral renal artery stenosis or intravascular volume 
depletion (which decrease perfusion to afferent arterioles). (NSAIDs = non-steroidal 
anti-inammatory drugs)
18.27 Management of acute kidney injury
 Assess uid status as this will determine uid prescription:
If hypovolaemic: optimise systemic haemodynamic status with uid challenge 
and inotropes if necessary
Once euvolaemic, match uid intake to urine output plus an additional 
500mL/24 hrs to cover insensible losses
If uid-overloaded, prescribe diuretics (loop diuretics at high dose will often 
be required); if the response is unsatisfactory, dialysis may be required
 Treat underlying cause
 If K+ > 6.5 mmol/L and ECG changes of hyperkalaemia are present administer 
calcium gluconate to stabilise myocardium, lower potassium by oral potassium 
exchange resin to prevent potassium absorption, or administering intravenous 
glucose/insulin or sodium bicarbonate to move potassium intracellularly (see 
Box 19.17). These are holding measures until a denitive method of removing 
potassium is achieved (restoration of renal function or dialysis)
 Discontinue potentially nephrotoxic drugs and reduce doses of therapeutic 
drugs according to level of renal function
 Ensure adequate nutritional support
 Consider proton pump inhibitors to reduce the risk of upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding
 Screen for intercurrent infections and treat promptly if present
(ECG = electrocardiogram)
Fig. 18.20 Pulmonary oedema in acute kidney injury. The appearances are 
indistinguishable from left ventricular failure but the heart size is usually normal. 
Blood pressure is often high.

[[p635]]
588    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
challenge in unstable patients. Accordingly, the decision to institute RRT 
should be made on an individual basis, taking account of the potential 
risks and benets, comorbidity and an assessment of whether early or 
delayed recovery is likely. Severe uraemia with pericarditis and neuro-
logical signs (uraemic encephalopathy) are uncommon in AKI but, when 
present, are strong indications for RRT; other indications are given in Box 
18.35. The two main options for RRT in AKI are intermittent haemodialy-
sis and continuous renal replacement therapy. Peritoneal dialysis is also 
an option if haemodialysis is not available (p. 595).
Recovery from AKI
Most cases of AKI will recover after the insult resolves but recovery may 
be impaired in those with pre-existing CKD or following a prolonged, 
severe or irreversible insult (Fig. 18.21). Recovery is heralded by a grad-
ual return of urine output and a steady reduction in serum creatinine. 
There is often a diuretic phase in which urine output increases rapidly 
and remains excessive for several days before returning to normal. This 
is due to loss of the concentrating ability of the kidneys due to tubular 
damage and to temporary loss of the medullary concentration gradient. 
After a few days, urine volume falls to normal as the concentrating mech-
anism and tubular reabsorption are restored. During the recovery phase 
of AKI, it may be necessary to provide temporary supplementation of 
uid, potassium and sometimes calcium, phosphate and magnesium.
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) refers to an irreversible deterioration in 
renal function that usually develops over a period of years (see Box 18.3). 
Initially, it manifests only as a biochemical abnormality but, eventually, 
loss of the excretory, metabolic and endocrine functions of the kidney 
leads to the clinical symptoms and signs of renal failure, collectively 
referred to as uraemia. When death is likely without RRT (CKD stage 5), 
it is called end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
Epidemiology
The social and economic consequences of CKD are considerable. In 
many countries, estimates of the prevalence of CKD stages 3–5 (eGFR 
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2) are around 5%–7%, mostly affecting people aged 
65 years and above (see Box 18.3). The prevalence of CKD in patients 
with hypertension, diabetes and vascular disease is substantially higher, 
and targeted screening for CKD should be considered in these and 
other high-risk groups. More than 25% of the population aged over 75 
years have an eGFR of < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2, mostly stage 3A CKD (see 
Box 18.3). In these patients, investigation and management should be 
focused on cardiovascular risk prevention, as very few will ever develop 
ESRD. Many primary renal diseases, however, are more common in older 
people, so investigation is warranted for those with declining renal func-
tion or with haematuria/proteinuria on dipstick.
Pathophysiology
Common causes of CKD are shown in Box 18.28. In many cases the 
underlying diagnosis is unclear, especially among the large number of 
older patients with stage 3 CKD. Many patients diagnosed at a late stage 
have bilateral small kidneys. Renal biopsy is rarely undertaken in this 
group since it is more risky, less likely to provide a histological diagnosis 
because of the severity of damage, and unlikely to alter management.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is for a reduced eGFR to be found incidentally 
during routine blood tests, often during screening of high-risk patients, 
such as those with diabetes or hypertension. Most patients with slowly 
progressive disease are asymptomatic until GFR falls below 30 mL/
min/1.73 m2 and some can remain asymptomatic with much lower GFR 
values than this. An early symptom is nocturia, due to the loss of concen-
trating ability, but this is non-specic. When GFR falls below 15–20 mL/
min/1.73 m2, symptoms and signs are common and can affect almost all 
body systems, but are often non-specic and may not immediately raise 
suspicion of kidney disease (Fig. 18.22). They typically include tiredness 
or breathlessness, which may, in part, be related to renal anaemia or uid 
overload. With further deterioration in renal function, patients may suffer 
pruritus, anorexia, weight loss, nausea, vomiting and hiccups. In very 
advanced renal failure, respiration may be particularly deep (Kussmaul 
breathing) due to profound metabolic acidosis, and patients may develop 
muscular twitching, ts, drowsiness and coma.
Investigations
The recommended investigations in patients with CKD are shown in Box 
18.29. Their main aims are:
 to exclude AKI requiring rapid investigation; in patients with unex-
pectedly high urea and creatinine (when there is an increase from 
previous results or no prior results are available), renal function 
should be retested within 2 weeks to avoid missing AKI
 to identify the underlying cause where possible, since this may inu-
ence the treatment
AKI
1
2
3
Full recovery
AKI to ESRD
Time
Renal function
Acute on chronic
kidney disease
Fig. 18.21 Recovery from acute kidney injury (AKI). Many patients make a 
full recovery of renal function (1). If the insult is prolonged or prior renal function 
not normal, however, patients may develop progressive chronic kidney disease (2) 
or, rarely, irreversible, complete loss of renal function (3). (ESRD = end-stage renal 
disease)
18.28  Common causes of chronic kidney disease
Disease
Proportion
Comments
Diabetes mellitus
20%–45%
Large racial and 
geographical differences
Interstitial diseases
20%–30%
Drug-induced, reux 
nephropathy
Glomerular diseases
10%–20%
IgA nephropathy is most 
common
Hypertension
5%–20%
Causality controversial, 
much may be secondary 
to another primary renal 
disease
Systemic inammatory 
diseases
5%–10%
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus, vasculitis
Renovascular disease
5%
Mostly atheromatous, may 
be more common
Congenital and 
inherited
10%
Polycystic kidney disease, 
Alport syndrome
Unknown
5%–10%

[[p636]]
Chronic kidney disease    589
18
 to identify reversible factors that may worsen renal function, such as 
hypertension or urinary tract obstruction
 to screen for complications of CKD, such as anaemia and renal 
osteodystrophy
 to screen for cardiovascular risk factors.
Referral to a nephrologist is appropriate for patients with potentially 
treatable underlying disease and those who are likely to progress to 
ESRD. Suggested referral criteria are listed in Box 18.30
Management
The aims of management in CKD are to:
 monitor renal function
 prevent or slow further renal damage
 limit complications of renal failure
 treat risk factors for cardiovascular disease
 prepare for RRT, if appropriate (p. 593).
Yellow complexion
Pallor
Dual-lumen central venous catheter
for dialysis access (right or left)*
Pericardial friction rub
Arteriovenous fistulae for
dialysis access*
Transplanted kidney (right or left)
with overlying scar*
‘Brown line’ pigmentation
of nails
Excoriation of pruritus
Bruising easily
Pitting oedema with fluid overload
Peripheral neuropathy
 
Absent reflexes
 
Reduced sensation
 
Paraesthesia
 
‘Restless legs’
Jugular venous pressure
raised in fluid overload or
pericardial tamponade
Pulsus paradoxus in
pericardial tamponade
Tenckhoff catheter for peritoneal
dialysis (right or left)*
Increased respiratory
rate and depth in
metabolic acidosis
Fig. 18.22 Physical signs in advanced chronic kidney disease. (*Features of renal replacement therapy.)
18.29  Suggested investigations in chronic kidney disease
Initial tests
Interpretation
Creatinine, eGFR
To assess stability/progression: compare to previous results
Urinalysis and quantication of proteinuria
Haematuria and proteinuria may indicate glomerular disease and need for biopsy (p. 566). 
Proteinuria indicates risk of progressive CKD requiring preventive ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy
Electrolytes
To identify hyperkalaemia and acidosis
Calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone and 25(OH)D
Assessment of renal osteodystrophy
Albumin
Low albumin: consider malnutrition, inammation, nephrotic syndrome
Full blood count (± Fe, ferritin, folate, B12)
If anaemic, exclude common non-renal explanations, then manage as renal anaemia
Lipids, glucose ± HbA1c
Cardiovascular risk high in CKD: treat risk factors aggressively
Renal ultrasound
Consider with obstructive urinary symptoms, persistent haematuria, family history of polycystic 
kidney disease or progressive CKD. Small kidneys suggest chronicity. Asymmetric renal size 
suggests renovascular or congenital disease
Hepatitis and HIV serology
If dialysis or transplant is planned. Hepatitis B vaccination recommended if seronegative
Other tests
Consider relevant tests from Box 18.26, especially if the cause of CKD is unknown
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB = angiotensin II receptor blocker; CKD = chronic kidney disease; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; 25(OH)D = 25-hydroxyvitamin D)

[[p637]]
590    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Monitoring of renal function
The rate of change in renal function varies between patients and may 
vary over time in each individual. Renal function should therefore be mon-
itored every 6 months in patients with stage 3 CKD, but more frequently 
in patients who are deteriorating rapidly or have stage 4 or 5 CKD. A plot 
of GFR against time (Fig. 18.23) can demonstrate whether therapy has 
been successful in slowing progression, detect any unexpected increase 
in the rate of decline that may warrant further investigation, and help 
predict when ESRD will be reached to facilitate timely planning for RRT.
Reduction of rate of progression
Slowing the rate of progression of CKD may reduce complications and 
delay symptom onset and the need for RRT (see Fig. 18.23). Therapies 
directed towards the primary cause of CKD should be employed where 
possible; tight blood pressure control is applicable to CKD regardless of 
cause, however, and reducing proteinuria is a key target in those with 
glomerular disease.
Antihypertensive therapy Lowering of blood pressure slows the rate at 
which renal function declines in CKD, independently of the agent used 
(apart from those with proteinuria; see below) and has additional bene-
ts in lowering the risk of hypertensive heart failure and cardiovascular 
disease. No threshold for benecial effects has been identied and any 
reduction of blood pressure appears to be benecial. A target blood pres-
sure of less than 140/90 mmHg is recommended for patients with CKD 
and no albuminuria (ACR <3 mg/mmol; see Box 18.11 for conversion of 
mg/mmol to mg/dL). A lower target of 130/80 mmHg is recommended 
for those with diabetes or an ACR of more than 70 mg/mmol. Achieving 
these blood pressure targets often requires multiple drugs, and thera-
peutic success may be limited by adverse effects and poor adherence.
Reduction of proteinuria  Patients with proteinuria are at higher risk of 
progression of renal disease, and there is strong evidence that reduc-
ing proteinuria reduces the risk of progression. ACE inhibitors and ARBs 
reduce proteinuria and retard the progression of CKD. These effects are 
partly due to the reduction in blood pressure but there is evidence for a 
specic benecial effect in patients with proteinuria (PCR >50 mg/mmol 
or ACR >30 mg/mmol; see Box 18.11) through a reduction in glomerular 
perfusion pressure (see Fig. 18.19). In addition, ACE inhibitors have been 
shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality 
in CKD. Accordingly, ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be prescribed to all 
patients with diabetic nephropathy and patients with CKD and protein-
uria, irrespective of whether or not hypertension is present.
While ACE inhibitors and ARBs are excellent drugs for patients with 
diabetes or CKD and proteinuria, they need to be prescribed with care 
in certain circumstances. Initiation of treatment with ACE inhibitors and 
ARBs may be accompanied by an immediate reduction in GFR; patients 
should therefore have their renal function checked within 7–10 days of 
initiating or increasing the dose of an ACE inhibitor or ARB. Treatment 
can be continued so long as the reduction in GFR is not greater than 
25% and is not progressive. Angiotensin II is critical for autoregulation 
of GFR in the context of low renal perfusion (see Fig. 18.1D), and so 
ACE inhibitors or ARBs may exacerbate pre-renal failure (see Fig. 18.19). 
Patients on ACE inhibitors/ARBs should therefore be warned to stop 
taking the medication if they become unwell, such as with fever, vomiting 
or diarrhoea, restarting once they are better. This also applies to other 
common medications used in patients with CKD, such as diuretics, met-
formin and NSAIDs, and this advice may be reinforced by providing writ-
ten information such as ‘sick-day rule’ cards (Box 18.31). ACE inhibitors 
and ARBs increase serum potassium and should not be commenced in 
patients with baseline potassium > 5.5 mmol/L. In patients with serum 
potassium >6.0 mmol/L, the dose of ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be 
reduced or discontinued entirely, but only after all other measures to 
18.30  Criteria for referral of chronic kidney disease patients to 
a nephrologist
 eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2
 Rapid deterioration in renal function (>25% from previous or >15 mL/min/
1.73 m2/year)
 Signicant proteinuria (PCR >100 mg/mmol or ACR >70 mg/mmol*), unless 
known to be due to diabetes and patient is already on appropriate medications
 ACR >30 mg/mmol* with non-visible haematuria
 Hypertension that remains poorly controlled despite at least four 
antihypertensive medications
 Suspicion of renal involvement in multisystem disease
*See Box 18.11 for conversion of mg/mmol to mg/dL.
(ACR = albumin:creatinine ratio; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate; PCR = 
protein:creatinine ratio)
BP 162/88
PCR 284
BP 177/104
PCR 397
BP 146/77
PCR 170
10
0
eGFR mL/min/1.73 m2
BP 207/101
PCR 367
BP 122/68
PCR 107
2
4
Time (years)
6
8
10
15
30
60
Fig. 18.23 Plot of estimated glomerular ltration rate (eGFR) against time in a patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus. After approximately 6 years of monitoring (blue 
arrow), this patient entered an aggressive treatment programme aimed at optimising blood pressure (BP) and glycaemic control. The reduction in BP was accompanied by a fall 
in proteinuria (protein:creatinine ratio, PCR; shown in mg/mmol). At the previous rate of decline in renal function (dashed line), he was likely to reach the level of renal function 
at which dialysis therapy is typically required (eGFR = 10 mL/min/1.73 m2) within 18 months; however, the relative stabilisation in his renal function (dotted line) means that this 
has been deferred, potentially for several years.

[[p638]]
Chronic kidney disease    591
18
reduce potassium have been considered (see below). Combination ther-
apy with ACE inhibitors and ARBs or direct renin inhibitors has not been 
shown to reduce progression of kidney disease but is associated with 
higher rates of hyperkalaemia and AKI, and is therefore to be avoided.
Treatment of complications
The kidneys have many functions in addition to excretion of waste (p. 
560). Treatments that substitute for all of the normal roles of the kidneys 
must therefore be instigated to maintain normal body homeostasis and 
prevent complications.
Maintenance of uid and electrolyte balance  The kidneys excrete waste 
and regulate many electrolytes, and so patients with CKD may accumu-
late waste products and develop electrolyte abnormalities.
Urea is a key product of protein degradation and accumulates with pro-
gressive CKD. All patients with stages 4 and 5 CKD should be given dietetic 
advice aimed at preventing excessive consumption of protein. Severe pro-
tein restriction is not recommended, however; there is no evidence that this 
reduces the rate of decline in renal function but may lead to malnutrition.
Potassium often accumulates in patients with advanced CKD, who 
should be provided with dietary advice to reduce daily potassium intake 
to below 70 mmol (Box 18.32). Potassium-binding compounds limit 
absorption of potassium from the gut and may be a useful adjunctive 
therapy. Calcium resonium is not recommended, other than as a very 
short-term measure, as it can be associated with bowel necrosis; how-
ever, newer agents, such as sodium zirconium cyclosilicate and patir-
omer, appear promising for chronic use. Other measures that may help 
regulate potassium include diuretic therapy and control of acidosis with 
sodium bicarbonate (see below). Consideration should be given to stop-
ping or reducing drugs that elevate potassium, such as potassium-spar-
ing diuretics and ACE inhibitors/ARBs; however, this has to be balanced 
against the potential benet that such drugs may have on retarding 
progression of renal and cardiovascular disease, and hence withdrawal 
should be reserved for when other measures have failed.
The inability of the failing kidney to excrete sodium and water com-
monly leads to their accumulation, which may manifest as oedema and 
drive hypertension. Patients with evidence of volume expansion should 
be instructed to consume a low-sodium diet (< 100 mmol/24 hrs) and in 
severe cases uid intake should also be restricted. Diuretics are com-
monly required, and as renal function deteriorates, increasing doses of 
potent loop diuretics or synergistic combinations of loop, thiazide and 
potassium-sparing diuretics may be necessary.
Occasionally, some patients with tubulo-interstitial disease can 
develop ‘salt-wasting’ disease and may require a high sodium and water 
intake, including supplements of sodium salts, to prevent uid depletion 
and worsening of renal function.
Acid–base balance  Reduced ability to excrete organic acids in patients 
with CKD may lead to an anion-gap metabolic acidosis. In addition, in 
patients with tubulo-interstitial disease or diabetic nephropathy, there 
may be specic defects in acid–base regulation within the kidney, caus-
ing a non-anion-gap renal tubular acidosis (p. 631). Although acidosis is 
usually asymptomatic, it may be associated with increased tissue catab-
olism and decreased protein synthesis, and may exacerbate bone dis-
ease and the rate of decline in renal function. Hence, plasma bicarb onate 
concentrations should be maintained above 22 mmol/L by prescribing 
sodium bicarbonate supplements (starting dose of 1 g 3 times daily, 
increasing as required). There is some evidence that correcting acidosis 
may reduce the rate of decline in renal function.
Renal bone disease  Disturbances of calcium and phosphate metabol-
ism are almost universal in advanced CKD (Fig. 18.24). The sequence of 
events that leads to renal bone disease is complex, but two primary fac-
tors are: impaired excretion of phosphate and failure of the renal tubular 
cells to convert 25-hydroxyvitamin D to its active metabolite 1,25-dihy-
droxyvitamin D. A rise in serum phosphate levels promotes production 
of the hormone broblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) from osteocytes 
(see Fig. 26.3) and stimulates parathyroid hormone (PTH) release and 
hyperplasia of the parathyroid glands. The FGF23 and PTH promote 
tubular phosphate excretion, thereby partly compensating for the 
reduced glomerular ltration of phosphate. The reduced 1,25-dihydrox-
yvitamin D level stimulates PTH release and reduces intestinal absorp-
tion of calcium. In addition, raised levels of serum phosphate complex 
with calcium in the extracellular space, leading to calcium phosphate 
deposition in tissues including the cardiovascular system. The combi-
nation of reduced absorption and increased deposition of calcium pro-
motes hypocalcaemia, which also stimulates PTH production by the 
parathyroid glands. Hence in many patients with CKD, compensatory 
responses initially maintain phosphate and calcium levels at the upper 
and lower ends of their respective normal ranges, at the expense of 
an elevated PTH level (secondary hyperparathyroidism). This is associ-
ated with bone resorption (osteitis brosa cystica), and in severe cases 
this may result in bony pain and increased risk of fractures. Conversely 
there is increased deposition of calcium phosphate in many tissues, 
most notably blood vessels and heart valves, which may contribute to 
the increased risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with CKD (see 
below). In some cases, tertiary hyperparathyroidism supervenes, due to 
autonomous production of PTH by the enlarged parathyroid glands; this 
presents with hypercalcae mia. Additional problems in bone metabolism 
include low bone turnover (adynamic bone disease) in patients who 
have been over-treated with vitamin D metabolites and osteoporosis in 
patients with poor nutritional intake.
The key focus in the management of renal bone disease should be 
directed towards the two main driving factors, hyperphosphatae mia 
and inadequate activation of vitamin D. Hyperphosphataemia should be 
treated by dietary restriction of foods with high phosphate content (milk, 
cheese, eggs and protein-rich foods) and by the use of phosphate-bind-
ing drugs that inhibit phosphate reabsorption in the gut. Various drugs 
are available, including calcium carbonate, aluminium hydroxide, lantha-
num carbonate and polymer-based phosphate binders such as seve-
lamer. The aim is to maintain serum phosphate values below 1.5 mmol/L 
(4.6 mg/dL) if possible, but many of these drugs are difcult to take 
and adherence can be a problem. Active vitamin D metabolites (either 
1-α-hydroxyvitamin D or 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) should be adminis-
tered in patients who are hypocalcaemic or have serum PTH levels more 
than twice the upper limit of normal. The dose should be adjusted to 
try to reduce PTH levels to between 2 and 4 times the upper limit of 
18.31  Exemplar medicine sick-day card
When you are unwell with vomiting, diarrhoea or fever, stop taking the following 
medications:
 ACE inhibitors: medicines ending in ‘-pril’, e.g. lisinopril, ramipril
 Angiotensin receptor blockers: medicines ending in ‘-sartan’, e.g. irbesartan, 
losartan, candesartan
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory painkillers: e.g. ibuprofen (Brufen), diclofenac 
(Voltarol)
 Diuretics: e.g. furosemide, bendroumethiazide, indapamide, spironolactone
 Metformin: a medicine for diabetes.
Restart when you are well again (after 24–48 hours of eating and drinking 
normally).
18.32  Foods high in potassium
 Fruit: bananas, avocados, gs, rhubarb
 Vegetables: tomatoes, spinach, parsnips, courgettes, sprouts, potatoes 
(including baked, fries, wedges; boiling vegetables reduces potassium content)
 Sweets/snacks: crisps, chocolate, toffee, nuts (including peanut butter)
 Drinks: beer, cider, wine (spirits contain less potassium), hot chocolate, fruit 
juice, milk, yoghurt
 Some salt substitutes, such as Lo-Salt: sodium chloride is substituted with 
potassium chloride

[[p639]]
592    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
normal to limit hyperparathyroidism while avoiding over-suppression of 
bone turnover and adynamic bone disease, but care must be exercised 
in order to avoid hypercalcaemia. In patients with persistent hypercalcae-
mia (tertiary hyperparathyroidism), parathyroidectomy may be required. If 
parathyroidectomy is unsuccessful or not possible, calcimimetic agents, 
such as cinacalcet, may be used. These bind to the calcium-sensing 
receptor in the parathyroid glands and reduce PTH secretion.
Anaemia  Anaemia is common in patients with CKD and contributes to 
many of the non-specic symptoms, including fatigue and shortness 
of breath. Haemoglobin can be as low as 50–70 g/L in CKD stage 5, 
although it is often less severe or absent in patients with polycystic kid-
ney disease. Several mechanisms are implicated, as summarised in Box 
18.33. Iron deciency is common in patients with CKD, and even more 
prevalent in those on haemodialysis as a result of haemolysis in the dialy-
sis circuit. Hence many patients require iron supplements, which may be 
given intravenously for those with iron intolerance or in situations where 
adherence may be difcult. Once iron deciency and other causes of 
anaemia have been excluded or corrected, recombinant human erythro-
poietin is very effective in correcting the anaemia of CKD and improving 
symptoms. However, correcting haemoglobin to normal levels confers 
higher risk of hypertension and thrombosis, therefore the target haemo-
globin is usually between 100 and 120 g/L or avoidance of blood trans-
fusions. Erythropoietin is less effective in the presence of iron deciency, 
active inammation or malignancy, in particular myeloma.
Treatment of risk factors for cardiovascular disease
The risk of cardiovascular disease is substantially increased in patients 
with a GFR below 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and in those with proteinuria, the 
combination of reduced eGFR and proteinuria being particularly unfav-
ourable. Patients with CKD have a higher prevalence of traditional risk 
factors for atherosclerosis, such as hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and 
diabetes; however, additional mechanisms of cardiovascular disease 
may also be implicated. Left ventricular hypertrophy is commonly found 
in patients with CKD, secondary to hypertension or anaemia. Calcication 
of the media of blood vessels, heart valves, myocardium and the con-
duction system of the heart is also common and may be due, in part, 
to the high serum phosphate levels. Reecting this fact, serum FGF23 
levels, which increase in response to serum phosphate, are an independ-
ent predictor of mortality in CKD. Both left ventricular hypertrophy and 
cardiac calcication may increase the risk of arrhythmias and sudden 
cardiac death, which is a much more common mode of death in patients 
with CKD than in the general population, particularly in those with more 
advanced disease and those on dialysis.
To reduce vascular risk, patients with CKD should be encouraged to 
adopt a healthy lifestyle, including regular exercise, and weight loss and 
smoking cessation where appropriate. Lipid-lowering drugs reduce car-
diovascular events in patients with CKD, although their efcacy may be 
lower once patients require dialysis.
Impaired renal function
Osteoclastic
bone resorption
Decreased conversion of
25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D
Calcium reabsorption
Phosphate excretion
Phosphate excretion
Calcium reabsorption
(gut and kidney)
Osteoblastic
bone formation
Bone
mineralisation
Serum calcium
FGF23
Hyperparathyroidism
Calcium phosphate deposition
in cardiovascular system
Serum phosphate
Negative
feedback
Negative
feedback
Negative
feedback
Fig. 18.24 Pathogenesis of renal osteodystrophy. Impaired renal clearance of phosphate promotes elevated serum phosphate, which binds to calcium, lowering the serum 
calcium and leading to calcium phosphate deposition in tissues including the cardiovascular system. Low 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH) 2D) levels reduce calcium absorption 
from gut and kidney exacerbating hypocalcaemia. Low serum calcium and 1,25(OH)2D levels (arrow not shown in gure for ease of reading) and high phosphate stimulate 
release of parathyroid hormone (PTH) which increases osteoclastic bone resorption, contributing to renal osteodystrophy. The elevated PTH and production of broblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF23) from osteocytes promotes phosphate excretion, however this is insufcient to prevent hyperphosphataemia in advanced chronic kidney disease.
18.33  Causes of anaemia in chronic kidney disease
 Deciency of erythropoietin
 Toxic effects of uraemia on marrow precursor cells
 Reduced intake, absorption and utilisation of dietary iron
 Reduced red cell survival
 Blood loss due to capillary fragility and poor platelet function

[[p640]]
Renal replacement therapy    593
18
Preparing for renal replacement therapy
It is crucial for patients who are known to have progressive CKD to be 
prepared well in advance for the institution of RRT. They should be referred 
to a nephrologist in a timely manner, as those who are referred late, when 
they are very close to requiring dialysis, tend to have poorer outcomes.
Several decisions need to be taken in discussion with the patient and 
family. The rst is to decide whether RRT is an appropriate choice or 
whether conservative treatment might be preferable (see the next sec-
tion). This is especially relevant in patients with signicant comorbidity. 
For those who decide to go ahead with RRT, there are further choices 
between haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis (Box 18.34), between 
hospital and home treatment, and on referral for renal transplantation.
Since there is no evidence that early initiation of RRT improves out-
come, the overall aim is to commence RRT when symptoms of CKD 
begin to impact on quality of life but before serious complications have 
occurred. While there is wide variation between patients, this typically 
occurs when the eGFR approaches 10 mL/min/1.73 m2. This may be a 
useful marker to predict the timing of initiation of RRT by extrapolating 
from a plot of serial eGFR measurements over time (see Fig. 18.23).
Preparations for starting RRT should begin at least 12 months before 
the predicted start date. This involves providing the patient with psycho-
logical and social support, assessing home circumstances and discuss-
ing the various choices of treatment (Fig. 18.25). Depression is common 
in patients who are on or approaching RRT, and support from the renal 
multidisciplinary team should be provided both for them and for their 
relatives, to explain and help them adapt to the changes to lifestyle that 
may be necessary once RRT starts; this may help to reduce their anxi-
eties about these changes. Physical preparations include establishment 
of timely access for haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis and vaccination 
against hepatitis B.
Renal replacement therapy
Renal replacement therapy (RRT) may be required on a temporary basis 
in patients with AKI or on a permanent basis for those with advanced 
CKD. Since the advent of long-term RRT in the 1960s, the number of 
patients with ESRD who are kept alive by dialysis and transplantation 
has increased considerably. By the end of 2017, almost 65  000 patients 
were on RRT in the UK, with a median age of 59 years. After a long 
period of expansion, the number of patients on dialysis in the UK and 
the United States has begun to stabilise; however, the total number of 
patients on RRT continues to expand, due to an increasing proportion 
(55%) of patients with a functional transplant. The remaining patients 
were on haemodialysis (39%) and peritoneal dialysis (6%).
There are variations in the number of patients receiving RRT in differ-
ent countries because of differences in the incidence of predisposing 
disease, as well as differences in medical practice. For example, the inci-
dence rate for RRT in the United States in 2017 was three times higher 
than in the UK (370 versus 121 patients per million population), and the 
prevalence rate at the end of 2017 was more than twice as high (2204 
versus 983 per million population). Diabetic kidney disease is the most 
common cause of ESRD in many countries, accounting for 29% of all 
ESRD in the UK and almost 50% in the United States. The large increase 
in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in developing countries is result-
ing in a predictable rise in cases of ESRD, which is challenging already 
stretched health-care resources.
Survival on dialysis is strongly inuenced by age and presence of 
complications such as diabetes (Fig. 18.26). For this reason, conserv-
ative care rather than RRT may be a more appropriate option for older 
patients or those with extensive comorbidities. Although many young 
patients without extrarenal disease lead normal and active lives on RRT, 
those aged 30–34 have a mortality rate 25 times higher than that of age-
matched controls.
The aim of RRT is to replace the excretory functions of the kidney and 
to maintain normal electrolyte concentrations and uid balance. Various 
options are available, including haemodialysis, haemoltration, haemo-
dialtration, peritoneal dialysis and renal transplantation, and each of 
these is discussed in more detail below. Indications for starting RRT in 
both AKI and CKD may be found in Box 18.35
Conservative treatment
In older patients and those with multiple comorbidities, conservative treat-
ment of stage 5 CKD, aimed at limiting the adverse symptoms of ESRD 
without commencing RRT, is increasingly viewed as a positive choice 
(see Box18.36). Current evidence suggests that survival of these patients 
without dialysis can be similar or only slightly shorter than that of patients 
who undergo RRT, but they avoid the hospitalisation and interventions 
associated with dialysis. Patients are offered full medical, psychological 
and social support to optimise and sustain their existing renal function 
and to treat complications, such as anaemia, for as long as possible, with 
appropriate palliative care in the terminal phase of their disease. Many of 
these patients enjoy a good quality of life for several years. When quality 
of life on dialysis is poor, it is appropriate to consider discontinuing it, fol-
lowing discussion with the patient and family, and to offer palliative care.
Haemodialysis
Haemodialysis is the most common form of dialysis employed in ESRD 
and is also used in AKI. Haemodialysis involves gaining access to the 
circulation, either through a central venous catheter or an arteriovenous 
stula or graft. The patient’s blood is pumped through a haemodialyser, 
which allows bidirectional diffusion of solutes between blood and the 
dialysate across a semipermeable membrane down a concentration gra-
dient (see Fig. 18.25A). The composition of the dialysate can be varied to 
achieve the desired solute gradient, and uid can be removed by apply-
ing negative pressure to the dialysate side.
Haemodialysis in AKI
Haemodialysis offers the best rate of small-solute clearance in AKI, 
compared with other techniques such as haemoltration, but should be 
18.34  Comparison of haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis
Haemodialysis
Peritoneal dialysis
Efcient; 4 hrs three times per week 
is usually adequate
Less efcient; four exchanges per 
day are usually required, each taking 
30–60 mins (continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis) or 8–10 hrs each 
night (automated peritoneal dialysis)
2–3 days between treatments
A few hours between treatments
Requires visits to hospital (although 
home treatment is possible with 
adaptations for some patients)
Performed at home
Requires adequate vascular access
Requires an intact peritoneal cavity 
without major scarring from previous 
surgery
Careful adherence to diet and 
uid restrictions required between 
treatments
Diet and uid less restricted
Fluid removal compressed into 
treatment periods; may cause 
symptoms and haemodynamic 
instability
Slow continuous uid removal, 
usually asymptomatic
Infections related to vascular access 
may occur
Peritonitis and catheter-related 
infections may occur
Patients are usually dependent on 
others
Patients can take full responsibility 
for their treatment

[[p641]]
594    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
started gradually because of the risk of delirium and convulsions due to 
cerebral oedema (dialysis disequilibrium). Typically, 1–2 hours of dialysis 
is prescribed initially but, subsequently, patients with AKI who are hae-
modynamically stable can be treated by 4–5 hours of haemodialysis on 
alternate days, or 2–3 hours every day. During dialysis, it is standard 
practice to anticoagulate patients, typically using heparin but the dose 
may be reduced if there is a bleeding risk. In patients undergoing short 
treatments and in those with abnormal clotting, it may be possible to 
avoid anticoagulation altogether. In AKI, dialysis is performed through 
a large-bore, dual-lumen catheter inserted into the femoral or internal 
jugular vein (Fig. 18.27A).
Haemodialysis in ESRD
In ESRD, vascular access for haemodialysis is gained by formation of an 
arteriovenous stula (AVF), usually in the forearm, up to a year before dia-
lysis is contemplated (Fig. 18.27B). After 4–6 weeks, increased pressure 
transmitted from the artery to the vein leading from the stula causes 
distension and thickening of the vessel wall (arterialisation). Large-bore 
needles can then be inserted into the vein to provide access for each 
haemodialysis treatment.
Haemodialysis
Dialysate
Haemofiltration
Ultrafiltrate
Replacement
fluid
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal cavity
Transplantation
External iliac artery
Peritoneal membrane
PD fluid
Catheter
Transplanted
kidney
External iliac vein
Donor artery
Donor vein
Donor ureter
Bladder
Blood from patient
Blood to patient
Blood to patient
Blood from patient
A
B
C
D
Fig. 18.25 Options for renal replacement therapy. 
the transplanted kidney is generally anastomosed to the external iliac vessels and the ureter to the bladder. The transplanted kidney replaces all functions of the failed kidney.
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
3
Time (years)
Survival (%)
18–44 years, no diabetes
18–44 years, with diabetes
44–64 years, no diabetes
44–64 years, with diabetes
 65 years, no diabetes
 65 years, with diabetes
5
10
Fig. 18.26 Percentage survival after commencing renal replacement therapy 
according to age group and presence of diabetes.

[[p642]]
Renal replacement therapy    595
18
Preservation of arm veins is thus very important in patients with pro-
gressive renal disease who may require haemodialysis in the future. 
If creation of an AVF is not possible, synthetic polytetrauoroethylene 
(PTFE) grafts may be fashioned between an artery and a vein, or cen-
tral venous catheters may be used for short-term access (Fig. 18.27C). 
These are tunnelled under the skin to reduce infection risk.
All patients starting dialysis must be screened in advance for hepatitis 
B, hepatitis C and HIV, and vaccinated against hepatitis B if they are not 
immune. All dialysis units should have segregation facilities for hepatitis 
B-positive patients, given its easy transmissibility. Patients with hepati-
tis C and HIV are less infectious and can be treated satisfactorily using 
machine segregation and standard infection control measures.
Haemodialysis is usually carried out for 3–5 hours three times weekly, 
either at home or in an outpatient dialysis unit. The intensity and frequency 
of dialysis should be adjusted to achieve a reduction in urea during dialysis 
(urea reduction ratio) of over 65%; below this level there is an increase in 
mortality. Most patients notice an improvement in symptoms during the 
rst 6 weeks of treatment. The intensity of dialysis can be increased by:
 escalating the number of standard sessions to four or more per 
week
 performing short, frequent dialysis sessions of 2–3 hours 5–7 times 
per week
 performing nocturnal haemodialysis, when low blood-pump speeds 
are used for approximately 8 hours overnight 5–6 times per week
 including a ltration component (haemodialtration) to achieve 
greater clearance of larger molecules.
More frequent dialysis and nocturnal dialysis can achieve better uid 
balance and phosphate control, improve left ventricular mass and pos-
sibly improve mortality, although the latter has not yet been robustly 
demonstrated. Box 18.37 summarises some of the problems related to 
haemodialysis.
Haemoltration
Haemoltration is employed continuously for long periods daily using 
a dual-lumen intravenous catheter and is hence termed continuous 
venovenous haemoltration (CVVH). This technique is principally used in 
the treatment of AKI in patients who are haemodynamically unstable and 
who therefore may not tolerate the rapid uid and electrolyte changes 
associated with intermittent haemodialysis. Large volumes of water are 
ltered from blood across a porous semipermeable membrane under a 
pressure gradient. Solutes are removed via ‘solvent drag’ rather than 
by diffusion, therefore this method is less efcient at clearing urea and 
potassium than haemodialysis. Replacement uid of a suitable electrolyte 
composition is added to the blood after it exits the haemolter. If removal 
of uid is required, then less uid is added back than is removed (see 
Fig. 18.25B). Typically 1–2 L of ltrate is replaced per hour (equivalent 
to a GFR of 15–30 mL/min/1.73 m2); higher rates of ltration may be of 
benet in patients with sepsis and multi-organ failure. Issues concerning 
anticoagulation are similar to those for haemodialysis, but may be more 
problematic because longer or continuous anticoagulation is necessary.
Haemodialtration combines haemodialysis with approximately 
20–30 L of ultraltration (with replacement of ltrate) over a 3–5-hour 
treatment. It uses a large-pore membrane and combines the improved 
clearance of medium-sized molecules observed in haemoltration with 
the higher small-solute clearance of haemodialysis. It is sometimes used 
in the treatment of AKI, often as continuous therapy. It is increasingly 
employed in patients on chronic dialysis but is more expensive than hae-
modialysis and the long-term benets are not yet established.
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis is principally used in the treatment of CKD, though it 
may occasionally be employed in AKI. It requires the insertion of a per-
manent Silastic catheter into the peritoneal cavity (see Fig. 18.25C). Two 
types are in common use. In continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD), about 2 L of sterile dialysis uid are introduced and left in place 
18.35  Indications for dialysis with examples for AKI and CKD
Indication*
Acute examples
Chronic examples
Uraemia
Pericarditis
Encephalopathy
Uraemic syndrome including anorexia, nausea, lethargy 
(generally not seen until eGFR <10 mL/min/1.73 m2)
Fluid overload
Acute pulmonary oedema
Intractable dependent oedema resistant to diuretics
Pulmonary oedema
Severe hypertension
Hyperkalaemia
High potassium (generally >6.5 mmol/L) with 
ECG changes (especially broad QRS)
Potassium resistant to dietary control and medical 
intervention
Metabolic acidosis
Severe acidosis (H+ >79 nmol/L; pH < 7.1)
Chronic acidosis resistant to bicarbonate therapy
Other (often relative indications)
Bleeding diathesis considered due to uraemia-
induced platelet dysfunction
Intractable anaemia despite erythropoietin and iron
Hyperphosphataemia despite binders
*The presence of anuria in AKI will modify the above indications, as these complications will not resolve if the patient is persistently anuric. Most indications to commence chronic dialysis are relative 
indications; a holistic approach is taken to making this decision.
(AKI = acute kidney injury; CKD = chronic kidney disease; ECG = electrocardiogram; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate)
18.36  Renal replacement therapy in old age
 Quality of life: age itself is not a barrier to good quality of life on RRT.
 Coexisting cardiovascular disease: older people are more sensitive to uid 
balance changes, predisposing to hypotension during dialysis with rebound 
hypertension between dialysis sessions. A failing heart cannot cope with uid 
overload, and pulmonary oedema develops easily.
 Confusion: sudden changes in serum electrolyte composition during dialysis 
may exacerbate confusion in patients with early dementia.
 Provision of treatment: peritoneal dialysis may avoid the problems due to 
sudden changes in uid and electrolyte status; however, older patients often 
require assistance with performing peritoneal dialysis, typically assistance 
setting up uids and connecting/disconnecting to automated peritoneal dialysis.
 Survival on dialysis: difcult to predict for an individual patient, but old age 
plus substantial comorbidity are associated with poor survival. In such patients 
similar survival may be achieved through conservative care, without the 
complications associated with dialysis.
 Withdrawal from dialysis: may be appropriate whenever quality of life 
deteriorates irreversibly, usually in the context of severe comorbidity.
 Transplantation: relative risks of surgery and immunosuppression exclude 
many older people from transplantation.
 Conservative therapy: without dialysis but with adequate support. This is an 
appropriate option for patients at high risk of complications from dialysis who 
have a limited prognosis.

[[p643]]
596    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
for approximately 4–6 hours. Metabolic waste products diffuse from peri-
toneal capillaries into the dialysis uid down a concentration gradient. 
The uid is then drained and fresh dialysis uid introduced, in a continu-
ous four-times-daily cycle. The inow uid is rendered hyperosmolar by 
the addition of glucose or glucose polymer; this results in net removal of 
uid from the patient during each cycle, due to diffusion of water from 
the blood through the peritoneal membrane down an osmotic gradient 
(ultraltration). The patient is mobile and able to undertake normal daily 
activities. Automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) is similar to CAPD but 
uses a machine to perform the uid exchanges during the night, typically 
leaving some uid in the peritoneum during the day for ongoing dialysis.
CAPD is particularly useful in children, as a rst treatment in adults 
with some residual renal function, and as a treatment for older patients 
with cardiovascular instability. The long-term use of peritoneal dialy-
sis may be limited by episodes of bacterial peritonitis and damage to 
the peritoneal membrane, including encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis, 
but some patients have been treated successfully for more than 10 
years. Box 18.38 summarises some of the problems related to CAPD 
treatment.
Renal transplantation
Renal transplantation offers the best chance of long-term survival in 
ESRD and is the most cost-effective treatment. All patients with ESRD 
should be considered for transplantation but many are not suitable due 
to a combination of comorbidity and advanced age (although no abso-
lute age limit applies). Active malignancy, vasculitis and cardiovascular 
comorbidity are common contraindications to transplantation, with risk 
of recurrence of the original renal disease (generally glomeruloneph-
ritides) being a less common problem.
Kidney grafts may be taken from a deceased donor in the UK after 
brain death (37%) or circulatory death (25%), or from a living donor 
(38%). As described in the section on transplantation and graft rejection 
in Chapter 4, matching of a donor to a specic recipient is strongly inu-
enced by immunological factors, since graft rejection is the major cause 
of transplant failure. Compatibility of ABO blood group between donor 
and recipient is usually required and the degree of matching for major 
histocompatibility (MHC) antigens, particularly human leucocyte antigens 
(HLA) A, B and DR, inuences the incidence of rejection. Immediately 
prior to transplantation, cross-matching should be performed for anti-
HLA antibodies (traditionally mixing of recipient serum with donor lym-
phocytes) (Ch. 4). Positive tests predict early rejection and worse graft 
survival. Although some ABO- and HLA-incompatible transplants are 
now possible, this involves appropriate preparation with pre-transplant 
plasma exchange and/or immunosuppression, so that recipient antibod-
ies to the donor’s tissue are reduced to acceptably low levels. This option 
is generally only available for living donor transplants because of the 
preparation required. Paired exchanges, in which a donor–recipient pair 
who are incompatible, either due to blood group or anti-HLA antibodies, 
are computer-matched with another pair to overcome the mismatch, are 
also used to increase the number of successful transplants that can be 
performed.
During the transplant operation, the kidney is placed in the pelvis; the 
donor vessels are usually anastomosed to the recipient’s external iliac 
artery and vein, and the donor ureter to the bladder (see Fig. 18.25D). 
The native kidneys are typically left in place but may be removed 
pre-transplant if they are a source of repeated sepsis or to make room 
for a transplant kidney in patients with very large kidneys due to adult 
polycystic kidney disease.
All transplant patients require regular life-long follow-up to monitor 
renal function and complications of immunosuppression. Allograft dys-
function is often asymptomatic and picked up during routine surveil-
lance blood tests. The common causes at different time points post 
transplant are summarised in Box 18.39. Immunosuppressive therapy 
(see Box 4.21) is required to prevent rejection and is more intensive 
in the early post-transplantation period, when rejection risk is highest. 
A common regimen is triple therapy with prednisolone; ciclosporin or 
tacrolimus; and azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. Sirolimus is an 
alternative that can be introduced later but is generally not used initially 
due to impaired wound healing. Basiliximab, an interleukin (IL)-2 recep-
tor antagonist, is frequently used at induction to lower rates of rejection. 
Anti-lymphocyte preparations (e.g. anti-thymocyte globulin, ATG ) may 
also be used as induction, especially in higher risk cases. Acute cellular 
rejection is usually treated, in the rst instance, by high-dose glucocor-
ticoids, such as intravenous methylprednisolone on three consecutive 
days. ATG is also used for glucocorticoid-resistant rejection. Antibody-
mediated rejection is more difcult to treat and usually requires plasma 
exchange and intravenous immunoglobulin (Ch. 4). Complications 
of immunosuppression include infections and malignancy (Ch. 4). 
Right internal
jugular vein
Catheter
Right atrium
of heart
Mixed arteriovenous
blood
Artery
Artery
Vein
Arteriovenous
graft
Vein, expanded due to
increased blood pressure
(needles inserted here)
Arteriovenous fistula
Blood from dialysis
machine
Blood to dialysis
machine
Blood from
dialysis machine
Blood to
dialysis machine
A
B
C
Fig. 18.27 Haemodialysis access. 

[[p644]]
Drugs and the kidney    597
18
Approximately 50% of patients of European descent develop skin 
malignancy by 15 years after transplantation.
The prognosis after kidney transplantation is good. Recent UK statis-
tics for transplants from deceased donors indicate 97% patient survival 
and 94% graft survival at 1 year, and 87% patient and 87% graft survival 
at 5 years. Even better gures are obtained with living donor transplanta-
tion (92% graft survival and 94% patient survival at 5 years).
Renal disease in pregnancy
Pregnancy has important physiological effects on the renal system. 
Some diseases are more common in pregnancy (Box 18.40), the mani-
festations of others are modied during pregnancy, and a few diseases, 
such as pre-eclampsia (see Box 32.8), are unique to pregnancy. These 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 32
 Renal disease in adolescence
Many causes of renal failure present during infancy or childhood, such 
as congenital urological malformations and inherited disorders like cys-
tinosis and autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. The conse-
quences continue throughout the patient’s life and the situation often 
arises whereby patients transition from paediatric to adult nephrology 
services. Some of the issues and challenges surrounding this transition 
are summarised in Box 18.41
Drugs and the kidney
Drug-induced renal disease
The kidney is susceptible to damage by drugs because it is the route 
of excretion of many water-soluble compounds, including drugs and 
18.37  Problems with haemodialysis
Problem
Clinical features
Cause
Treatment
During treatments
Hypotension
Sudden ↓BP; often leg cramps; 
sometimes chest pain
Fluid removal and hypovolaemia
Saline infusion; exclude cardiac 
ischaemia; quinine may help cramp
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hypotension; sometimes chest pain
Potassium and acid–base shifts
Check K+; review dialysis prescription; 
stop dialysis
Haemorrhage
Blood loss (overt or occult); 
hypotension
Anticoagulation
Venous needle disconnection
Stop dialysis; seek source; consider 
heparin-free treatment
Air embolism
Circulatory collapse; cardiac arrest
Disconnected or faulty lines and 
equipment malfunction
Stop dialysis
Dialyser hypersensitivity
Acute circulatory collapse
Allergic reaction to dialysis membrane 
or sterilisant
Stop dialysis; change to different articial 
kidney
Systemic sepsis
Rigors; fever; ↓BP
Usually involves vascular access devices 
(catheter or stula)
Blood cultures; antibiotics
Between treatments
Pulmonary oedema
Breathlessness
Fluid overload
Ultraltration, uid restriction, lower dry 
weight
(BP = blood pressure)
18.38  Problems with continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
Problem
Clinical features
Cause
Treatment
Peritonitis
Cloudy drainage uid; abdominal pain 
and systemic sepsis are variable
Usually entry of skin contaminants 
via catheter; bowel organisms less 
common
Culture of peritoneal dialysis uid
Intraperitoneal antibiotics
Catheter removal sometimes required
Catheter exit site infection
Erythema and pus around exit site
Usually skin organisms
Antibiotics; sometimes surgical 
drainage
Peritoneal membrane leaks
Fluid leak from tunnel or pleural 
effusion (typically unilateral and 
right-sided)
Leak adjacent to catheter or 
via congenital pleuroperitoneal 
communication
Temporary reduction in volume 
of dialysis uid. However, 
pleuroperitoneal leaks are likely to 
require switch to haemodialysis
Ultraltration failure
Fluid overload
Damage to peritoneal membrane, 
leading to rapid transport of glucose 
and loss of osmotic gradient
Replacement of glucose with 
synthetic, poorly absorbed polymers 
for some exchanges (icodextrin)
Peritoneal membrane failure
Inadequate clearance of urea etc.
Scarring/damage to peritoneal 
membrane
Increase in exchange volumes; 
consideration of automated peritoneal 
dialysis or switch to haemodialysis
Sclerosing peritonitis
Intermittent bowel obstruction
Malnutrition
Unknown; typically occurs after many 
years on peritoneal dialysis
Switch to haemodialysis (may still 
progress)
Surgery and tamoxifen may be used

[[p645]]
598    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
their metabolites. Some may reach high concentrations in the renal 
cortex as a result of proximal tubular transport mechanisms. Others 
are concentrated in the medulla by the operation of the countercurrent 
system.
Toxic renal damage may occur by a variety of mechanisms (Box 18.42). 
Very commonly, drugs contribute to the development of acute tubular 
necrosis as one of multiple insults. Numerically, reactions to NSAIDs and 
ACE inhibitors are the most important. Haemodynamic renal impairment, 
acute tubular necrosis and allergic reactions are usually reversible if rec-
ognised early enough. Other types, however, especially those associated 
with extensive brosis, are less likely to be reversible.
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Impairment of renal function may develop in patients on NSAIDs, since 
prostaglandins play an important role in regulating renal blood ow by 
vasodilating afferent arterioles (see Fig. 18.19). This is particularly likely 
in patients with other disorders, such as volume depletion, heart failure, 
cirrhosis, sepsis and pre-existing renal impairment. In addition, idiosyn-
cratic immune reactions may occur, causing minimal change nephrotic 
syndrome, membranous nephropathy (p. 574) and acute interstitial 
nephritis (p. 576). Analgesic nephropathy (see Box 18.19) is now a rare 
complication of long-term use.
ACE inhibitors
These abolish the compensatory angiotensin II-mediated vasoconstric-
tion of the glomerular efferent arteriole that takes place in order to main-
tain glomerular perfusion pressure distal to a renal artery stenosis and 
in renal hypoperfusion (see Figs. 18.1 and 18.19). Monitoring of renal 
function before and after initiation of therapy is essential and an expected 
rise in creatinine of about 20% is frequently observed.
Prescribing in renal disease
Many drugs and drug metabolites are excreted by the kidney and so the 
presence of renal impairment alters the required dose and frequency (p. 
31). Immunosuppressive medications such as tacrolimus or ciclosporin 
are metabolised by the cytochrome P450 system, hence drug interac-
tions need to be considered before prescribing other medications.
18.39  Common causes of renal allograft dysfunction
Time post transplant
Cause
Risk factors
Hours to days
Renal artery/vein thrombosis
Technically difcult surgery
Thrombophilia/SLE
Ureteric anastomotic leak
Small bladder/anuria pre-transplant
Delayed graft function (i.e. transplant does not start working 
immediately)
Prolonged cold ischaemia time*
Donation after circulatory death
Older, hypertensive donor with stroke as cause of death, high 
tacrolimus level
Hyperacute rejection
Pre-formed anti-HLA antibodies
HLA mismatch
Previous transplant
Weeks
Acute rejection (especially <3 months; can occur later with 
non-adherence/insufcient immunosuppression)
Pre-formed anti-HLA antibodies
HLA mismatch
Previous transplant
Months
BK virus nephropathy
Intensive immunosuppression
Ureteric stent use
Renal artery stenosis
Donor disease
Injury at organ retrieval
Years
Chronic allograft injury (often antibody-mediated)
Previous acute rejections
Non-adherence/insufcient immunosuppression
Any time
Tacrolimus/ciclosporin toxicity
High doses/serum levels
Concurrent use of drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 system
Sepsis (opportunistic and conventional)
Recurrence of disease:
Early (FSGS/MCGN/aHUS)
Later (IgA nephropathy/membranous glomerulonephritis)
Primary FSGS and MCGN
Previous transplant recurrence
*Time from organ retrieval in the donor until implantation into the recipient.
(aHUS = atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome; FSGS = focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; IgA = immunoglobulin A; MCGN = mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis; 
SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus)
18.40  Renal diseases in pregnancy
 Eclampsia: severe hypertension, encephalopathy and ts
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 Thrombotic microangiopathy: may be part of pre-eclampsia spectrum and 
can also occur post-partum (including thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/
haemolytic uraemic syndrome)
 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
 ‘HELLP’ syndrome: haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets 
(thrombotic microangiopathy with abnormal liver function)
18.41  Kidney disease in adolescence
 Adherence: young adults moving from parental supervision may become 
disengaged. There may also be reduced adherence to prophylactic and 
therapeutic treatment, including immunosuppressive medications, diet and uid 
restrictions and dialysis.
 Adverse events: there is an increased risk of transplant loss and other adverse 
events in young adults on renal replacement therapy.
 Management: joint transition clinics should be established with the paediatric 
team to facilitate transfer to adult specialist clinics.

[[p646]]
Infections of the urinary tract    599
18
Infections of the urinary tract
In health, bacterial colonisation is conned to the lower end of the urethra 
and the remainder of the urinary tract is sterile (see Ch. 6). The urinary 
tract can become infected with various bacteria but the most common 
is E. coli derived from the gastrointestinal tract. The most common pre-
senting problem is cystitis with urethritis (generally referred to as urinary 
tract infection (UTI)).
Urinary tract infection
UTI is a common disorder, accounting for 1%–3% of consultations in 
general medical practice. The prevalence of UTI in women is about 3% 
at the age of 20, increasing by about 1% in each subsequent decade. In 
males, UTI is uncommon, except in the rst year of life and in men over 
60, when it may complicate bladder outow obstruction.
Pathophysiology
Urine is an excellent culture medium for bacteria; in addition, the 
urothelium of susceptible persons may have more receptors, to which 
virulent strains of E. coli become adherent. In women, the ascent of 
organisms into the bladder is easier than in men; the urethra is shorter 
and the absence of bactericidal prostatic secretions may be relevant. 
Sexual intercourse may cause minor urethral trauma and transfer bac-
teria from the perineum into the bladder. Instrumentation of the blad-
der may also introduce organisms. Multiplication of organisms then 
depends on a number of factors, including the size of the inoculum and 
18.42  Mechanisms and examples of drug-induced renal disease/dysfunction
Mechanism
Drug or toxin
Comments
Haemodynamic
NSAIDs
Reduce renal blood ow due to inhibition of 
prostaglandin synthesis causing afferent arteriolar 
vasoconstriction
ACE inhibitors
Reduce efferent glomerular arteriolar tone, so 
especially problematic in the presence of renal artery 
stenosis and other causes of renal hypoperfusion 
(e.g. sepsis)
Radiographic contrast media
Multifactorial aetiology may include intense 
vasoconstriction
Acute tubular necrosis
Aminoglycosides, amphotericin
In most examples there is evidence of direct tubular 
toxicity but haemodynamic and other factors probably 
contribute
Paracetamol overdose
May occur with or without serious hepatotoxicity
Radiographic contrast media
Directly toxic to proximal tubular cells
Loss of tubular/collecting duct function
Lithium
Cisplatin
Aminoglycosides, amphotericin
Dose-related, partially reversible loss of concentrating 
ability
Occurs at lower exposures than cause acute tubular 
necrosis
Glomerulonephritis (immune-mediated)
Penicillamine, gold
Membranous nephropathy
Penicillamine, propylthiouracil, hydralazine
Crescentic or focal necrotising glomerulonephritis 
in association with ANCA and systemic small-vessel 
vasculitis
NSAIDs
Minimal change nephropathy, membranous 
nephropathy
Interstitial nephritis (immune-mediated)
NSAIDs, penicillins, proton pump inhibitors, many 
others
Acute interstitial nephritis
Interstitial nephritis (toxicity)
Lithium
As a consequence of acute toxicity
Chronic interstitial nephritis
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus
Papillary necrosis
Various NSAIDs
Ischaemic damage secondary to NSAID effects on 
renal blood ow
Tubular obstruction (crystal formation)
Aciclovir
Crystals of the drug form in tubules
Aciclovir is now more common than the original 
example of sulphonamides
Chemotherapy
Uric acid crystals form as a consequence of tumour 
lysis (typically, a rst-dose effect in haematological 
malignancy)
Nephrocalcinosis
Oral sodium phosphate-containing bowel cleansing 
agents
Precipitation of calcium phosphate occurring in 
1%–4% and exacerbated by volume depletion
Usually mild but damage can be irreversible
Retroperitoneal brosis
Ergolinic dopamine agonists (cabergoline),
Idiopathic retroperitoneal brosis is more common
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)

[[p647]]
600    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
virulence of the bacteria. Conditions that predispose to UTI are shown 
in Box 18.43
Clinical features
Typical features of cystitis and urethritis include:
 abrupt onset of frequency of micturition and urgency
 burning pain in the urethra during micturition (dysuria)
 suprapubic pain during and after voiding
 intense desire to pass more urine after micturition, due to spasm of 
the inamed bladder wall (strangury)
 urine that may appear cloudy and have an unpleasant odour
 non-visible or visible haematuria.
Systemic symptoms are usually slight or absent. However, infection 
in the lower urinary tract can spread to cause acute pyelonephritis. This 
is suggested by prominent systemic symptoms with fever, rigors, vomit-
ing, hypotension and loin pain, guarding or tenderness, and may be an 
indication for hospitalisation. Only about 30% of patients with acute pye-
lonephritis have associated symptoms of cystitis or urethritis. Prostatitis 
is suggested by perineal or suprapubic pain, pain on ejaculation and 
prostatic tenderness on rectal examination.
The differential diagnosis of lower urinary tract symptoms includes 
urethritis due to sexually transmitted disease, notably chlamydia (Ch. 
15) and urethritis associated with reactive arthritis (Ch. 26). Some 
patients, usually female, have symptoms suggestive of urethritis and 
cystitis but no bacteria are cultured from the urine (‘urethral syndrome’). 
Possible explanations include infection with organisms not readily cul-
tured by ordinary methods (such as Chlamydia and certain anaerobes), 
intermittent or low-count bacteriuria, reaction to toiletries or disinfect-
ants, symptoms related to sexual intercourse, or post-menopausal 
atrophic vaginitis.
The differential diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis includes pyonephro-
sis, acute appendicitis, diverticulitis, cholecystitis, salpingitis, ruptured 
ovarian cyst or ectopic pregnancy. In pyonephrosis due to an infected 
and obstructed upper urinary tract, patients may become extremely ill, 
with fever, leucocytosis and positive blood cultures. With a perinephric 
abscess, there is marked pain and tenderness, and often bulging of the 
loin on the affected side. Urinary symptoms may be absent in this situation 
and urine testing negative, containing neither pus cells nor organisms.
Investigations
An approach to investigation is shown in Box 18.44. In an otherwise 
healthy woman with a single lower urinary tract infection, urine culture 
prior to treatment is not mandatory. Investigation is necessary, however, 
in patients with recurrent infection or after failure of initial treatment, dur-
ing pregnancy, or in patients susceptible to serious infection, such as 
the immunocompromised, those with diabetes or an indwelling cathe-
ter, and older people (Box 18.45). The diagnosis can be made from the 
combination of typical clinical features and abnormalities on urinalysis. In 
symptomatic infections, urine dipstick tests may be positive for leuco-
cyte esterase released from neutrophils and nitrites, due to conversion 
of nitrates to nitrites by urinary pathogens. The absence of both nitrites 
and leucocyte esterase in the urine makes UTI unlikely. Interpretation of 
bacterial counts in the urine, and of what is a ‘signicant’ culture result, 
is based on probabilities. Urine taken by suprapubic aspiration should 
be sterile, so the presence of any organisms is signicant. If the patient 
has symptoms and there are neutrophils in the urine, a small number of 
organisms is signicant. In asymptomatic patients, more than 105 organ-
isms/mL is usually regarded as signicant (asymptomatic bacteriuria; see 
below).
Typical organisms causing UTI in the community include E. coli derived 
from the gastrointestinal tract (about 75% of infections), Proteus spp., 
Pseudomonas spp., streptococci and Staphylococcus epidermidis. In 
hospital, E. coli still predominates but Klebsiella and streptococci are 
becoming more common. Certain strains of E. coli have a particular pro-
pensity to invade the urinary tract.
Investigations to detect underlying predisposing factors for UTI are 
used selectively, most commonly in children, men or patients with recur-
rent infections (see Box 18.44).
Management
Antibiotics are recommended in all cases of proven UTI (Box 18.46), 
but not asymptomatic bacteriuria (see below). If urine culture has been 
18.43  Risk factors for urinary tract infection
Bladder outow obstruction
 Benign prostatic enlargement
 Prostate cancer
 Urethral stricture
Anatomical abnormalities
 Vesico-ureteric reux
 Uterine prolapse
 Bladder stula
Neurological problems
 Multiple sclerosis
 Spina bida
 Diabetic neuropathy
Foreign bodies
 Urethral or suprapubic catheter
 Ureteric stent
 Nephrostomy tube
 Urolithiasis
Loss of host defences
 Atrophic urethritis and vaginitis in 
post-menopausal women
18.44 Investigation of patients with urinary tract infection
All patients
 Dipstick* estimation of nitrite, leucocyte esterase and glucose
 Microscopy/cytometry of urine for white blood cells, organisms
 Urine culture
Infants, children, anyone with fever or complicated infection
 Full blood count; creatinine, eGFR
 Blood cultures
Pyelonephritis: men, children, women with recurrent infections
 Renal tract ultrasound or CT
 Pelvic examination in women, rectal examination in men
Continuing haematuria or other suspicion of bladder lesion
 Cystoscopy
*May substitute for microscopy and culture in simple uncomplicated infection.
18.45  Urinary infection in old age
 Prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria: rises with age. Among the most 
frail in institutional care it rises to 40% in women and 30% in men.
 Decision to treat: treating asymptomatic bacteriuria does not improve chronic 
incontinence or decrease mortality or morbidity from symptomatic urinary 
infection. It risks adverse effects from the antibiotic and the emergence of 
resistant organisms. Bacteriuria should not be treated in the absence of urinary 
symptoms.
 Source of infection: the urinary tract is the most frequent source of 
bacteraemia in older patients admitted to hospital. It may present with an acute 
confusional state.
 Incontinence: new or increased incontinence is a common presentation of UTI 
in older women.
 Treatment: post-menopausal women with acute lower urinary tract symptoms 
may require longer than 3 days’ therapy.

[[p648]]
Infections of the urinary tract    601
18
performed, treatment may be started while awaiting the result. For infec-
tion of the lower urinary tract, treatment for 3 days is the norm and is less 
likely to induce signicant alterations in bowel ora, including Clostridioides
(formerly Clostridium) difcile, than more prolonged therapy. Trimethoprim 
or nitrofurantoin is the usual rst choice of drug for initial treatment; how-
ever, between 10% and 40% of organisms causing UTI are resistant to 
trimethoprim, the lower rates being seen in community-based practice. 
Trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin are not recommended if eGFR is <30 mL/
min/1.73m2 due to reduced efcacy/increased risk of toxicity. In addition, 
trimethoprim may increase serum potassium and creatinine levels and lead 
to artefactual reductions in eGFR, which resolve once the drug is discon-
tinued. Quinolone antibiotics such as ciprooxacin and noroxacin, and 
cephalosporins such as cefalexin are also generally effective. Co-amoxiclav 
and amoxicillin are no longer recommended as blind therapy, as up to 30% 
of organisms are resistant. They may be used once cultures conrm that 
the organism is sensitive. Penicillins and cephalosporins are safe to use in 
pregnancy but trimethoprim, sulphonamides, quinolones and tetracyclines 
should be avoided.
In more severe infection, antibiotics should be continued for 7–14 
days. Seriously ill patients may require intravenous therapy with gen-
tamicin for a few days (see Box 18.46), later switching to an oral 
agent.
A uid intake of at least 2 L/day is usually recommended, although 
this is not based on evidence and may exacerbate symptoms of dysuria.
Persistent or recurrent UTI
If the causative organism persists on repeat culture despite treatment, 
or if there is reinfection with any organism after an interval, then an 
underlying cause is more likely to be present (see Box 18.43) and more 
detailed investigation is justied (see Box 18.44). In women, recurrent 
infections are common and investigation is justied only if infections 
are frequent (three or more per year) or unusually severe. Recurrent 
UTI, particularly in the presence of an underlying cause, may result in 
permanent renal damage, whereas uncomplicated infections rarely (if 
ever) do so (see chronic reux nephropathy below).
If an underlying cause cannot be treated, suppressive antibiotic ther-
apy (see Box 18.46) can be used to prevent recurrence and reduce the 
risk of sepsis and renal damage. Urine should be cultured at regular inter-
vals; a regimen of two or three antibiotics in sequence, rotating every 
6months, is often used in an attempt to reduce the emergence of resist-
ant organisms. Other simple measures may help to prevent recurrence 
(Box18.47). Trimethoprim or nitrofurantoin is recommended for proph-
ylaxis. Alternative antibiotics include cefalexin, co-amoxiclav and cipro-
oxacin, but these should be avoided if possible because of adverse 
effects and the generation of resistance.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria
This is dened as more than 105 organisms/mL in the urine of apparently 
healthy asymptomatic patients. Approximately 1% of children under the 
18.47  Prophylactic measures to be adopted by women with 
recurrent urinary infections
 Fluid intake of at least 2 L/day
 Regular complete emptying of bladder
 Good personal hygiene
 Emptying of bladder before and after sexual intercourse
 Cranberry juice/tablets and/or D-mannose may be effective
18.46  Antibiotic regimens for urinary tract infection in adults1
Scenario
Drug
Regimen
Duration
Comment
Cystitis
First choices
Trimethoprim
Nitrofurantoin
200 mg twice daily
50 mg 4 times daily
Second choices1
Cefalexin
Ciprooxacin
Pivmecillinam
250 mg 4 times daily
250 mg twice daily
400 mg 3 times daily
3 days
7–10 days in men
In pregnancy
Nitrofurantoin
Cefalexin
50 mg 4 times daily
250 mg 4 times daily
7 days
Avoid trimethoprim and quinolones during 
pregnancy; avoid nitrofurantoin at term
Prophylactic therapy
First choice
Second choice1
Trimethoprim
Nitrofurantoin
100 mg at night
50 mg at night
Continuous
Pyelonephritis
First choices
Cefalexin
Ciprooxacin
1 g 4 times daily
500 mg twice daily
14 days
7 days
Admit to hospital if no response within 24 hrs
Second choices
Gentamicin2
Cefuroxime
Adjust dose according to renal 
function and serum levels
750–1500 mg 3 times daily
14 days
Switch to appropriate oral agent as soon as 
possible
Epididymo-orchitis
Young men
Ciprooxacin
100 mg twice daily
14 days
Refer young men to genito-urinary department 
to check for Chlamydia trichomatis and Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae, which requires addition of a single 
dose of ceftriaxone 500 mg IM
Older men
Ciprooxacin
500 mg twice daily
Acute prostatitis
First choice
Ciprooxacin
500 mg twice daily
14 days
Second choice
Trimethoprim
200 mg twice daily
1In all cases, the choice of drug should take locally determined antibiotic resistance patterns into account. 2See Hartford nomogram (Fig. 6.18).
(IM = intramuscular)

[[p649]]
602    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
age of 1 year, 1% of schoolgirls, 0.03% of schoolboys and men, 3% of 
non-pregnant adult women and 5% of pregnant women have asympto-
matic bacteriuria. It is increasingly common in those aged over 65. There 
is no evidence that this condition causes renal scarring in adults who are 
not pregnant and have a normal urinary tract, and, in general, treatment 
is not indicated. Up to 30% will develop symptomatic infection within 
1 year, however. Treatment is required in infants, pregnant women and 
those with urinary tract abnormalities.
Catheter-related bacteriuria
In patients with a urinary catheter, bacteriuria increases the risk of Gram-
negative bacteraemia vefold. Bacteriuria is common, however, and 
almost universal during long-term catheterisation. Treatment is usually 
avoided in asymptomatic patients, as this may promote antibiotic resist-
ance. Careful sterile insertion technique is important and the catheter 
should be removed as soon as it is not required.
Acute pyelonephritis
The kidneys are infected in a minority of patients with UTI. Acute 
renal infection (pyelonephritis) presents as a classic triad of loin pain, 
fever and tenderness over the kidneys. The renal pelvis is inamed 
and small abscesses are often evident in the renal parenchyma 
(see Fig. 18.13C).
Renal infection is almost always caused by organisms ascending 
from the bladder, and the bacterial prole is the same as for lower uri-
nary tract infection (see above). Rarely, bacteraemia may give rise to 
renal or peri nephric abscesses, most commonly due to staphylococci. 
Predisposing factors may facilitate infection, such as cysts or renal 
scarring.
Rarely, acute pyelonephritis is associated with papillary necrosis. 
Fragments of renal papillary tissue are passed per urethra and can be 
identied histologically. They may cause ureteric obstruction and, if this 
occurs bilaterally or in a single kidney, it may lead to AKI. Predisposing 
factors include diabetes mellitus, chronic urinary obstruction, analgesic 
nephropathy and sickle-cell disease. A necrotising form of pyelonephri-
tis with gas formation, emphysematous pyelonephritis, is occasionally 
seen in patients with diabetes mellitus. Xanthogranulomatous pyelo-
nephritis is a chronic infection that can resemble renal cell cancer. It is 
usually associated with obstruction, is characterised by accumulation of 
foamy macrophages and generally requires nephrectomy. Infection of 
cysts in polycystic kidney disease (p. 579) requires prolonged antibiotic 
treatment.
Appropriate investigations are shown in Box 18.44 and manage-
ment is described above and in Box 18.46. Intravenous rehydration 
may be needed in severe cases. If complicated infection is suspected 
or response to treatment is not prompt, urine should be re-cultured and 
renal tract ultrasound performed to exclude urinary tract obstruction or 
a perinephric collection. If obstruction is present, drainage by a percu-
taneous nephrostomy or ureteric stent should be considered and the 
underlying cause treated.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis of the kidney and renal tract is secondary to tubercul osis 
elsewhere and is the result of blood-borne infection. Initially, lesions 
develop in the renal cortex; these may ulcerate into the renal pelvis 
and involve the ureters, bladder, epididymis, seminal vesicles and pros-
tate. Calcication in the kidney and stricture formation in the ureter are 
typical.
Clinical features may include symptoms of bladder involvement (fre-
quency, dysuria); haematuria (sometimes macroscopic); malaise, fever, 
night sweats, lassitude and weight loss; loin pain; associated genital dis-
ease; and chronic renal failure as a result of urinary tract obstruction or 
destruction of kidney tissue.
Neutrophils are present in the urine but routine urine culture may be 
negative (sterile pyuria). Special techniques of microscopy and culture 
may be required to identify tubercle bacilli and are most usefully per-
formed on early morning urine specimens. Bladder involvement should 
be assessed by cystoscopy. Radiology of the urinary tract and a chest 
X-ray to look for pulmonary tuberculosis are mandatory. Anti-tuberculous 
chemotherapy follows standard regimens (see Box 17.52). Surgery to 
relieve urinary tract obstruction or to remove a very severely infected 
kidney may be required.
Urolithiasis
Renal stone disease is common, affecting people of all countries and eth-
nic groups. In the UK, the prevalence is about 1.2%, with a lifetime risk of 
developing a renal stone by age 60–70 of approximately 7% in men. In some 
regions, the risk is higher, most notably in Saudi Arabia, where the lifetime 
risk of developing a renal stone in men aged 60–70 is just over 20%.
Pathophysiology
Urinary calculi consist of aggregates of crystals, usually containing calcium 
or phosphate in combination with small amounts of proteins and glycopro-
teins. The most common types are summarised in Box 18.48. A number 
of risk factors have been identied for renal stone formation (Box 18.49), 
however in developed countries most calculi occur in healthy young men, 
in whom investigations reveal no clear predisposing cause. Renal stones 
vary greatly in size, from sand-like particles anywhere in the urinary tract to 
large, round stones in the bladder. In developing countries, bladder stones 
are common, particularly in children, whereas in developed countries, renal 
stones are more common. Staghorn calculi ll the whole renal pelvis and 
branch into the calyces (Fig. 18.28); they are usually associated with infec-
tion and composed largely of struvite. Deposits of calcium may be pres-
ent throughout the renal parenchyma, giving rise to ne calcication within 
it (nephrocalcinosis), especially in patients with renal tubular acidosis, 
hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D intoxication and healed renal tuberculosis. 
Cortical nephrocalcinosis may occur in areas of cortical necrosis, typically 
after AKI in pregnancy or other severe AKI.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is highly variable. Many patients with renal stone 
disease are asymptomatic, whereas others present with pain, haematuria, 
UTI or urinary tract obstruction. A common presentation is with acute loin 
pain together with haematuria: a symptom complex termed renal or ure-
teric colic. This is most commonly caused by ureteric obstruction by a 
calculus but the same symptoms can occur in association with a sloughed 
renal papilla, tumour or blood clot. The patient is suddenly aware of pain in 
the loin, which radiates round the ank to the groin and often into the testis 
or labium, in the sensory distribution of the rst lumbar nerve. The pain 
steadily increases in intensity to reach a peak in a few minutes. The patient 
is restless and generally tries unsuccessfully to obtain relief by changing 
position or pacing the room. There is pallor, sweating and often vomiting. 
18.48  Composition of renal stones
Composition
Percentage
Calcium oxalate1
60%
Calcium phosphate
15%
Uric acid
10%
Magnesium ammonium 
phosphate (struvite)2
15%
Cystine and others
1%
1Stones often contain small amounts of calcium phosphate. 2Associated with urine infection.

[[p650]]
Urolithiasis    603
18
Frequency, dysuria and haematuria may occur. The intense pain usually 
subsides within 2 hours but may continue unabated for hours or days. It is 
usually constant during attacks, although slight uctuations in severity may 
be seen. Subsequent to an attack of renal colic, intermittent dull pain in the 
loin or back may persist for several hours.
Investigations
Patients with symptoms of renal colic should be investigated to deter-
mine whether or not a stone is present, to identify its location and to 
assess whether it is causing obstruction. About 90% of stones contain 
calcium and these can be visualised on plain abdominal X-ray (radio-
opaque stones) but non-contrast CTKUB (see Fig. 18.28) is the gold 
standard for diagnosing a stone within the kidney or ureter, as 99% of 
stones are visible using this method. Ultrasound can show stones within 
the kidney and dilatation of the renal pelvis and ureter if the stone is 
obstructing urine ow; it is useful in unstable patients or young women, 
in whom exposure to ionising radiation is particularly undesirable.
A minimum set of investigations (Box 18.50) should be performed in 
patients with a rst renal stone. The yield of more detailed investigation is 
low, and hence is usually reserved for those at high risk for further stone 
formation (see Box 18.50). Chemical analysis of stones is often helpful 
in dening the underlying cause. Since most stones pass spontaneously 
through the urinary tract, ideally the urine should be sieved for a few days 
after an episode of colic in order to collect the calculus for analysis.
Management
The immediate treatment of renal colic is with analgesia and antiemetics. 
Renal colic is often unbearably painful and demands powerful analgesia; 
a non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug (NSAID), e.g. diclofenac, given by 
any route is rst-line treatment and is often very effective. Intravenous 
paracetamol should be given if NSAIDs are contraindicated or are not 
giving sufcient pain relief. An opioid should then be considered, e.g. 
morphine (10–20 mg) or pethidine (100 mg) intramuscularly.
18.49  Predisposing factors for kidney stones
General factors
 Early onset of urolithiasis (especially children and adolescents)
 Familial stone formation
 Uric acid and urate-containing stones
 Infection stones
Diseases associated with stone formation
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Metabolic syndrome
 Nephrocalcinosis
 Ileal disease or resection (increases oxalate absorption and urinary excretion)
 Polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
 Increased levels of vitamin D
 Sarcoidosis
 Spinal cord injury, neurogenic bladder
Environmental and dietary causes
 Low urine volumes: high ambient temperatures, low uid intake
 Chronic lead and cadmium exposure
Congenital and inherited causes
 Cystinuria (type A, B and AB)
 Renal tubular acidosis type I (distal)
 Primary hyperoxaluria
 Xanthinuria
 Lesch–Nyhan syndrome
 Cystic brosis
Anatomical abnormalities associated with stone formation
 Medullary sponge kidney
 Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction
 Calyceal diverticulum
 Ureteric stricture
 Ureteric reux
 Horseshoe kidney
 Ureterocele
From EAU guidelines 2019 https://uroweb.org/guideline/urolithiasis/
Fig. 18.28 Non-contrast computed tomogram of the kidneys, ureters and 
bladder (CTKUB). Coronal view showing a staghorn calculus in the left kidney. 
Courtesy of Dr I. Mendichovszky, University of Cambridge.
18.50 Investigations for renal stones
Sample
Test
First stone
High-risk stone 
formers
Stone
Chemical 
composition1


Blood
Calcium


Uric acid


Urea and 
electrolytes


Bicarbonate


Parathyroid 
hormone2
()
Urine
Dipstick test 
for protein, 
blood, nitrites, 
leucocytes, 
urine pH


Amino acids

24-hr urine
Urea

Creatinine 
clearance

Sodium

Calcium

Oxalate

Uric acid

1The most valuable test if a stone can be obtained. 2Only if serum calcium or urinary calcium 
excretion is high.

[[p651]]
604    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Patients with renal or ureteric stones are at high risk of infection; if sur-
gery is contemplated, the patient should be covered with appropriate anti-
biotics. Urgent drainage of the affected collecting system with a ureteric 
stent or percutaneous nephrostomy is required if infection occurs in the 
stagnant urine proximal to the stone (pyonephrosis), and in patients with a 
solitary kidney who develop anuria in association with a stone in the ureter.
Asymptomatic stones less than 5 mm in diameter can be observed 
as they are not likely to affect quality of life and up to 90% may pass 
spontaneously without intervention. Conversely, only 10% of stones 
>6 mm in diameter pass spontaneously through the urinary tract and 
hence these may need an intervention. Stones can be fragmented by 
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), in which shock waves 
generated outside the body are focused on the stone, breaking it into 
small pieces that can pass easily down the ureter (Fig. 18.29). Surgical 
options are ureteroscopy and stone fragmentation, usually with a laser, 
or percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) and fragmentation with an 
ultrasonic disaggregator. The recommended treatment depends on 
stone size, location and patient characteristics. Figure 18.29 details 
options by stone location.
Measures to prevent further stone formation are guided by the inves-
tigations in Box 18.50. Some general principles apply to almost every 
patient with calcium-containing stones (Box 18.51), while other meas-
ures apply to specic stone types. Urate stones can be prevented by 
allopurinol but its role in patients with calcium stones and high urate 
excretion is uncertain. Stones formed in cystinuria can be reduced by 
penicillamine therapy. It may also be helpful to attempt to alkalinise the 
urine with sodium bicarbonate, as a high pH discourages urate and cys-
tine stone formation.
Diseases of the collecting system and 
ureters
Congenital abnormalities
Various congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (often abbre-
viated as CAKUT) can occur (Fig. 18.30); they affect more than 10% of 
infants. If not immediately lethal, they can lead to complications in later 
life, including obstructive nephropathy and CKD.
Single kidneys
About 1 in 500 infants is born with only one kidney. In isolation this is 
usually compatible with normal life, although it may be associated with 
other developmental abnormalities.
Medullary sponge kidney disease
Medullary sponge kidney is a congenital disorder characterised by mal-
formation of the papillary collecting ducts in the pericalyceal region of 
the renal pyramids. This leads to the formation of microscopic and large 
medullary cysts. Patients often present as adults with renal stones but 
the renal function usually remains adequate. The diagnosis is made by 
ultrasound, CT or intravenous urography, where contrast medium is seen 
to ll dilated or cystic tubules, which are sometimes calcied.
Ureterocele
A ureterocele occurs behind a pin-hole ureteric orice when the intra-
mural part of the ureter dilates and bulges into the bladder. It can become 
very large and cause lower urinary tract obstruction. Incision of the pin-
hole opening relieves the obstruction.
Ectopic ureters and duplex kidneys
Ectopic ureters occur with congenital duplication of one or both kidneys 
(duplex kidneys). Developmentally, the ureter has two main branches 
and, if this arrangement persists, the two ureters of the duplex kidneys 
may drain separately into the bladder. The lower pole moiety enters the 
bladder superiorly and laterally, while the upper pole moiety enters the 
bladder inferomedially to the lower pole moiety ureter or, more rarely, 
enters the vagina or seminal vesicle. The lower pole moiety has an inef-
fective valve mechanism, so that urine passes up the ureter on void-
ing (vesico-ureteric reux, see below), whereas the upper pole moiety is 
often associated with a ureterocele.
A
B
Renal pelvis or kidney
ESWL
PCNL
Ureteroscopy
Upper ureter
ESWL
Ureteroscopy
Bladder
Cystoscopic removal
or destruction
Percutaneous
endoscopic removal
or destruction
Open surgery removal
or destruction
Lower ureter
ESWL
Ureteroscopy
Fig. 18.29 Options for removal of urinary stones.
the urinary tract, shown in relation to the site of the stone. (PCNL = percutaneous nephrolithotomy) (A) Images  courtesy of  Mr Laurian Dragos, Addenbroke’s Hospital, Cambridge.

[[p652]]
Diseases of the collecting system and ureters    605
18
Megaureter
A megaureter is a ureter dilated to more than 5 mm in diameter. It may 
be obstructed or non-obstructed and reuxing or non-reuxing. Some 
50% of cases are asymptomatic but patients may present with pain, 
haematuria or infection. Radiographic and pressure/ow studies may be 
needed to determine whether there is obstruction to urine ow. Patients 
with symptoms or reduced renal function are treated. Ideally, treatment 
is expectant with antibiotic prophylaxis. Surgery (narrowing of the ure-
ter and/or reimplantation) may, however, be needed for recurrent symp-
toms, reduction of more than 10% in renal function or complications (i.e. 
stones).
Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction
Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction (PUJO) causes idiopathic hydrone-
phrosis and results from a functional obstruction at the junction of the 
ureter and renal pelvis. The abnormality is likely to be congenital and is 
often bilateral. It can be seen in very young children but gross hydro-
nephrosis may present at any age. The common presentation is ill-de-
ned renal pain or ache, exacerbated by drinking large volumes of liquid 
(Dietl’s crisis). Rarely, it is asymptomatic. The diagnosis is often sus-
pected after ultrasound or CT scan, and can be conrmed with a 99mTc-
MAG3 renogram followed by diuretic. In a PUJO, the MAG3 renogram 
shows a pathognomonic ‘rising curve’ as the radioisotope accumulates 
in the renal pelvis and still does not drain following the diuretic injection. 
Treatment is surgical excision of the pelvi-ureteric junction and reanas-
tomosis (pyeloplasty), which can now be performed laparoscopically or 
by robot-assisted surgery. Less invasive alternatives are also possible, 
including balloon dilatation and endoscopic pyelotomy, but are generally 
less effective.
Reux nephropathy
This condition, which was previously known as chronic pyelonephritis, 
is a specic type of chronic interstitial nephritis associated with vesico- 
ureteric reux (VUR) in early life and with the appearance of scars in the 
kidney, as demonstrated by various imaging techniques. About 12% of 
patients in Europe requiring treatment for ESRD may have this disorder 
but diagnostic criteria are imprecise.
Pathophysiology
Reux nephropathy is thought to be due to chronic reux of urine from the 
bladder into the ureters, in association with recurrent UTI in childhood. It was 
previously assumed that ascending infection was necessary for progressive 
renal damage in patients with VUR but there is evidence to suggest that 
renal scars can occur, even in the absence of infection. Furthermore, studies 
have found that efforts to surgically correct VUR or use prophylactic antibi-
otics to prevent the UTIs are ineffective in halting progression of the disease.
Susceptibility to VUR has a genetic component and may be associ-
ated with renal dysplasia and other congenital abnormalities of the uri-
nary tract. It can be connected with outow obstruction, usually caused 
by urethral valves, but usually occurs with an apparently normal bladder.
Clinical features
Usually, the renal scarring and dilatation are asymptomatic and the 
patient may present at any age with hypertension (sometimes severe), 
proteinuria or features of CKD. There may be no history of overt UTI. 
However, symptoms arising from the urinary tract may be present and 
include frequency of micturition, dysuria and aching lumbar pain. VUR 
may occur in children but diminishes as the child grows, and usually 
has disappeared by adulthood. Urinalysis often shows the presence 
of leucocytes and moderate proteinuria (usually <1 g/24 hrs) but these 
are not always present. The risk of renal stone formation is increased. A 
number of women rst present with hypertension and/or proteinuria in 
pregnancy. Children and adults with small or unilateral renal scars have a 
18.51  Measures to prevent calcium stone formation
Diet
Fluid
 At least 2 L output per day (intake 3–4 L): check with 24-hr urine collections
 Intake distributed throughout the day (especially before bed)
 Add fresh lemon juice to drinking water (high in citrate, which may prevent 
calcium binding to other stone components and thus prevents stone formation)
 Avoid carbonated drinks
Sodium
 Restrict intake
Protein
 Moderate, not high
Calcium
 Maintain normal calcium intake (calcium forms an insoluble salt with dietary 
oxalate, lowering oxalate absorption and excretion)
 Avoid calcium supplements separate from meals (increase calcium excretion 
without reducing oxalate excretion)
Oxalate
 Avoid foods that are rich in oxalate (spinach, rhubarb)
Drugs
Potassium citrate
 Can reduce the recurrence of calcium oxalate and calcium oxalate/calcium 
phosphate stones in adults
Thiazide diuretics
 Reduce calcium excretion
 Valuable in recurrent stone formers and hypercalciuria
Allopurinol
 If urate excretion high (unproven except for urate stones)
Avoid
 Vitamin D supplements (increase calcium absorption and excretion)
 Vitamin C supplementation (increases oxalate excretion)
Renal agenesis/
dysplasia
Ectopic kidney
Single kidney
PUJ obstruction
Horseshoe
kidney
Duplex ureter
Ectopic ureter
Megaureter
Ureterocele
Urethral valves
Vesico-ureteric
reflux
Fig. 18.30 Congenital abnormalities of the urinary tract. (PUJ = pelvi-ureteric 
junction)

[[p653]]
606    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
good prognosis, provided renal growth is normal. With signicant unilat-
eral scars there is usually compensatory hypertrophy of the contralateral 
kidney. In patients with more severe bilateral disease, prognosis is related 
to the severity of renal dysfunction, hypertension and proteinuria. If the 
serum creatinine is normal and hypertension and proteinuria are absent, 
then the long-term prognosis is usually good.
Investigations
Renal scarring can be detected by ultrasound but it has poor sensitiv-
ity and is only capable of detecting major defects and excluding signi-
cant obstruction. Radionuclide DMSA scans are more sensitive (see Fig. 
18.6), and serial imaging by MRI or CT may be useful in assessing pro-
gression. Abnormalities may be unilateral or bilateral and of any grade of 
severity. Gross scarring of the kidneys, commonly at the poles, is seen, 
with reduced kidney size and narrowing of the cortex and medulla. Renal 
scars may be juxtaposed to dilated calyces. In patients who develop 
heavy proteinuria and hypertension, renal biopsies show glomerulo-
megaly and focal glomerulosclerosis, probably as a secondary response 
to reduced nephron numbers. Radionuclide techniques can also be used 
to demonstrate VUR as a non-invasive alternative to micturating cys-
tourethrography (MCUG; the bladder is lled with contrast media through 
a urinary catheter and images are taken during and after micturition; 
Fig. 18.31). As surgical intervention for VUR has declined in popularity 
(see below), however, this type of imaging is used less often.
Management
Infection, if present, should be treated; if recurrent, it should be pre-
vented with prophylactic therapy, as described above in this chapter for 
UTI, although as mentioned above this does not prevent CKD. If recur-
rent pyelonephritis occurs in an abnormal kidney with minimal function, 
nephrectomy may be indicated. Occasionally, hypertension is cured by 
the removal of a diseased kidney when the disease is predominantly or 
entirely unilateral.
As most childhood reux tends to disappear spontaneously and 
trials have shown small or no benets from anti-reux surgery, such 
intervention is now less common. Severe reux may be managed by 
ureteric reimplantation or subtrigonal injection of Teon or polysaccharide 
(STING) beneath the ureteric orice.
Retroperitoneal brosis
Fibrosis of the retroperitoneal connective tissues may encircle and com-
press the ureter(s), causing obstruction. The brosis is most commonly 
idiopathic but can represent a reaction to infection, radiation or aortic 
aneurysm, or be caused by metastatic cancer. It is recognised as part of 
the spectrum of disorders associated with elevated IgG4 levels. Rarely, 
it can be associated with inammatory bowel disease. Patients usually 
present with ill-dened symptoms of ureteric obstruction. Typically, there 
is an acute phase response (high CRP and ESR, and polyclonal hyper-
gammaglobulinaemia). Imaging with CT or IVU shows ureteric obstruc-
tion with medial deviation of the ureters. Idiopathic retroperitoneal brosis 
may respond well to glucocorticoids (with a reduction in inammatory 
marker levels) but ureteric stenting is often necessary to relieve obstruc-
tion and preserve renal function. Failure to improve indicates the need 
for surgery (ureterolysis), both to relieve obstruction and to exclude 
malignancy.
Tumours of the kidney and urinary tract
Several malignant tumours can affect the kidney and urinary tract, includ-
ing renal cell cancer, upper urinary tract urothelial cancers, bladder can-
cer, prostate cancer and cancers of the testis and penis. The urogenital 
tract can also be affected by benign tumours and secondary tumour 
deposits, which can cause obstructive uropathy. Renal cell cancer and 
bladder cancer are described here, while prostate cancer and testicular 
tumours are covered later in this chapter.
Renal cell cancer
Renal cell cancer (RCC) is by far the most common malignant tumour of 
the kidney in adults, making up 2.5% of all adult cancers, with a prev-
alence of 16 cases per 100 000 population. It is twice as common in 
males. The peak incidence is between 65 and 75 years of age and it 
is uncommon before 40. RCCs of differing histological subtype arise 
from different parts of the nephron or collecting duct. Haemorrhage and 
necrosis give the cut surface a characteristic mixed golden-yellow and 
red appearance (Fig. 18.32B). Microscopically, clear cell RCCs are the 
most common histological subtype (85%), with papillary, chromophobe 
and collecting duct tumours comprising the majority of the remainder. 
In RCC, there is potentially spread along the renal vein and the inferior 
vena cava. Direct invasion of perinephric tissues is common. Lymphatic 
spread occurs to para-aortic nodes, while distant metastases (which 
may be solitary) most commonly develop in the lungs, bone and brain.
Clinical features
In 50% of patients, asymptomatic renal tumours are identied as an inci-
dental nding during imaging investigations carried out for other reasons. 
Among symptomatic patients, about 60% present with haematuria, 40% 
with loin pain and a few with a palpable mass. About 10% present with 
a triad of pain, haematuria and a mass; this usually represents advanced 
disease. RCC is one of the great mimics of medicine as patients may 
present with a remarkable range of systemic effects, including fever, raised 
ESR, polycythaemia, disorders of coagulation, hypercalcaemia, and 
abnormalities of plasma proteins and liver function tests. The patient may 
present with pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) or, rarely, with neuro pathy. 
Some of these systemic effects are caused by secretion of products by 
the tumour, such as renin, erythropoietin, parathyroid hormone-related 
protein (PTHrP) and gonadotrophins. The effects disappear when the 
tumour is removed but may reappear when metastases develop.
Investigations
Ultrasound is often the initial investigation and allows differentiation 
between solid tumour and simple renal cysts. If the results are suggestive 
of a tumour, contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and chest should be 
Fig. 18.31 Vesico-ureteric reux (grade IV) shown by micturating cystogram.
The bladder has been lled with contrast medium through a urinary catheter. After 
micturition, there was gross vesico-ureteric reux into widely distended ureters and 
pelvicalyceal systems. Courtesy of Dr A.P. Bayliss and Dr P. Thorpe, Aberdeen Royal 
Inrmary.

[[p654]]
Tumours of the kidney and urinary tract    607
18
performed for staging (Fig. 18.32A). For tumours with no evidence of met-
astatic spread and when the nature of the lesion is uncertain, ultrasound or 
CT-guided biopsy may be used to avoid nephrectomy for benign disease.
Management
Radical nephrectomy that includes the perirenal fascial envelope is the 
treatment of choice. Nephrectomy is commonly performed laparoscop-
ically, with equivalent outcomes to open surgery. Partial nephrectomy, 
which may be carried out by open but increasingly by minimally invasive 
robot-assisted or laparoscopic surgery, is recommended, where possi-
ble, for tumours of 7 cm or less, as there is a lower incidence of long-term 
cardiac- and renal-related morbidity. Patients at high operative risk who 
have small tumours may also be treated percutaneously by cryother-
apy or radiofrequency ablation. Active surveillance with serial imaging in 
those with renal masses <4 cm is a management option that should also 
be discussed with patients. Surgery may also play a role in the treatment 
of solitary metastases, since these can remain single for long periods and 
excision may be curative.
RCC is resistant to most chemotherapeutic agents. Tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs) such as sunitinib and pazopanib are the mainstay of 
treatment. Recently, T-cell checkpoint inhibitors such as PD-L1, PD-1 
and CTLA-4 inhibitors have been licensed for use as single agents or 
in combination (PD-L1/PD-1 with CTLA-4 inhibitor or TKI) as rst-line 
treatment options for metastatic RCC.
In previous years, patients who presented with distant metastases 
were treated with cytoreductive nephrectomy, in which nephrectomy 
was coupled with systemic cytokine treatment, since this was shown 
to improve survival as compared with either treatment in isolation. The 
benet of cytoreductive nephrectomy is less clear with TKIs and hence 
is used sparingly; the benet is unknown for T-cell checkpoint inhibitors.
Current survival data indicate that, if RCC is conned to the kidney, 
5-year survival is 75%, but this falls to 12% when there are distant 
metastases.
Urothelial tumours
Tumours arising from the transitional epithelium of the renal tract can 
affect the renal pelvis, ureter, bladder or urethra. They are rare under the 
age of 40, affect men 3–4 times more often than women, and account 
for about 3% of all malignant tumours. The bladder is by far the most 
frequently affected site. Although almost all tumours are urothelial cell 
cancer (previously known as transitional cell cancers), squamous cell 
cancer may occur in urothelium that has undergone metaplasia, usu-
ally following chronic inammation due to stones or schistosomiasis. The 
appearance of a urothelial cell cancer ranges from a delicate papillary 
structure with a relatively good prognosis to a solid ulcerating mass in 
more aggressive disease.
Pathophysiology
Risk factors include cigarette smoking and exposure to industrial carcin-
ogens such as aromatic amines, aniline dyes and aldehydes.
Clinical features
More than 80% of patients present with painless, visible haematuria. It 
should be assumed that such bleeding is from a tumour until proven oth-
erwise (p. 568). Tumours of the ureter or bladder may also cause symp-
toms of obstruction, depending on the site of involvement, and tumours 
of the bladder present with dysuria or storage symptoms. Physical exam-
ination is usually unremarkable, except in patients with very advanced 
disease, when bimanual examination may reveal a palpable mass.
Investigations
Cystoscopy (usually exible cystoscopy under a local anaesthetic) 
is used to evaluate the bladder in cases of haematuria or suspected 
bladder cancer. Imaging of the upper urinary tract (CT urogram is the 
gold standard but IVU combined with renal ultrasound is also accept-
able) is also important to rule out abnormalities of the kidney, ureters and 
renal pelvis in patients with haematuria. If a suspicious defect is seen on 
CT urography or IVU in the ureter or renal pelvis, a retrograde uretero-
pyelogram, ureteroscopy and biopsy are required. If evidence of a solid 
invasive urothelial tumour is found, CT of the abdomen, pelvis and chest 
should be performed to dene tumour stage.
Management
Most bladder tumours are low-grade, non-muscle-invasive lesions that 
can be successfully treated endoscopically by transurethral resection 
of the tumour. Intravesical chemotherapy with mitomycin C is usually 
administered as a one-off treatment post resection to prevent tumour 
recurrence, or may be given as a prolonged course to treat multiple 
low-grade bladder tumours. Patients with carcinoma in situ have a high 
risk of progression to invasive cancer. These patients often respond well 
to intravesical bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG) treatment but more rad-
ical treatment by cystectomy may be required if this is unsuccessful. 
Following initial treatment and endoscopic clearance of bladder tumours, 
regular check cystoscopies are required to look for evidence of recur-
rence. Patients with recurrences of non-muscle-invasive disease can 
usually be treated by further resection and diathermy, but if this is unsuc-
cessful, a cystectomy may be needed.
A
B
Fig. 18.32 Renal cell cancer. 
(A, B) Courtesy of Dr A.P. Bayliss and Dr P. Thorpe, 
Aberdeen Royal Inrmary

[[p655]]
608    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
The management of muscle-invasive bladder cancer involves radical 
cystectomy with urinary diversion into an incontinent ileal conduit or a 
continent catheterisable bowel pouch; the latter is usually reserved for 
patients under the age of 70 years.
The prognosis of bladder cancer depends on tumour stage and 
grade. In patients where the cancer has not invaded the bladder muscle 
at diagnosis, 5% of low-grade tumours and 50% of high-grade tumours 
progress to develop invasion of the bladder muscle. Overall, the 5-year 
survival for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer of either grade 
is 50%–70%.
Urothelial cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is usually treated by 
laparoscopic or open nephro-ureterectomy, but if the tumour is solitary 
and low-grade, it may be treated endoscopically.
Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is dened as any involuntary leakage of urine. It may 
occur in patients with a normal urinary tract, as the result of dementia 
or poor mobility, or transiently during an acute illness or hospitalisation, 
especially in older people (Box 18.52). The prevalence of any form of 
incontinence in all females is 25%–45%, with a concomitant socioeco-
nomic burden. Childbirth, hysterectomy, obesity, recurrent UTI, smoking, 
caffeine and constipation are risk factors for incontinence.
Pathophysiology
In the normal micturition cycle, urine accumulates in the bladder during 
the storage phase, the sphincter tone gradually increases, but there are 
no signicant changes in vesical pressure, detrusor pressure or intra-ab-
dominal pressure. During voiding, intravesical pressure increases as a 
result of detrusor contraction and the sphincter relaxes, allowing urine to 
ow from the bladder until it is empty. Clinical disorders associated with 
incontinence are connected with various abnormalities in this cycle and 
these are discussed in more detail below.
Stress incontinence
This occurs because passive bladder pressure exceeds the urethral pres-
sure, due either to poor pelvic oor support or a weak urethral sphincter. 
Usually there is an element of both these factors. Stress incontinence is 
very common in women and seen most frequently following childbirth. 
It is rare in men and usually follows surgery to the prostate. The pres-
entation is with incontinence during coughing, sneezing or exertion. In 
women, perineal inspection may reveal leakage of urine when the patient 
coughs.
Urge incontinence
This usually occurs because of detrusor over-activity, which produces 
an increased bladder pressure that overcomes the urethral sphincter. 
Urgency with or without incontinence may also be driven by a hypersen-
sitive bladder resulting from UTI or a bladder stone. Detrusor over-activity 
is usually idiopathic, other than in patients with neurological conditions 
such as spina bida or multiple sclerosis, in whom it is neurogenic. The 
incidence of urge incontinence increases with age, occurring in 10%–
15% of the population aged over 65 years and in approximately 50% of 
patients requiring nursing home care. It is more common in women, but 
is also seen in men with lower urinary tract obstruction and most often 
remits after the obstruction is relieved.
Continual incontinence
This is suggestive of a stula, usually between the bladder and vagina 
(vesicovaginal), or the ureter and vagina (ureterovaginal). It is most com-
mon following gynaecological surgery but is also seen in patients with 
gynaecological malignancy or post radiotherapy. In parts of the world 
where obstetric services are scarce, prolonged obstructed labour can 
be a common cause of vesicovaginal stulae. Continual incontinence 
may also be seen in infants with congenital ectopic ureters. Occasionally, 
stress incontinence is so severe that the patient leaks continuously.
Overow incontinence
This occurs when the bladder becomes chronically over-distended and 
may lead to AKI (high-pressure chronic urinary retention). It is most com-
monly seen in men with benign prostatic enlargement or bladder neck 
obstruction (see below) but may arise in either sex as a result of failure 
of the detrusor muscle (atonic bladder). The latter may be idiopathic but 
more commonly is the result of damage to the pelvic nerves, either from 
surgery (commonly, hysterectomy or rectal excision), trauma or infection, 
or from compression of the cauda equina by disc prolapse, trauma or 
tumour. Incontinence due to prostatic enlargement can be regarded as a 
type of overow incontinence.
Post-micturition dribble
This is very common in men, even in the relatively young. It is due to a 
small amount of urine becoming trapped in the U-bend of the bulbar ure-
thra, which leaks out when the patient moves. Post-micturition dribble 
is more pronounced if associated with a urethral diverticulum or urethral 
stricture. It may occur in women with a urethral diverticulum and may 
mimic stress incontinence.
Clinical assessment
Patients should be encouraged to keep a voiding diary, including the 
measured volume voided, frequency of voiding, a note of incontinence 
pad usage, precipitating factors and associated features, such as 
urgency, since this can be of diagnostic value. Structured questionnaires 
may help objectively quantify symptoms. The patient should be assessed 
for evidence of cognitive impairment and impaired mobility. A neurologi-
cal assessment should be performed to detect disorders such as multi-
ple sclerosis that may affect the nervous supply of the bladder, and the 
lumbar spine should be inspected for features of spina bida occulta. 
Perineal sensation and anal sphincter tone should be assessed. Rectal 
examination is needed to assess the prostate in men and to exclude fae-
cal impaction as a cause of incontinence. Genital examination should be 
done to identify phimosis or paraphimosis in men, and vaginal mucosal 
atrophy, cystoceles or rectoceles in women.
Investigations
Urinalysis and culture should be performed in all patients. Ultrasound 
examination can be helpful in identifying patients with overow incon-
tinence who have incomplete bladder emptying, as it may reveal a sig-
nicant amount of uid in the bladder (>100 mL) post-micturition. Urine 
ow rates and full urodynamic assessment by cystometrography may 
be required to diagnose the type of incontinence and are indicated in 
selected cases when the diagnosis is unclear on clinical grounds. A CT 
scan and cystoscopy should be performed in patients with continual 
incontinence who are suspected of having a stula. Imaging with MRI is 
indicated when a urethral diverticulum is suspected.
Management
Weight reduction in obese patients will aid resolution of incontinence. 
Women with stress incontinence respond well to physiotherapy. The 
18.52  Incontinence in old age
 Prevalence: urinary incontinence affects 15% of women and 10% of men aged 
over 65 years.
 Cause: incontinence may be transient and due to delirium, urinary infection, 
medication (such as diuretics), faecal impaction or restricted mobility, and these 
should be treated before embarking on further specic investigation. Routine 
urinalysis is rarely helpful and can be misleading.
 Detrusor over-activity: established incontinence in old age is most commonly 
due to detrusor over-activity, which may be caused by damage to central 
inhibitory centres or local detrusor muscle abnormalities.
 Catheterisation: poor manual dexterity or cognitive impairment may 
necessitate the help of a carer to assist with intermittent catheterisation.

[[p656]]
Prostate disease    609
18
mainstay of treatment for urge incontinence is bladder retraining, which 
involves teaching patients to hold more urine voluntarily in their bladder, 
assisted by anticholinergic medication.
Surgery may be required in patients who have severe daytime incon-
tinence despite conservative treatment. In neurologically intact patients, 
stress urinary incontinence in males is treated surgically by articial uri-
nary sphincter and in females by returning the urethra and bladder neck 
to their normal position with a pubovaginal sling or colposuspension. For 
urge incontinence intravesical injection of botulinum neurotoxin type A 
has excellent results. Further surgical options are sacral nerve stimula-
tion, detrusor myectomy or bladder augmentation.
The treatment of incontinence secondary to stula formation is sur-
gical. Patients with overow incontinence due to bladder obstruction 
should be treated surgically or with long-term catheterisation (intermit-
tent or continuous). Incontinence secondary to neurological diseases 
can be managed by intermittent self-catheterisation.
Prostate disease
Prostatitis
This results from inammation of the prostate gland. Acute or chronic 
bacterial prostatitis can be caused by infection with the same bacte-
ria that are associated with UTI (p. 599) but chronic prostatitis can also 
be ‘non-bacterial’, in which case no organism can be cultured from the 
urine. This is also known as chronic pelvic pain syndrome. Clinical fea-
tures of prostatitis include frequency, dysuria, painful ejaculation, perineal 
or groin pain, difculty passing urine and, in acute disease, considera-
ble systemic disturbance. The prostate is enlarged and tender. Bacterial 
prostatitis is conrmed by a positive culture from urine or from urethral 
discharge obtained after prostatic massage, and the treatment of choice 
is a quinolone antibiotic. A 6-week course of antibiotics is required (see 
Box 18.46). Treatment of chronic pelvic pain syndrome is challenging but 
some patients respond to a combination of α-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(α-blockers), NSAIDs and amitriptyline.
Benign prostatic enlargement
Benign prostatic enlargement (BPE) is extremely common. It has been 
estimated that about half of all men aged 80 years and over will have 
lower urinary tract symptoms associated with bladder outlet obstruction 
(BOO) due to BPE. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the histological 
abnormality that underlies BPE.
Pathophysiology
The prostate gland increases in volume by 2.4 cm3 per year on average 
from 40 years of age. The process begins in the periurethral (transitional) 
zone and involves both glandular and stromal tissue to a variable degree. 
The cause is unknown, although BPE does not occur in patients with 
hypogonadism, suggesting that hormonal factors may be important.
Clinical features
The primary symptoms of BPE arise because of difculty in voiding urine 
due to obstruction of the urethra by the prostate; these voiding symptoms 
consist of hesitancy, poor urinary ow and a sensation of incomplete 
emptying. Other storage symptoms include urinary frequency, urgency 
of micturition and urge incontinence, although these are not specic to 
BPE. Some patients present suddenly with acute urinary retention, when 
they are unable to micturate and develop a painful, distended bladder. 
This is often precipitated by excessive alcohol intake, constipation or 
prostatic infection. Severity of symptoms can be ascertained by using the 
International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) questionnaire (Box 18.53), 
which serves as a valuable starting point for assessment of the patient. 
Once a baseline value is established, any improvement or deterioration 
may be monitored on subsequent visits. The IPSS is combined with a 
quality-of-life score, in which patients are asked the following question: 
‘If you were to spend the rest of your life with your urinary condition the 
way it is now, how would you feel about that?’ Responses range from 0 
(delighted) to 6 (terrible).
Patients may also present with chronic urinary retention. Here, the 
bladder slowly distends due to inadequate emptying over a long period 
of time. Patients with chronic retention can also develop acute reten-
tion: so-called acute-on-chronic retention. This condition is character-
ised by pain-free bladder distension, which may result in hydroureter, 
hydronephrosis and renal failure (high-pressure chronic retention, of 
which nocturnal incontinence is a pathognomonic symptom). On digital 
rectal examination (DRE), patients with BPE have evidence of prostatic 
enlargement with a smooth prostate gland. Abdominal examination 
may also reveal evidence of bladder enlargement in patients with uri-
nary retention.
Investigations
The diagnosis of BOO secondary to BPE is a clinical one but ow rates 
can be accurately measured with a ow meter, post-void residual volume 
of urine assessed with ultrasound, and prostate volume by transrectal 
ultrasound scan (TRUS). Objective assessment of obstruction is possible 
by urodynamics and should be undertaken if symptoms are mixed, with 
both voiding and storage making underlying pathophysiology uncertain 
and/or ow test equivocal for obstruction (<150 ml voided or >10 mL/s). 
If symptoms or signs, such as a palpable bladder, nocturnal enuresis, 
recurrent UTI or a history of renal stones, are present, renal function 
18.53  The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS)
Symptom
Question
Example score
Straining
How often have you 
had to push or strain to 
begin urination?
1
Urgency
How often have you 
found it difcult to 
postpone urination?
2
Intermittency
How often have you 
found that you stopped 
and started again 
several times when you 
urinated?
1
Emptying
How often have you 
had a sensation of not 
emptying your bladder 
completely after you 
nished urinating?
3
Frequency
How often have you 
had to urinate again 
less than 2 hours after 
you nished urinating?
1
Weak stream
How often have you 
had a weak urinary 
stream?
2
Nocturia
How many times did 
you most typically get 
up to urinate from the 
time you went to bed at 
night until the time you 
got up in the morning?
1
Total score
11
0 = not at all; 1 = less than one-fth of the time; 2 = less than half 
the time; 3 = about half of the time; 4 = more than half of the time; 
5 = almost always.
A score of 0–7 indicates mild symptoms, 8–19 moderate symptoms  
and 20–35 severe symptoms. In the example shown, the patient  
had moderate symptoms.

[[p657]]
610    NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
should be assessed; if it is abnormal, screening should be conducted for 
evidence of obstructive uropathy by ultrasound examination.
Management
Patients who present with acute retention require urgent treatment and 
should undergo immediate catheterisation to relieve the obstruction. 
Those with mild to moderate symptoms can be treated by medication 
(Box 18.54). The rst-line treatments are α1A-adrenoceptor blockers 
such as tamsulosin, which reduce the tone of smooth muscle cells in 
the prostate and bladder neck, thereby reducing the obstruction. The 
5α-reductase inhibitors nasteride and dutasteride inhibit conversion of 
testosterone to the nine times more potent dihydrotestosterone in the 
prostate and so cause the prostate to reduce in size. This class of drugs 
is indicated in patients with an estimated prostate size of more than 
30 g or a prostate-specic antigen (PSA) level of more than 1.4 ng/mL. 
Patients who fail to respond to a single drug may be treated with a com-
bination of α-blockers and 5α-reductase inhibitors, since this is more ef-
cacious than either agent alone. Symptoms that are resistant to medical 
therapy require surgical treatment to remove some of the prostate tissue 
that is causing urethral obstruction. This is usually achieved by transure-
thral resection of the prostate (TURP) but enucleation of the prostate 
by holmium laser or vaporisation by potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP) 
laser (Greenlight laser) is equally effective and has potentially fewer com-
plications. Open surgery is very rarely needed, as very large glands can 
be treated with holmium laser treatment.
Prostate cancer
Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy in men in the UK, with 
an incidence of ~170 per 100 000 population. It is also common in north-
ern Europe and the United States (particularly in the African American 
population) but is rare in China and Japan. It is uncommon in India but 
the incidence is increasing. Prostate cancer rarely occurs before the age 
of 50 and has a mean age at presentation of 70 years.
Pathophysiology
Prostate cancers tend to arise within the peripheral zone of the prostate 
and almost all are adenocarcinomas. Metastatic spread to pelvic lymph 
nodes occurs early and metastases to bone, mainly the lumbar spine 
and pelvis, are common. Genetic factors are known to play an important 
role in pathogenesis, and multiple genetic loci have been found to predis-
pose to the disease in genome-wide association studies. A family history 
of prostate cancer greatly increases a man’s chances of developing the 
disease.
Clinical features
Most patients either are asymptomatic or present with lower urinary tract 
symptoms indistinguishable from BPE. On DRE the prostate may feel 
nodular and stony-hard, and the median sulcus may be lost, but up to 
45% of cancers are impalpable. Symptoms and signs due to metastases 
are much less common at the initial presentation but may include back 
pain, weight loss, anaemia and obstruction of the ureters.
Investigations
Measurement of PSA levels in a peripheral blood sample, together with 
DRE, is the cornerstone of diagnosis. Prior to a PSA test, men should be 
given careful counselling about the limitations of the test: namely, a normal 
level does not exclude prostate cancer, while a high value does not conrm 
the diagnosis but will open a discussion about biopsy and possible future 
treatments with potential side-effects (Box 18.55). The need for radical 
treatment of localised prostate cancer is still not established; radical treat-
ments have signicant potential morbidity and mortality, yet early identi-
cation and treatment of prostate cancer may save lives. Current evidence 
suggests that population-based screening for prostate cancer with PSA is 
of limited value, due in part to the fact that over 700 patients would need 
to be screened to cure 1 man of prostate cancer. Individuals suspected of 
having prostate cancer, based on an elevated PSA and/or abnormal DRE, 
should undergo transrectal or transperineal ultrasound-guided prostate 
biopsies. About 40% of patients with a serum PSA of 4.0–10 ng/mL or 
more will have prostate cancer on biopsy, although 25% of patients with a 
PSA of less than 4 ng/mL may also have prostate cancer. Occasionally, a 
small focus of tumour is found incidentally in patients undergoing TURP for 
benign hyperplasia. If the diagnosis of prostate cancer is conrmed, stag-
ing should be performed by pelvic MRI to assess the presence and extent 
of local involvement. An isotope bone scan should be carried out if distant 
metastases are suspected (rare if the PSA is below 20 ng/mL); very high 
levels of serum PSA (>100 ng/mL) almost always indicate distant bone 
metastases. Following diagnosis, serial assessment of PSA levels is useful 
for monitoring response to treatment and disease progression.
Management
Tumour conned to the prostate is potentially curable by radical pros-
tatectomy, radical radiotherapy or brachytherapy (implantation of 
small radioactive particles into the prostate). These options should be 
considered only in patients with more than 10 years’ life expectancy. 
Patients who are found to have small-volume, low-grade disease do not 
appear to require specic treatment but should be followed up period-
ically with PSA testing, DRE and a schedule of biopsies; this is known 
as active surveillance. Prostate cancer, like breast cancer, is sensitive 
to steroid hormones; metastatic prostate cancer is treated by andro-
gen depletion, involving either surgery (orchidectomy) or, more com-
monly, androgen-suppressing drugs. Androgen receptor blockers, such 
as bicalutamide or cyproterone acetate, may also prevent tumour cell 
growth. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues, such 
as goserelin, continuously occupy pituitary receptors, preventing them 
from responding to the GnRH pulses that normally stimulate luteinising 
hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) release. This ini-
tially causes an increase in testosterone before producing a prolonged 
reduction, and for this reason the initial dose must be covered with an 
androgen receptor blocker to prevent a tumour are.
A small proportion of patients fail to respond to endocrine treatment. A 
larger number respond for a year or two but then the disease progresses. 
18.54  Treatment for benign prostatic enlargement
Medical
 Prostate <30 g: α-blockers
 Prostate > 30 g: 5α-reductase inhibitors ± α-blockers
Surgical
 Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)
 Laser enucleation
 Laser vaporisation
 Open prostatectomy
18.55  Advantages and disadvantages of prostate-specic 
antigen (PSA) testing in order to identify men with prostate 
cancer
Advantages
 Identication of prostate cancer at a treatable stage, which otherwise may not 
have been identied*
Disadvantages
 High false-positive rate: 50%–60% of men with an elevated PSA will not have 
prostate cancer
 High false-negative rate: 25% of men with a normal PSA have prostate cancer
 Leads to further invasive tests (biopsy) with morbidity (e.g. sepsis or bleeding)
 May lead to diagnosis of prostate cancer, which is often over-treated by surgery 
or radiotherapy with associated side-effects (e.g. impotence or incontinence)
 If PSA is elevated but biopsy is normal, there is a potential need for further 
testing and associated anxiety
*The advantages of identifying prostate cancer earlier than would be the case if the man 
developed symptomatic disease must be considered against the limitations of PSA testing.

[[p658]]
18
Further information    611
Chemotherapy with docetaxel can then be effective and provide a mod-
est (around 3 months) survival advantage. Newer hormonal agents such 
as enzalutamide and abiraterone acetate also provide some survival ben-
et. There is also a role for initial prostate radiotherapy in those with low 
volume metastatic prostate cancer. Radiotherapy is useful for localised 
bone pain but the basis of treatment remains pain control by analgesia 
(p. 145). Provided that patients do not die of another cause, the 10-year 
survival rate of patients with tumours localised to the prostate is 95%, 
but if metastases are present, this falls to 10%. Life expectancy is not 
reduced in patients with small foci of tumour.
Testicular tumours
Testicular tumours are uncommon, with a prevalence of 5 cases per 
100 000 population. They occur mainly in young men aged between 20 
and 40 years. They often secrete α-fetoprotein (AFP) and β-human cho-
rionic gonadotrophin (β-hCG), which are useful biochemical markers for 
both diagnosis and prognosis. Seminoma and non-seminomatous germ 
cell tumours (NSGCT) account for ~85% of all tumours of the testis. 
Leydig cell tumours are less common.
Seminomas arise from seminiferous tubules and represent a relatively 
low-grade malignancy. Metastases can occur through lymphatic spread, 
however, and typically involve the lungs.
NSGCTs arise from primitive germinal cells and tend to occur at a 
younger age than seminomas. They may contain cartilage, bone, mus-
cle, fat and a variety of other tissues, and are classied according to the 
degree of differentiation. Well-differentiated tumours are the least aggres-
sive; at the other extreme, trophoblastic teratoma is highly malignant. 
Occasionally, teratoma and seminoma occur together.
Leydig cell tumours are usually small and benign but secrete oestro-
gens, leading to presentation with gynaecomastia.
Clinical features and investigations
The common presentation is incidental discovery of a painless testicular 
lump, although some patients complain of a testicular ache.
All suspicious scrotal lumps should be imaged by ultrasound. Serum 
levels of AFP and β-hCG are elevated in extensive disease. Oestradiol 
may be elevated, suppressing LH, FSH and testosterone. Accurate stag-
ing is based on CT of the lungs, liver and retroperitoneal area.
Management and prognosis
The primary treatment is surgical inguinal orchidectomy. Subsequent 
adjuvant treatment depends on the histological type and stage. Adjuvant 
chemotherapy with carboplatin is the treatment of choice for early-stage 
but high-risk seminoma. NSGCTs conned to the testes may be man-
aged conservatively, but more advanced cancers are treated with 
chemotherapy, usually the combination of bleomycin, etoposide and 
cisplatin. Follow-up is by CT and assessment of LDH, AFP and β-hCG. 
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection is performed for residual or recur-
rent nodal masses.
The 5-year survival rate for patients with seminoma is 90%–95%. For 
NSGCT, the 5-year survival varies between 60% and 95%, depending on 
tumour type, stage and volume.
Erectile dysfunction
Causes of erectile failure are shown in Box 18.56. Vascular, neuropathic 
and psychological causes are most common. Exclusion of previously 
unrecognised cardiovascular disease is important in men presenting with 
erectile dysfunction. With the exception of diabetes mellitus, endocrine 
causes are relatively uncommon and are characterised by loss of libido, 
as well as erectile dysfunction. Erectile dysfunction and reduced libido 
occur in over 50% of men with advanced CKD or those on dialysis, and 
is a markedly under-diagnosed problem. It is important to discuss mat-
ters frankly with the patient, and to establish whether there are associ-
ated features of hypogonadism and if erections occur at any other time. If 
the patient has erections on wakening, vascular and neuropathic causes 
are much less likely and a psychological cause should be suspected.
Investigations
Blood should be taken for glucose, lipids, prolactin, testosterone, LH 
and FSH. A number of further tests are available but are rarely employed 
because they do not usually inuence management. These include noct-
urnal tumescence monitoring (using a plethysmograph placed around 
the shaft of the penis overnight) to establish whether blood supply and 
nerve function are sufcient to allow erections to occur during sleep; 
 intracavernosal injection of prostaglandin E1 to test the adequacy of 
blood supply; and internal pudendal artery angiography.
Management
First-line therapy is usually with oral phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibi-
tors, such as sildenal, which elevate cyclic guanosine monophosphate 
(cGMP) levels in vascular smooth muscle cells of the corpus caverno-
sum, causing vasodilatation and penile erection. Co-administration of 
these drugs with nitric oxide donors, such as glycerol trinitrate, is con-
traindicated because of the risk of severe hypotension. Other treatments 
for impotence include self-administered intracavernosal injection or ure-
thral administration of prostaglandin E1; vacuum devices that achieve 
an erection maintained by a tourniquet around the base of the penis; 
and prosthetic implants, either of a xed rod or an inatable reservoir. 
Psychotherapy involving the patient and sexual partner may be helpful 
for psychological problems. Erectile dysfunction associated with periph-
eral neuropathy and vascular disease is difcult to treat. If hypogonadism 
is detected, it should be managed as described on page 670.
Further information
Websites
edren.org Renal Unit, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh; information about individual 
diseases, protocols for immediate in-hospital management and more
edrep.org/resources Educational resources
nephjc.com Online journal club, blog and resource for those interested in 
nephrology
ukidney.com Educational resource with calculators, case presentations, videos 
and seminal papers
renalfellow.org Educational blog written by renal trainees for trainees
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg182 National Institute of Health and Care Excellence  
CKD Guidelines
uroweb.org/guidelines European Association of Urology guidelines; current 
European guidelines on the management of all common urological conditions
18.56  Causes of erectile dysfunction
With reduced libido
 Hypogonadism
 Depression
With intact libido
 Psychological problems, including anxiety
 Vascular insufciency (atheroma)
 Neuropathic causes (diabetes mellitus, alcohol excess, multiple sclerosis)
 Drugs (β-blockers, thiazide diuretics)

[[p659]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p660]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 18.1. 
 A previously well 5-year-old girl presents with leg and peri-
orbital oedema and is found to have 4+ proteinuria on urine 
dipstick testing. Her renal function is normal. She has no family 
history of note. Her initial management should involve:
 A. 
A kidney biopsy
 B. 
No kidney biopsy but treat initially with corticosteroids
 C. 
Prophylactic antibiotics
 D. 
 No kidney biopsy but treat initially with 
cyclophosphamide
 E. 
An ACE inhibitor
Answer: B.
This child has nephrotic syndrome so this is very likely to be Minimal 
Change Disease, such that a biopsy is usually not performed but treat-
ment is commenced with corticosteroids. A biopsy is only considered in 
a child with nephrotic syndrome if they fail to respond adequately to cor-
ticosteroids. Prophylactic antibiotics are sometime used in children with 
reux nephropathy and recurrent UTIs but are not indicated in nephrotic 
syndrome. The proteinuria should resolve, often very quickly, with corti-
costeroids so ACE inhibition is not warranted.
 18.2. 
 The following are valid therapeutic interventions for renal bone 
disease except:
 A. 
Activated vitamin D supplementation
 B. 
Parathyroidectomy
 C. 
 Injections of recombinant human parathyroid hormone 
(PTH)
 D. 
Dietary phosphate restriction
 E. 
 Calcimimetic drugs (e.g. cinacalcet) which bind the 
calcium-sensing receptor on the parathyroid gland.
Answer: C.
Renal bone disease is caused by decreased excretion of phos-
phate and decreased activation of vitamin D (i.e. impaired conversion 
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD in the kidney). These 
events, as well a low calcium levels caused by low vitamin D activation, 
directly stimulate the parathyroid glands to produce PTH in an effort to 
correct the low calcium and high phosphate. Therefore, interventions 
such as activated vitamin D supplementation and dietary phosphate 
restriction will help. Reducing PTH levels either medically (calcimimetics) 
or surgically may be needed in resistant cases. Administering PTH will 
obviously not help.
 18.3. 
 A 64-year-old man presents with fever and shortness of 
breath. He has a history of type 2 diabetes, hypertension and 
chronic kidney disease and is prescribed lisinopril, amlodipine, 
metformin and simvastatin. Observations show: SaO2 86% on 
FiO2 35%, pulse 130 beats/min, BP 142/68 mmHg. He tests 
positive for SARS-CoV-2 and his condition deteriorates, and his 
increasing oxygen requirements necessitate his transfer to ICU 
for ventilation. He develops anuria and requires dialysis. What is 
the most likely cause of his acute decline in kidney function?
 A. 
Acute tubular necrosis
 B. 
Metformin
 C. 
Obstructive nephropathy
 D. 
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis
 E. 
Pre-renal failure
Answer: A.
The tubular region of the kidneys are most susceptible to injury due 
to the relative hypoxia at baseline in the medulla and the high oxygen 
demand of the tubules. Intercurrent illness may cause AKI by promoting 
systemic hypoxia or reduced renal perfusion. SARS-CoV-2 can cause a 
number of kidney problems, including proteinuria, microthrombi and ATN 
through hypoxia or direct viral infection.
Metformin should be discontinued in AKI, however this is due to the 
risk of accumulation of metformin leading to a lactic acidosis and met-
formin per se does not cause kidney injury.
Obstructive nephropathy is a possibility given this man’s age and the 
fact that he has developed anuria, but is much less likely in this context.
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis typically occurs after the infection 
and is less common with viral infections.
While there may have been an element of pre-renal failure earlier in his 
illness, his blood pressure is now adequate and the anuria implies that he 
has developed ATN. Hence, further uid resuscitation is unlikely to result 
in recovery of renal function, and he will need dialysis support until his 
condition improves and his necrotic tubules regenerate. Unfortunately, 
the severity of his disease is consistent with a poor prognosis.
 18.4. 
 A 62-year-old man presents with shortness of breath which 
came on suddenly during the night. He has noticed a wheeze, 
but no cough or sputum. He has end-stage kidney disease 
due to diabetic nephropathy, he is anuric and has been on 
haemodialysis for 2 years and is due his regular dialysis 
session the next day. His observations are: temp 37.6°C, SaO2
88% on FiO2 35%, pulse 120 bpm, BP 178/100 mmHg. What 
is the most likely cause of his shortness of breath?
 A. 
Acidosis due to renal failure
 B. 
Exacerbation of obstructive airways disease
 C. 
Pulmonary embolus
 D. 
Pulmonary oedema
 E. 
Renal anaemia
Answer: D.
This is a classical presentation, where a patient with anuric end-stage 
kidney disease on haemodialysis accumulates uid between dialysis 
sessions and develops pulmonary oedema, with paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnoea prior to their next haemodialysis session.
While renal anaemia and acidosis can cause shortness of breath, they 
do not typically cause hypoxia. An exacerbation of obstructive airways 
disease is possible, given the wheeze, but there is no history of obstruc-
tive airways disease and a wheeze can also be present in pulmonary 
oedema.
Pulmonary embolus is also a cause of acute shortness of breath, but 
would be less likely than pulmonary oedema in this context.
 18.5. 
 A 66-year-old woman who smokes 15 cigarettes per day 
presents with painful visible haematuria which persists despite 
treatment with two courses of oral antibiotics. What is the 
optimal next management step?
 A. 
A course of intravenous antibiotics
 B. 
Rigid cystoscopy under general anaesthetic
 C. 
Flexible cystoscopy and upper tract imaging
 D. 
Urine culture and CT urogram
 E. 
Ureteroscopy
Answer: C.
Visible haematuria is a red ag symptom and should be investigated. 
Although the symptom may be due to a urinary tract infection, repeated 
courses of antibiotics should not be given, rather urgent referral to a 
urologist should occur. The urology department will likely have a hae-
maturia clinic where the patient can be investigated urgently with exible 

[[p661]]
cystoscopy (under local anaesthetic) to evaluate for intravesical lesions 
and upper tract imaging (ultrasound or CT urogram) to evaluate the 
upper urinary tracts.
 18.6. 
 An otherwise t and well 69-year-old man with a 6 cm biopsy 
proven clear cell renal cell cancer and associated bilateral 
lung (largest lesion 4 cm diameter), bone and pancreatic 
metastases is best treated with which of the following 
treatments?
 A. 
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor
 B. 
Immediate cytoreductive nephrectomy
 C. 
Nephrectomy and metastatectomies
 D. 
Platinum based chemotherapy
 E. 
Anti-androgen therapy
Answer: A.
This is a case of widespread metastatic clear cell renal cell cancer. 
Recommended treatment is with systemic therapy, of which there are 
many options: tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), T-cell checkpoint inhib-
itors, mTOR inhibitors or combination of TKIs with T-cell checkpoint 
inhibitors. Immediate cytoreductive nephrectomy is not recommended 
as there is no survival advantage over systemic therapy and may never 
be recommended unless there is a dramatic response to the metastatic 
disease burden. Multiple metastatectomies would be very morbid and 
very unlikely to be curative. Anti-androgen therapy is used in prostate 
cancer and platinum-based chemotherapy in urothelial cancers.

[[p662]]
19
A Mather
DR Sullivan
E Miller-Hodges
Clinical examination in biochemical and metabolic disorders 614
Biochemical investigations 616
Water and electrolyte homeostasis 617
Sodium homeostasis 617
Functional anatomy and physiology 617
Presenting problems in sodium balance 619
Water homeostasis 623
Functional anatomy and physiology 623
Presenting problems in regulation of osmolality 624
Potassium homeostasis 627
Functional anatomy and physiology 627
Presenting problems in potassium homeostasis 627
Acid–base homeostasis 630
Functional anatomy and physiology 630
Presenting problems in acid–base balance 631
Calcium homeostasis 633
Magnesium homeostasis 633
Functional anatomy and physiology 633
Presenting problems in magnesium homeostasis 634
Phosphate homeostasis 634
Functional anatomy and physiology 634
Presenting problems in phosphate homeostasis 634
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism 635
Functional anatomy and physiology 635
Lipids and cardiovascular disease 637
Investigations 637
Presenting problems in lipid metabolism 637
Principles of management 639
Inherited metabolic disorders 642
Disorders of amino acid metabolism 642
Disorders of the urea cycle 643
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism 643
Glycogen storage diseases 643
Disorders of mitochondrial energy metabolism 643
Lysosomal storage disorders 643
The porphyrias 643
Clinical biochemistry and 
metabolic medicine

[[p663]]
614    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Clinical examination in biochemical and metabolic disorders
Many biochemical and metabolic disorders are clinically silent or present with non-specic manifestations, and are rst detected by laboratory testing. 
Several abnormalities can be picked up by history and physical examination, however, as summarised below.
Insets: (ankle oedema) From Huang H-W, Wong L-S, Lee C-H. Sarcoidosis with bilateral leg lymphedema as the initial presentation: a review of the 
literature. Dermatologica Sinica 2016; 34:29–32; (raised jugular venous pressure) Newby D, Grubb N. Cardiology: an illustrated colour text. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2005; (cherry-red spots) Vieira de Rezende Pinto WB, Sgobbi de Souza PV, Pedroso JL, etal. Variable phenotype and 
severity of sialidosis expressed in two siblings presenting with ataxia and macular cherry-red spots. J Clin Neurosci 2013; 20:1327–1328; (photosensitive 
rash) Ferri FF. Ferri’s Color atlas and text of clinical medicine. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2009; courtesy of the Institute of Dermatology, London
Hyperlipidaemia
Xanthelasma
Corneal arcus
Gangliosidosis
Cherry-red spot fundus
Porphyria
Photosensitive rash
Hyperlipidaemia
Tendon xanthoma
Eruptive xanthoma
Observation
 General appearance
 Skin turgor
 Oedema
 Rash
 Eyes
Hypervolaemia
Raised jugular venous
pressure
Ankle oedema
Hypovolaemia
Low blood pressure
Rapid pulse
Acute hypernatraemia
Dizziness
Delirium
Weakness
Acute hyponatraemia
Cerebral oedema
Vomiting
Somnolence
Seizures
Coma
Glycogen storage disease
Hepatomegaly
Abdominal pain
Extra heart sounds
Lung crepitations
B
C
M
N
O
A
J
K
L
I
F
D
E
G
H
H
G
J
M
N
O
F
C
B
A
I
I
K
L
E
D

[[p664]]
Clinical examination in biochemical and metabolic disorders    615
19
Assessment of volume status and electrolyte disturbances
Check blood pressure, pulse and jugular venous pressure
Check for dry mouth
Check for sacral and ankle oedema
Examine chest for pleural
effusion
Examine abdomen for
hepatomegaly and ascites
Check bloods
Review results
Check ECG
Hypokalaemia
Hyperkalaemia
Check skin turgor
Check for signs of hyperlipidaemia
Check skin and tendons for xanthomas
Check eyes for arcus and xanthelasma
Examine for signs of multi-system disease
Check for peripheral neuropathy
and for muscle tenderness
or weakness
Check for cardiomegaly
and arrhythmias
Check for
hepato-splenomegaly
Check bloods and urine for
metabolic biochemistry
Peaked
T wave
U wave
ST
depression

[[p665]]
616    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
There is a worldwide trend towards increased use of laboratory-based 
diagnostic investigations, and biochemical investigations in particular. In 
the health-care systems of higher-income countries, it has been esti-
mated that 60%–70% of all critical decisions taken in regard to patients, 
and over 90% of data stored in electronic medical records systems, 
involve a laboratory service or result.
This chapter covers a diverse group of disorders affecting adults that 
are not considered elsewhere in this book, whose primary manifes-
tation is in abnormalities of biochemistry laboratory results, or whose 
underlying pathophysiology involves disturbance in specic biochemical 
pathways.
Biochemical investigations
There are three broad reasons why a clinician may request a biochemical 
laboratory investigation:
 to screen an asymptomatic subject for the presence of disease
 to assist in diagnosis of a patient’s presenting complaint
 to monitor changes in test results, as a marker of disease progres-
sion or response to treatment.
Contemporary medical practice has become increasingly reliant on 
laboratory investigation and, in particular, on biochemical investigation. 
This has been associated with extraordinary improvements in the analyt-
ical capacity and speed of laboratory instrumentation and the following 
operational trends:
 Large central biochemistry laboratories feature extensive use of 
automation and information technology. Specimens are trans-
ported from clinical areas to the laboratory using high-speed 
transport systems (such as pneumatic tubes) and identied with 
machine-readable labels (such as bar codes). Laboratory instru-
ments have been miniaturised and integrated with robot transport 
systems to enable multiple rapid analyses of a single sample. 
Statistical process control techniques are used to assure the quality 
of analytical results, and increasingly to monitor other aspects of the 
laboratory, such as the time taken to complete the analysis (‘turn-
around time’).
 Point-of-care testing (POCT) brings selected laboratory analytical 
systems into clinical areas, to the patient’s bedside or even con-
nected to an individual patient. These systems allow the clinician to 
receive results almost instantaneously for immediate treatment of 
the patient, although often with lesser precision or at greater cost 
than using a central laboratory.
 The diversity of analyses has widened considerably with the intro-
duction of many techniques borrowed from the chemical or other 
industries (Box 19.1).
Good medical practice involves the appropriate ordering of laboratory 
investigations and correct interpretation of test results (Box 19.2). The 
key principles, including the concepts of sensitivity and specicity, are 
described in Chapter 1. Reference intervals for laboratory results are 
provided in Chapter 35. Many laboratory investigations can be subject 
to variability arising from whether the sample is being taken in the fed 
or fasted state; the timing of sample collection, in relation to diurnal 
variation of analytes; dosage intervals for therapeutic drug monitoring; 
sample type, such as serum, plasma; use of anticoagulants, such as 
EDTA, which can interfere with some assays; or artefacts, such as tak-
ing a venous sample proximal to the site of an intravenous infusion. It 
is therefore important for clinical and laboratory staff to communicate 
effectively and for clinicians to follow local recommendations concerning 
collection and transport of samples in the appropriate container and 
with appropriate labelling.
19.1  Range of analytical modalities used in the clinical biochemistry laboratory
Analytical modality
Analyte
Typical applications
Ion-selective electrodes
Blood gases, electrolytes (Na, K, Cl)
Point-of-care testing (POCT)
High-throughput analysers
Colorimetric chemical reaction or  
coupled enzymatic reaction
Simple mass or concentration measurement 
(creatinine, phosphate)
Simple enzyme activity
High-throughput analysers
Ligand assay (usually immunoassay)
Specic proteins
Hormones
Drugs
Increasingly available for POCT or high-throughput 
analysers
Chromatography: gas chromatography  
(GC), high-performance liquid  
chromatography (HPLC), thin-layer  
chromatography (TLC)
Organic compounds
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM)
Mass spectroscopy (MS)
Drugs
Vitamins
Organic compounds
Screening for drugs of misuse
Vitamins
Biochemical metabolites
Spectrophotometry, turbidimetry,  
nephelometry, uorimetry
Haemoglobin derivatives
Specic proteins
Immunoglobulins
Xanthochromia
Lipoproteins
Paraproteins
Electrophoresis
Proteins
Some enzymes
Paraproteins
Isoenzyme analysis
Atomic absorption (AA)
Inductively coupled plasma/mass  
spectroscopy (ICP-MS)
Trace elements and metals
Quantitation of heavy metals
Molecular diagnostics
Nucleic acid quantication and/or sequence
Inherited and somatic cell variants (Ch. 3)
Genetic polymorphisms (Ch. 3)
Variations in rates of drug metabolism (Ch. 2)
Microbial diagnosis (Ch. 6)

[[p666]]
Sodium homeostasis    617
19
Water and electrolyte homeostasis
Total body water (TBW) is approximately 60% of body weight in an adult 
male, although the proportion is somewhat more for infants and less for 
women. In a 70 kg man TBW is therefore about 40 L. Approximately 25 L 
is located inside cells (the intracellular uid or ICF), while the remaining 
15 L is in the extracellular uid (ECF) compartment (see Fig. 19.1). Most 
of the ECF (approximately 12 L) is interstitial uid, which is within the tis-
sues but outside cells, whereas the remainder (about 3 L) is in the plasma 
compartment.
The ion composition between the main body uid compartments intra-
cellularly and extracellularly is illustrated in Figure 19.1. The dominant 
positively charged ion (cation) within cells is potassium, whereas phos-
phates and negatively charged proteins constitute the major intracellu-
lar negatively charged ions (anions). In the ECF the dominant cation is 
sodium, while chloride and, to a lesser extent, bicarbonate are the most 
important ECF anions. An important difference between the intravascular 
(plasma) and interstitial compartments of the ECF is that only plasma 
contains signicant concentrations of protein.
The major force maintaining the difference in cation concentrations 
between the ICF and ECF is the sodium–potassium pump (Na,K-
activated adenosine triphosphatase – ATPase), which is present in all 
cell membranes. Maintenance of these gradients is essential for many 
cell processes, including the excitability of conducting tissues such as 
nerve and muscle. The difference in protein content between the plasma 
and the interstitial uid compartment is maintained by the impermeability 
of the capillary wall to protein. This protein concentration gradient (the 
colloid osmotic, or oncotic, pressure of the plasma) contributes to the 
balance of forces across the capillary wall that favour uid retention within 
the plasma compartment.
The concentration of sodium in the ECF plays a pivotal role in deter-
mining plasma osmolality and thereby controlling intracellular volume 
through changes in water balance between the intracellular and extracel-
lular space. In contrast, plasma volume is largely controlled by total body 
sodium, which determines volume change. Therefore, disturbances in 
water homeostasis typically present with biochemical abnormalities such 
as hyponatraemia or hypernatraemia, whereas disturbances in sodium 
homeostasis present with hypervolaemia or hypovolaemia as the result 
of expansion or contraction of ECF volume, respectively.
Sodium homeostasis
Most of the body’s sodium is located in the ECF, where it is by far the 
most abundant cation. Accordingly, total body sodium is the princi-
pal determinant of ECF volume. Sodium intake varies widely between 
individuals, ranging between 50 and 250 mmol/24 hr. The kidneys can 
compensate for these wide variations in sodium intake by increas-
ing excretion of sodium when there is sodium overload, and retaining 
sodium in the presence of sodium depletion, to maintain normal ECF 
volume and plasma volume.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The functional unit for renal excretion is the nephron, which is illustrated in 
Figure 19.2. Blood undergoes ultraltration in the glomerulus, generating 
a uid that is free from cells and protein and which resembles plasma in 
its electrolyte composition. This is delivered into the renal tubules, where 
reabsorption of water and various electrolytes occurs. (More detail on 
the structure and function of the glomerulus is given in Ch. 18.) The glo-
merular ltration rate (GFR) is approximately 125 mL/min (equivalent to 
180 L/24 hr) in a normal adult. Over 99% of the ltered uid is reabsorbed 
into the blood in the peritubular capillaries during its passage through 
successive segments of the nephron, mainly as a result of tubular reab-
sorption of sodium. The processes mediating sodium reabsorption, and 
the factors that regulate it, are key to understanding clinical disturbances 
and pharmacological interventions of sodium and uid balance.
The nephron can be divided into four different functional segments in 
terms of sodium and water reabsorption (see Fig. 19.2).
Proximal renal tubule
About 65% of the ltered sodium load is reabsorbed in the proximal renal 
tubule. The cellular mechanisms are complex but some of the key fea-
tures are shown in panel (A) of Figure 19.2. The key to sodium reabsorp-
tion from the luminal uid rests on the basolateral (blood-side) of the cell 
where large numbers of Na,K-ATPase pumps are present (black circle) 
19.2  How to interpret urea and electrolytes results*
Sodium
 Largely reects changes in water balance
 See ‘Hypernatraemia’ and ‘Hyponatraemia’
Potassium
 May reect K shifts in and out of cells
 Low levels usually mean excessive losses (gastrointestinal or renal)
 High levels usually mean renal dysfunction
 See ‘Hypokalaemia’ and ‘Hyperkalaemia’
Chloride
 Generally changes in parallel with plasma Na
 Low in metabolic alkalosis
 High in some forms of metabolic acidosis
Bicarbonate
 Abnormal in acid–base disorders
 See Box 19.18
Urea
 Increased with a fall in glomerular ltration rate (GFR), reduced renal perfusion 
or urine ow rate, and in high protein intake or catabolic states
Creatinine
 Increased with a fall in GFR, in individuals with high muscle mass, and with 
some drugs
 See Figure 18.2
*The term urea and electrolytes (U&Es) refers to urea, electrolyes and creatinine. In some 
countries this is abbreviated to EUC (electrolytes/urea/creatinine).
Intracellular fluid
Interstitial
fluid
Plasma
Protein
Extracellular fluid
Cl−
HCO3−
HPO4
2−
Proteinn  − 
2K +
3Na +
Na+
K+
(12 L)
(3 L)
(25 L)
Fig. 19.1 Normal distribution of body water and electrolytes. Schematic 
representation of volume (L = litres) and composition (dominant ionic species only 
shown) of the intracellular uid (ICF) and extracellular uid (ECF) in a 70 kg male. 
The main difference in composition between the plasma and interstitial uid (ISF) is 
the presence of appreciable concentrations of protein in the plasma but not the ISF. 
The Na/K differential is maintained by the Na,K-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) 
pump.

[[p667]]
618    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
which transport sodium from the cells into the blood. This creates a low 
concentration of sodium within the cell that drives the passive reabsorp-
tion of sodium from the lumen into the epithelial cell. Transporters in the 
apical membrane are then able to couple sodium transport to the entry 
of various organic molecules, including glucose, amino acids, phosphate 
and others. An example of this is shown in Figure 19.2 where the reab-
sorption of Na is coupled to the reabsorption of glucose via the SGLT2 
transport protein (yellow circle). Entry of sodium into the tubular cells 
at this site is also linked to secretion of H+ ions, through the sodium–
hydrogen exchanger (NHE-3) (pink circle). This relates to a complicated 
system responsible for bicarbonate reabsorption where HCO3 ions in the 
lumen are combined with H+ ions to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). The 
H2CO3 is broken down to form H2O and CO2 in a reaction catalysed by 
carbonic anhydrase (CA) present on the luminal membrane of the tubu-
lar cell. The CO2 and H2O are then freely able to diffuse into the tubular 
cell. Within the tubular cell, H2CO3 is generated from H2O and CO2 by 
intracellular CA. The H2CO3 then dissociates spontaneously to produce H+
ions which are transported into the lumen by the NHE-3 transporter and 
HCO3- ions which are transported into the blood. This allows for almost 
complete reabsorption of bicarbonate in the proximal tubule. In addition, 
a large component of the transepithelial ux of sodium, water and other 
dissolved solutes occurs through gaps between the cells (the ‘shunt’ path-
way). Overall, uid and electrolyte reabsorption is almost isotonic in this 
segment, as water reabsorption is matched very closely to sodium uxes, 
such that the osmolality of uid passing into the loop of Henle is very similar 
to that of plasma. A component of this water ow also passes through the 
cells, via aquaporin-1 (AQP-1) water channels (see Fig. 19.5), which are 
not sensitive to hormonal regulation. Acetazolamide and SGLT2 inhibitors 
both act on this segment to promote sodium excretion by their effects on 
carbonic anhydrase and the SLGT2 protein, respectively.
Loop of Henle
The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle reabsorbs a further 25% of the 
ltered sodium but is impermeable to water, resulting in dilution of the lumi-
nal uid as illustrated in panel (B) in Figure 19.2. Again, the primary driving 
Fig. 19.2 Anatomy of the nephron and principal transport mechanisms in different parts of the renal tubule. The apical membrane of tubular cells is the side facing 
the lumen and the basolateral membrane is the side facing the blood. Black circles indicate active transport pumps linked to ATP hydrolysis and other symbols indicate ion 
channels and transporter molecules (see text for more details). Details of the proportion of sodium reabsorbed, water permeability and sites of action for different classes of 
diuretics are shown. The SGLT2 inhibitors are primarily used for the treatment of diabetes but have diuretic properties by blocking SGLT2 (yellow circle) in the proximal tubule 
 = afferent arteriole; ea = efferent arteriole; md = macula densa)
Cortex
Medulla
A
B
Thin
descending
limb
Loop of
Henle
Thin ascending
limb
Medullary
collecting
duct
Pars
recta
Glomerulus
C
Cortical
collecting
duct
D
Thick
ascending
limb
aa
ea
md
Na+
Gluc
SGLT2
NHE-3
Na+
‘Shunt’
3Na+
Na+
2K+
H2O
H2O
Solutes
H2O
+
+
CO2
CO2
HCO3–
H2CO3
HCO3–+H+
H2CO3
H+
H+
CA
CA
Tubular cell
Lumen
Blood
Na+
H2O
Diuretics
Yes
H2O
No
H2O
No
Proximal (convoluted) tubule
Early distal (convoluted) tubule
Ascending limb of loop of Henle
SGLT2
inhibitors
Acetazolamide
A
3Na+
2K+
Tubular cell 
Lumen
Blood
Na+
Diuretics
Loop
diuretics
25%
B
Na+
NCCT
3Na+
2K+
Tubular cell
Lumen
Blood
Na+
H2O
Yes
Na+
Diuretics
Th
7%
C
Cl−
Ca2+
Ca2+
3Na+
Na+, K+,
Ca2+, Mg2+
Na+
 2Cl−
 NKCC2
K+
K+
ROMK
3Na+
2K+
Tubular cell
Lumen
Blood
Diuretics
Amiloride
Spironolactone
3%
D
Late distal tubule
K+
ROMK
Na+
ENaC
H+
Cl−
Principal cell
Intercalated cell
Urine
65%

[[p668]]
Sodium homeostasis    619
19
force is the Na,K-ATPase on the basolateral cell membrane (black circle) 
which creates a low intracellular concentration of sodium, but in this seg-
ment, sodium entry through the Na,K,2Cl (NKCC2, white cylinder) allows 
electroneutral entry of these ions into the renal tubular cell by balancing 
transport of cations (Na+/K+) with anions (Cl ). Some of the potassium 
accumulated inside the cell recirculates across the apical membrane back 
into the lumen through the ROMK potassium channel (white circle), pro-
viding a continuing supply of potassium to match the high concentrations 
of sodium and chloride in the lumen. Due to this, a small positive transepi-
thelial potential difference exists in the lumen of this segment relative to the 
interstitium, and this serves to drive cations such as sodium, potassium, 
calcium and magnesium between the cells, forming a reabsorptive shunt 
pathway. Loop diuretics like furosemide inhibit sodium reabsorption in this 
segment by inhibiting the NKCC2 transporter.
Early distal renal tubule
The early distal tubule (also called distal convoluted tubule) is responsible for 
reabsorption of about 7% of the ltered sodium load, as shown in panel (C) 
in Figure 19.2. This is again primarily driven by the activity of the basolateral 
Na,K-ATPase (black circle). In this segment, entry of sodium into the cell 
from the luminal uid occurs via the NCCT sodium–chloride co-transport 
carrier (orange cylinder). This segment is also impermeable to water, result-
ing in further dilution of the luminal uid. There is no signicant transepithelial 
ux of potassium in this segment, but calcium is reabsorbed in exchange 
for sodium, where a basolateral sodium–calcium exchanger (blue cylinder) 
leads to low intracellular concentrations of calcium, promoting calcium entry 
from the luminal uid through a calcium channel (blue ellipse). Thiazide diu-
retics inhibit sodium reabsorption in this segment by inhibiting the NCCT 
transporter.
Late distal renal tubule and collecting ducts
The late distal tubule and cortical collecting duct are anatomically and 
functionally continuous (panel (D) in Fig. 19.2). Here, sodium entry from the 
luminal uid into principal cells occurs through the epithelial sodium chan-
nel (ENaC), generating a substantial lumen-negative transepithelial potential 
difference. This sodium ux into the tubular cells is balanced by secretion of 
potassium and hydrogen ions into the lumen and by reabsorption of chlo-
ride ions. Potassium passes into the luminal uid down its electrochemical 
gradient, through an apical potassium channel (ROMK) in the principal cells 
(white circle). Hydrogen ion secretion is mediated by an H+-ATPase (black 
triangle) located on the luminal membrane of the alpha intercalated cells. 
Beta intercalated cells secrete bicarbonate and both cell types participate in 
the excretion of ammonia and ammonium. The distal tubule and collecting 
duct have a variable permeability to water, depending on circulating levels 
of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH). All ion transport processes in 
this segment are stimulated by the steroid hormone aldosterone, which 
can increase sodium reabsorption to a maximum of 2%–3% of the ltered 
sodium load. Amiloride and spironolactone both reduce sodium reabsorp-
tion in this segment by inhibiting the activity of the ENaC transporter (blue 
doughnut), either directly, as in the case of amiloride, or by inhibiting the 
effects of aldosterone, as is the case with spironolactone.
Less than 1% of sodium reabsorption occurs in the medullary collect-
ing duct, where it is inhibited by atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain 
natriuretic peptide (BNP).
Regulation of sodium transport
The amount of sodium excreted by the kidney is dependent on the ltered 
load of sodium (which is principally determined by GFR) and the control 
of tubular sodium reabsorption. A number of interrelated mechanisms 
serve to maintain whole-body sodium balance, and hence ECF volume, 
by matching urinary sodium excretion to sodium intake (Fig. 19.3), and 
controlling those two processes.
Important sensing mechanisms include volume receptors in the car-
diac atria and the intrathoracic veins, as well as pressure receptors 
located in the central arterial tree (aortic arch and carotid sinus) and the 
afferent arterioles within the kidney. A further afferent signal is generated 
within the kidney itself: the enzyme renin is released from specialised 
smooth muscle cells in the walls of the afferent and efferent arterioles, at 
the point where they make contact with the early distal tubular cells of 
the macula densa to form the juxtaglomerular apparatus (see Fig. 19.2). 
Renin release is stimulated by:
 reduced perfusion pressure in the afferent arteriole
 increased sympathetic nerve activity
 decreased sodium chloride concentration in the distal tubular uid.
Renin acts on the peptide substrate, angiotensinogen (which is 
produced by the liver), to produce angiotensin I, which is cleaved by 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), largely in the pulmonary capil-
lary bed, to produce angiotensin II (see Fig. 20.19). Angiotensin II has 
multiple actions: it stimulates proximal tubular sodium reabsorption and 
release of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex, 
and causes vasoconstriction of small arterioles. Aldosterone amplies 
sodium retention by its action on the cortical collecting duct. The net 
effect of activation of the renin–angiotensin system is to raise blood 
pressure and cause sodium and water retention, thereby correcting 
hypovolaemia.
Changes in GFR alter peritubular hydrostatic pressure and oncotic 
pressure in opposite directions, resulting in a change in sodium reab-
sorption. In particular, with hypovolaemia, and a reduction in hydrostatic 
pressure and an increase in oncotic pressure, there is an increase in 
sodium reabsorption.
The sympathetic nervous system also acts to increase sodium reten-
tion, both through haemodynamic mechanisms (afferent arteriolar vaso-
constriction and GFR reduction) and by direct stimulation of proximal 
tubular sodium reabsorption. In contrast, other humoral mediators, such 
as the natriuretic peptides, which inhibit sodium reabsorption, contribute 
to natriuresis during periods of sodium and volume excess.
Increases in sodium intake cause hypervolaemia, which increases 
renal perfusion and GFR and suppresses renin production through 
increased delivery of sodium into the macula densa. This sets in motion 
a train of events opposite to those that occur in hypovolaemia, to cause 
an increase in sodium excretion.
Presenting problems in sodium balance
When the balance of sodium intake and excretion is disturbed, any 
tendency for plasma sodium concentration to change is usually corrected 
 Volume receptors
    Cardiac atria
    Intrathoracic veins
 Pressure receptors
    Aortic arch/carotids
    Afferent arteriole
 Tubular fluid [NaCl]
    Macula densa
 Neurohumoral
     RAA
     SNS/catecholamines
     ANP
     BNP
     Prostaglandins
 Haemodynamic
     GFR
Peritubular forces
ECF Na content
and volume
Afferent
Efferent
Sensors
Effectors
Fig. 19.3 Mechanisms involved in the regulation of sodium transport. ANP = 
atrial natriuretic peptide; BNP = brain natriuretic peptide; ECF = extracellular uid; 
GFR = glomerular ltration rate; RAA = renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; 
SNS = sympathetic nervous system. ⊕ indicates an effect to stimulate Na 
reabsorption and hence reduce Na excretion, while ⊖ indicates an effect to inhibit Na 
reabsorption and hence increase Na excretion.

[[p669]]
620    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
by the osmotic mechanisms controlling water balance. As a result, disor-
ders in sodium balance present chiey as alterations in the ECF volume, 
resulting in hypovolaemia or hypervolaemia, rather than as an alteration 
in plasma sodium concentration. Clinical manifestations of altered ECF 
volume are illustrated in Box 19.3
Hypovolaemia
Hypovolaemia is dened as a reduction in circulating blood volume. The 
most common causes are loss or sequestration of sodium-containing 
uids or acute blood loss, as summarised in Box 19.4
Pathogenesis
Loss of sodium-containing uid triggers the changes in renal sodium hand-
ling and activation of the renin–angiotensin system that were described 
earlier in this chapter. Loss of whole blood, as in acute haemorrhage, is 
another cause of hypovolaemia, and elicits the same mechanisms for 
the conservation of sodium and water as loss of sodium-containing uid.
Clinical features
Hypovolaemia is primarily a clinical diagnosis, based on characteristic 
symptoms such as thirst, dizziness and weakness along with character-
istic clinical signs (see Box 19.3) in the context of a relevant precipitating 
illness.
Investigations
Serum sodium concentrations do not reect total body sodium and are 
therefore not helpful in making the diagnosis of  hypovolaemia. The GFR 
is usually maintained unless the hypovolaemia is very severe or pro-
longed, but urinary ow rate is reduced as a consequence of activation of 
sodium- and water-retaining mechanisms in the nephron. Serum creati-
nine, which reects GFR, is usually normal, but serum urea concentration 
is typically elevated due to a low urine ow rate, which is accompanied 
by increased tubular reabsorption of urea. Similarly, serum uric acid may 
also rise, reecting increased reabsorption in the proximal renal tubule. 
The urine sodium concentration appropriately falls and sodium excretion 
may reduce to less than 0.1% of the ltered sodium load.
Management
Management of sodium and volume depletion has two main components:
 treat the cause where possible, to stop ongoing salt and volume 
losses
 replace the salt and water decits, and provide ongoing mainten- 
ance requirements, usually by intravenous uid replacement when 
depletion is severe.
Intravenous uid therapy
Intravenous uid therapy can be used to maintain water, sodium and 
potassium intake when the patient is fasting, such as during an acute 
illness or post-operatively. If any decits or continuing pathological losses 
are identied, additional uid and electrolytes will be required. In pro-
longed periods of fasting (more than a few days), attention also needs 
to be given to providing sufcient caloric and nutritional intake to pre-
vent excessive catabolism of body energy stores. The daily maintenance 
requirements for water and electrolytes in a typical adult are shown in 
Box 19.5 and the composition of some widely available intravenous u-
ids are given in Box 19.6. The choice of uid and the rate of administra-
tion depend on the clinical circumstances, as assessed at the bedside 
and from laboratory data, as described in Box 19.7
The choice of intravenous uid therapy in the treatment of signicant 
hypovolaemia relates to the concepts in Figure 19.1. If uid containing 
neither sodium nor protein is given, it will distribute in the body uid com-
partments in proportion to the normal distribution of total body water. For 
example, administration of 1 L of 5% dextrose contributes little (approx-
imately 3/40 of the infused volume) towards expansion of the plasma 
volume, which makes this uid unsuitable for restoring the circulation 
and perfusion of vital organs. Intravenous infusion of an isotonic (normal) 
saline solution, on the other hand, is more effective at expanding the 
ECF, although only a small proportion (about 3/15) of the infused volume 
actually contributes to plasma volume.
Whilst it would appear that solutions containing plasma proteins (col-
loids) would be better retained within the vascular space and be more 
effective at correcting hypovolaemia than protein-free uids (crystal-
loids), clinical studies have not shown any advantage of giving albumin-
containing infusions in the treatment of acute hypovolaemia and indeed 
have demonstrated increased morbidity related to their use. Therefore, 
crystalloids are the uid of choice for resuscitation in acute hypovolae-
mia. More studies, however, are required to clarify the most appropriate 
crystalloid in this situation, given that normal saline can cause a mild met-
abolic acidosis, perhaps related to excessive chloride loading, whereas 
‘balanced solutions’, such as Hartmann’s, may cause a mild hypona-
traemia, as their composition is slightly hypotonic.
Hypervolaemia
Hypervolaemia is the result of sodium and water excess and is rare in 
patients with normal cardiac and renal function, since the kidney has a 
19.3  Clinical features of hypovolaemia and hypervolaemia
Hypovolaemia
Hypervolaemia
Symptoms
Thirst
Dizziness on standing
Weakness
Ankle swelling
Abdominal swelling
Breathlessness
Signs
Postural hypotension
Tachycardia
Dry mouth
Reduced skin turgor
Reduced urine output
Weight loss
Delirium, stupor
Peripheral oedema
Raised JVP
Pulmonary crepitations
Pleural effusion
Ascites
Weight gain
Hypertension 
(sometimes)
(JVP = jugular venous pressure)
19.4  Causes of hypovolaemia
Mechanism
Examples
Inadequate sodium intake
Environmental deprivation, inadequate 
therapeutic replacement
Gastrointestinal sodium loss
Vomiting, diarrhoea, nasogastric suction, 
external stula
Skin sodium loss
Excessive sweating, burns
Renal sodium loss
Diuretic therapy, mineralocorticoid 
deciency, tubulointerstitial disease
Internal sequestration*
Bowel obstruction, peritonitis, 
pancreatitis, crush injury
Reduced blood volume
Acute blood loss
*A cause of circulatory volume depletion, although total body sodium and water may be normal 
or increased.
19.5  Basic daily water and electrolyte requirements
Requirement per kg
Typical 70 kg adult
Water
35–45 mL/kg
2.45–3.15 L/24 hrs
Sodium
1.5–2 mmol/kg
105–140 mmol/24 hrs
Potassium
1.0–1.5 mmol/kg
70–105 mmol/24 hrs

[[p670]]
Sodium homeostasis    621
19
large capacity to increase renal excretion of sodium and water via the 
homeostatic mechanisms described earlier in the chapter.
Pathogenesis
The most common systemic disorders responsible for hypervolaemia are 
outlined in Box 19.8. In cardiac failure, cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome, 
sodium retention occurs in response to circulatory insufciency caused 
by the primary disorder, as illustrated in Figure 19.4. The pathophysiology 
is different in kidney failure, when the primary cause of volume expansion 
is the profound reduction in GFR impairing sodium and water excretion, 
while secondary tubular mechanisms are of lesser importance. In primary 
hyperaldosteronism (Conn syndrome) the pathophysiology also differs, 
in that increased secretion of aldosterone directly stimulates sodium 
reabsorption.
Clinical features
Peripheral oedema is the most common physical sign of hypervolaemia 
since the excess uid leaks out of the capillaries to expand the interstitial 
compartment of the ECF. This is particularly the case in nephrotic syn-
drome and chronic liver disease, in which hypoalbuminaemia is a promi-
nent feature. The main exception is Conn syndrome, which presents with 
hypertension and often hypokalaemia, but in which peripheral oedema 
is unusual.
19.7  How to assess uid and electrolyte balance in 
hospitalised patients
Step 1: assess clinical volume status
 Examine patient for signs of hypovolaemia or hypervolaemia (see Box 19.3)
 Check daily weight change
Step 2: review uid balance chart
 Check total volumes IN and OUT on previous day (IN–OUT is positive by 
~400 mL in normal balance, reecting insensible uid losses of ~800 mL and 
metabolic water generation of ~400 mL)
 Check cumulative change in daily uid balance over previous 3–5 days
 Correlate chart gures with weight change and clinical volume status to 
estimate net uid balance
Step 3: assess ongoing uid losses
 Check losses from gastrointestinal tract and surgical drains
 Estimate increased insensible losses (e.g. in fever) and internal sequestration 
(‘third space’)
Step 4: check plasma U&Es (see Box 19.2)
 Check plasma Na as marker of relative water balance
 Check plasma K as a guide to extracellular K balance
 Check HCO3 as a clue to acid–base disorder
 Check urea and creatinine to monitor renal function
Step 5: prescribe appropriate intravenous uid replacement therapy
 Replace basic water and electrolytes each day (see Box 19.5)
 Allow for anticipated oral intake and pathological uid loss
 Adjust amounts of water (if IV, usually given as isotonic 5% dextrose), sodium 
and potassium according to plasma electrolyte results
(IV = intravenous; U&Es = urea and electrolytes)
19.6  Composition of some isotonic intravenous uids
Fluid
D-glucose
Calories
Na+ (mmol/L)
Cl  (mmol/L)
Other (mmol/L)
5% dextrose
50 g
200
0
0
0
Normal (0.9%) saline
0
0
154
154
0
Hartmann's solution
0
0
131
111
K+ 5
Ca2+ 2
Lactate  29
19.8  Causes of sodium and water excess
Mechanism
Examples
Impaired renal function
Primary renal disease
Primary hyperaldosteronism*
Conn syndrome
Secondary hyperaldosteronism
(see Fig. 19.5)
Congestive cardiac failure
Cirrhotic liver disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing enteropathy
Malnutrition
Idiopathic/cyclical oedema
Renal artery stenosis*
*Conditions in this box other than primary hyperaldosteronism and renal artery stenosis are 
typically associated with generalised oedema.
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic
syndrome
Heart failure
Peripheral
vasodilatation/
splanchnic
pooling
Reduced
albumin
synthesis
Heavy
proteinuria
↓Cardiac
 output
↓ Plasma
albumin
↓ Arterial
filling
 ↑ Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
 ↑ Renal sympathetic drive
 Altered renal haemodynamics 
↑Venous
 pressure
Na+ + H2O
retention
↑Capillary
 hydrostatic
 pressure
↓ Capillary
   oncotic
   pressure
Oedema
Fig. 19.4 Secondary mechanisms causing sodium excess and oedema in 
cardiac failure, cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome. Primary renal retention of Na 
and water may also contribute to oedema formation when glomerular ltration rate is 
signicantly reduced (see Box 19.8).
Investigations
Although hypervolaemia is accompanied by an excess of total body sodium, 
serum sodium concentrations tend to be normal due to the accompanying 
water retention. Serum concentrations of potassium are normal except in 

[[p671]]
622    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Conn syndrome, where there is hypokalaemia due to the increased aldos-
terone production. Creatinine, GFR and urea are usually normal, unless the 
underlying cause of hypervolaemia is renal failure. General investigations 
may reveal evidence of cardiac, renal or liver disease.
Management
The management of hypervolaemia involves a number of components:
 specic treatment directed at the underlying cause, such as ACE 
inhibitors in heart failure and glucocorticoids in minimal change 
nephropathy
 restriction of dietary sodium (to 50–80 mmol/24 hr) to match the 
diminished excretory capacity
 uid restriction
Diuretic therapy
Diuretics play a pivotal role in the treatment of hypervolaemia due to salt 
and water retention and in hypertension. They act by inhibiting sodium 
reabsorption at various locations along the nephron (see Fig. 19.2). Their 
potency and adverse effects relate to their mechanism and site of action.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhib-
itor that inhibits intracellular production of H+ ions in the proximal tubule, 
reducing the fraction of sodium reabsorption that is exchanged for H+ by 
the apical membrane sodium–hydrogen exchanger. It is a weak diuretic 
but is seldom used clinically for this purpose, since only a small fraction 
of proximal sodium reabsorption uses this mechanism, and much of the 
sodium that is not reabsorbed in the proximal tubule can be reabsorbed 
by downstream segments of the nephron. Its use is also complicated by 
metabolic acidosis due to reduction in proximal bicarbonate reabsorption.
Sodium-dependent glucose transporter inhibitors Inhibitors of the sodi-
um-dependent glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2), such as dapagliozin and 
canagliozin, simultaneously block glucose and sodium reabsorption in 
the proximal tubule. They have mild diuretic properties but are principally 
used to lower blood glucose in the treatment of diabetes. However, they 
have been found to have renoprotective effects beyond their ability to 
improve diabetic control, probably related to a reduction in glomerular 
hyperltration. This occurs due to their ability to reduce sodium reab-
sorption and thereby a reduction in tubuloglomerular feedback.
Loop diuretics Loop diuretics, such as furosemide, inhibit sodium reab-
sorption in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, by blocking the 
action of the apical membrane NKCC2 co-transporter. Because this seg-
ment reabsorbs a large fraction of the ltered sodium, these drugs are 
potent diuretics, and are commonly used in diseases associated with sig-
nicant oedema. Loop diuretics cause excretion not only of sodium (and 
with it water) but also of potassium. This occurs chiey as a result of deliv-
ery of increased amounts of sodium to the late distal tubule and cortical 
collecting ducts, where sodium reabsorption is associated with secretion 
of potassium, and is amplied if circulating aldosterone levels are high.
Thiazide diuretics Thiazide diuretics inhibit sodium reabsorption in the 
early distal tubule, by blocking the NCCT co-transporter in the apical 
membrane. Since this segment reabsorbs a much smaller fraction of the 
ltered sodium, these are less potent than loop diuretics, but are widely 
used in the treatment of hypertension and less severe oedema. Like loop 
diuretics, thiazides increase excretion of potassium through delivery of 
increased amounts of sodium to the late distal tubule and collecting 
duct. They are the diuretics that are most likely to be complicated by the 
development of hyponatraemia.
Potassium-sparing diuretics Potassium-sparing diuretics act on the late dis-
tal renal tubule and cortical collecting duct segment to inhibit sodium reab-
sorption. Since sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion are linked 
at this site, the reduced sodium reabsorption is accompanied by reduced 
potassium secretion. The apical sodium channel ENaC (see Fig. 19.2) is 
blocked by amiloride and triamterene, while spironolactone and eplerenone 
also act at this site by blocking binding of aldosterone to mineralocorticoid 
receptors thereby blocking ENaC activity.
Osmotic diuretics These act independently of a specic transport mech-
anism. As they are freely ltered at the glomerulus but not reabsorbed 
by any part of the tubular system, they retain uid osmotically within the 
tubular lumen and limit the extent of sodium reabsorption in multiple seg-
ments. Mannitol is the most commonly used osmotic diuretic. It is given 
by intravenous infusion to achieve short-term diuresis in conditions such 
as cerebral oedema.
Clinical use of diuretics
The following principles should be observed when using diuretics:
 Use the minimum effective dose.
 Use for as short a period of time as necessary.
 Monitor regularly for adverse effects.
The choice of diuretic is determined by the potency required, the pres-
ence of coexistent conditions and the side-effect prole.
Adverse effects encountered with the most frequently used classes of 
diuretic (loop drugs and thiazide drugs) are summarised in Box 19.9. Volume 
depletion and electrolyte disorders are the most common, as predicted 
from their mechanism of action. The metabolic side-effects listed are rarely 
of clinical signicance and may reect effects on K+ channels that inuence 
insulin secretion. Since most drugs from these classes are sulphonamides, 
there is a relatively high incidence of hypersensitivity reactions, and occa-
sional idiosyncratic side-effects in a variety of organ systems.
The side-effect prole of the potassium-sparing diuretics differs in 
a number of important respects from that of other diuretics. The dis-
turbances in potassium, magnesium and acid–base balance are in the 
opposite direction, so that normal or increased levels of potassium and 
magnesium are found in the blood, and there is a tendency to metabolic 
acidosis, especially when renal function is impaired.
An important feature of the most commonly used diuretic drugs (furo-
semide, thiazides and amiloride) is that they act on their target molecules 
from the luminal side of the tubular epithelium. Since they are highly pro-
tein-bound in the plasma, very little reaches the urinary uid by glomer-
ular ltration, but there are active transport mechanisms for secreting 
organic acids and bases, including these drugs, across the proximal 
tubular wall into the lumen, resulting in adequate drug concentrations 
being delivered to later tubular segments. This secretory process may be 
impaired by certain other drugs, and also by accumulated organic ani-
ons as occurs in chronic kidney disease and chronic liver failure, leading 
to resistance to diuretics. The transport protein is also responsible for 
the secretion of uric acid so the use of these diuretics can competitively 
inhibit this process and result in gout.
Diuretic resistance is encountered under a variety of circumstances, 
including impaired renal function, activation of sodium-retaining mecha-
nisms, impaired oral bioavailability (such as in patients with gastrointes-
tinal disease) and decreased renal blood ow. In these circumstances, 
19.9  Adverse effects of loop-acting and thiazide diuretics
Renal side-effects
 Hypovolaemia
 Hyponatraemia
 Hypokalaemia
 Metabolic alkalosis
 Hyperuricaemia
 Hypomagnesaemia
 Hypercalciuria (loop)
 Hypocalciuria (thiazide)
Metabolic side-effects
 Glucose intolerance/hyperglycaemia
 Hyperlipidaemia
Miscellaneous side-effects
 Hypersensitivity reactions
 Erectile dysfunction
 Acute pancreatitis/
cholecystitis (thiazide)

[[p672]]
Water homeostasis    623
19
short-term intravenous therapy with a loop-acting agent such as furo-
semide may be useful. Combinations of diuretics administered orally 
may also increase potency. Either a loop or a thiazide drug can be com-
bined with a potassium-sparing drug, and all three classes can be used 
together for short periods, with carefully supervised clinical and labora-
tory monitoring.
Water homeostasis
Daily water intake can vary from about 500 mL to several litres a day. 
About 800 mL of water is lost daily through the stool, sweat and 
the respiratory tract (insensible losses) and about 400 mL is gener-
ated daily through oxidative metabolism (metabolic water). The kid-
neys are chiey responsible for adjusting water excretion to balance 
intake, endogenous production and losses so as to maintain total 
body water content and serum osmolality within the reference range 
of 280–296mOsmol/kg.
Functional anatomy and physiology
While regulation of total ECF volume is principally achieved through renal 
control of sodium excretion, mechanisms exist to allow for the excretion 
of urine that is hypertonic or hypotonic in relation to plasma to maintain 
constant plasma osmolality.
These functions are largely achieved by the loop of Henle and the 
collecting ducts (see Fig. 19.2). The countercurrent conguration of ow 
in adjacent limbs of the loop (Fig. 19.5) involves osmotic movement of 
water from the descending limbs and reabsorption of solute from neigh-
bouring ascending limbs, to set up a gradient of osmolality from isotonic 
(like plasma) in the renal cortex to hypertonic (around 1200mOsmol/kg) 
in the inner part of the medulla. At the same time, the uid emerging from 
the thick ascending limb is hypotonic compared to plasma because it 
has been diluted by the reabsorption of sodium, but not water, from the 
thick ascending limb and is further diluted in the early distal tubule. As 
this dilute uid passes from the cortex through the collecting duct system 
to the renal pelvis, it traverses the medullary interstitial gradient of osmo-
lality set up by the operation of the loop of Henle, and water is able to 
be reabsorbed. Whether water is reabsorbed at this point to concentrate 
the urine or whether the duct becomes impermeable to water allowing 
for dilute urine to be excreted depends on the presence or absence of 
the circulating level of vasopressin respectively. Vasopressin is released 
by the posterior pituitary gland under conditions of increased plasma 
osmolality or hypovolaemia.
 When water intake is high and plasma osmolality is normal or 
low–normal (Fig. 19.5B), vasopressin levels are suppressed and 
the collecting ducts remain impermeable to water. The luminal uid 
osmolality remains low, resulting in the excretion of a dilute urine 
(minimum osmolality approximately 50 mOsmol/kg in a healthy 
young person).
 When water intake is restricted and plasma osmolality is high 
(Fig. 19.5A), or in the presence of signicant plasma volume 
depletion, vasopressin levels rise. This causes water permeability 
of the collecting ducts to increase through binding of vasopres-
sin to the V2 receptor, which enhances collecting duct water 
permeability through the insertion of AQP-2 channels into the 
luminal cell membrane. This results in osmotic reabsorption of 
water along the entire length of the collecting duct, with maxi-
mum urine osmolality approaching that in the medullary tip (up to 
1200 mOsmol/kg).
Parallel to these changes in vasopressin release are changes in 
water-seeking behaviour triggered by the sensation of thirst, which also 
becomes activated as plasma osmolality rises.
In summary, for adequate dilution of the urine there must be:
 adequate solute delivery to the loop of Henle and early distal tubule
 normal function of the loop of Henle and early distal tubule
300
A
Loop
of Henle
Passive diffusion of H2O  
Active transport of NaCl
Aquoporin 2 (AQP2) channelsAQP2 channels
Portions of tubule impermeable to H2O
Vasa
recta
From
proximal tubule
Blood
flow
Blood
flow
Urine
flow
300
100
300
300
600
H2O
NaCl
NaCl
NaCl
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
900
300
600
900
1200
1200
1000
1200
600
900
1200
AQP2
AQP2
AQP2
600
600
900
900
100
300
300
Distal tubule
Distal tubule
1
2
3
4
4
5
Water
deficit
B Water overload
Cortex
Medulla
Collecting
tubule
100
100
100
100
100
300
400
700
Fig. 19.5 Mechanisms of renal water handling. (1) Filtrate from the proximal tubule is isosmotic to plasma and cortical interstitial uid. (2) Water moves down its osmotic 
gradient, concentrating the ltrate but not diluting the interstitium, as the vasa recta carries away the water. (3) The ltrate is at its highest concentration at the bend of the loop 
and therefore the surrounding medulla is also concentrated. (4) NaCl is pumped out of the ltrate in the thick ascending limb and early distal tubule, increasing the interstitial uid 
overload, vasopressin secretion is suppressed, AQP2 channels are held intracellularly, rendering the collecting ducts impermeable to water, resulting in production of a dilute urine.

[[p673]]
624    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
 absence of vasopressin in the circulation.
If any of these processes is faulty, water retention and hyponatraemia 
may result.
Conversely, to achieve concentration of the urine there must be:
 adequate solute delivery to the loop of Henle
 normal function of the loop of Henle
 vasopressin release into the circulation
 vasopressin action on the collecting ducts.
Failure of any of these steps may result in inappropriate water loss and 
hypernatraemia.
Presenting problems in regulation of osmolality
Changes in plasma osmolality are mainly determined by changes in serum 
sodium concentration and its associated anions. As outlined above, 
changes in sodium concentration usually occur because of disturbances in 
water balance, either because there is a relative excess of body water com-
pared to total body sodium (hyponatraemia) or a relative lack of body water 
compared to total body sodium (hypernatraemia). Abnormalities of water 
balance can result from disturbances in urinary concentration or dilution.
If extracellular osmolality falls, water ows across cell membranes, 
causing cell swelling, whereas cell shrinkage occurs when osmolality 
rises. Brain cells and therefore cerebral function are particularly sensitive 
to such volume changes and can result in increased intracerebral pres-
sure and reduced cerebral perfusion.
Hyponatraemia
Hyponatraemia is dened as a serum Na <135 mmol/L. It is a common 
electrolyte abnormality with many potential underlying causes, as sum-
marised in Box 19.10
Pathophysiology
In all cases, hyponatraemia is caused by greater retention of water rela-
tive to sodium. The causes are best categorised according to associated 
changes in the ECF volume (see Box 19.10).
Hyponatraemia with hypovolaemia
In this situation there is depletion of sodium and water but the sodium 
decit exceeds the water decit, causing hypovolaemia and hyponatrae-
mia (see Box 19.3). The cause of sodium loss is usually apparent and 
common examples are shown in Box 19.10
Hyponatraemia with euvolaemia
In this situation there are no major disturbances of body sodium content 
and the patient is clinically euvolaemic. Excess body water may be the 
result of abnormally high intake, either orally (primary polydipsia) or as a 
result of medically infused uids (as intravenous dextrose solutions, or by 
absorption of sodium-free bladder irrigation uid after prostatectomy).
Water retention also occurs in the syndrome of inappropriate secre-
tion of antidiuretic hormone, or vasopressin (SIADH). In this condition, an 
endogenous source of vasopressin (either cerebral or tumour-derived) 
promotes water retention by the kidney in the absence of an appropriate 
physiological stimulus (Box 19.11). The clinical diagnosis requires the 
patient to be euvolaemic, with no evidence of cardiac, renal or hepatic 
disease potentially associated with hyponatraemia. Other non-osmotic 
stimuli that cause release of vasopressin (pain, stress, nausea) should 
also be excluded. Supportive laboratory ndings are shown in Box 19.11
Hyponatraemia with hypervolaemia
In this situation, excess water retention is associated with sodium retention 
and volume expansion, as in heart failure, liver disease or kidney disease.
Clinical features
Hyponatraemia is often asymptomatic but can also be associated with 
profound disturbances of cerebral function, manifesting as anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting, delirium, lethargy, seizures and coma. The likelihood 
of symptoms occurring is related to the speed at which hyponatraemia 
develops rather than the severity of hyponatraemia. This is because water 
rapidly ows into cerebral cells when plasma osmolality falls acutely, 
causing them to become swollen and ischaemic. However, when hypo-
natraemia develops gradually, cerebral neurons have time to respond by 
reducing intracellular osmolality, through excreting potassium and reduc-
ing synthesis of intracellular organic osmolytes (Fig. 19.6). The osmotic 
gradient favouring water movement into the cells is thus reduced and 
symptoms are avoided. This process takes about 24–48 hours and 
hyponatraemia is therefore classied as acute (<48 hrs) and chronic 
(>48 hrs). Hyponatraemia can also be dened as mild (130–135 mmol/L), 
moderate (125–129 mmol/L) or severe (<124 mmol/L), based on bio-
chemical ndings or on the degree of severity of symptoms (Box 19.12).
Investigations
An algorithm for the clinical assessment of patients with hyponatraemia 
is shown in Figure 19.7. Artefactual causes of hyponatraemia should 
be considered in all cases. These include severe hyperlipidaemia or 
hyperproteinaemia, when the aqueous fraction of the serum specimen 
19.10  Causes of hyponatraemia
Volume status
Examples
Hypovolaemic
Renal sodium losses:
Diuretic therapy (especially thiazides)
Adrenocortical failure 
Gastrointestinal sodium losses:
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Skin sodium losses:
Burns
Euvolaemic
Primary polydipsia
Excessive electrolyte-free water infusion
SIADH
Hypothyroidism
Hypervolaemic
Congestive cardiac failure
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Chronic kidney disease (during free water intake)
(SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) secretion; see
Box 19.11).
19.11  Causes and diagnosis of syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH)
Causes
 Tumours
 Central nervous system disorders: stroke, trauma, infection, psychosis, 
porphyria
 Pulmonary disorders: pneumonia, tuberculosis, obstructive lung disease
 Drugs: anticonvulsants, psychotropics, antidepressants, cytotoxics, oral 
hypoglycaemic agents, opiates
 Idiopathic
Diagnosis
 Low plasma sodium concentration (typically <130 mmol/L)
 Low plasma osmolality (<275mOsmol/kg)
 Urine osmolality not minimally low (typically >100mOsmol/kg)
 Urine sodium concentration not minimally low (>30 mmol/L)
 Low–normal plasma urea, creatinine, uric acid
 Clinical euvolaemia
 Absence of adrenal, thyroid, pituitary or renal insufciency
 No recent use of diuretics
 Exclusion of other causes of hyponatraemia (see Box 19.10)
 Appropriate clinical context (above)

[[p674]]
Water homeostasis    625
19
is reduced because of the volume occupied by the macromolecules 
(although this artefact is dependent on the assay technology). Transient 
hyponatraemia may also occur due to osmotic shifts of water out of cells 
during hyperosmolar states caused by acute hyperglycaemia or by man-
nitol infusion, but in these cases plasma osmolality is normal.
When these conditions have been excluded, serum and urine elec-
trolytes and osmolality (Fig. 19.7) are usually the only tests required to 
clarify the underlying cause. Hypovolaemic hyponatraemia is character-
ised by a low urinary sodium concentration (<30 mmol/L) when there are 
extrarenal causes of sodium loss and high urinary sodium concentration 
(>30 mmol/L) in patients with excessive renal sodium loss.
Measurement of vasopressin is not generally helpful in distinguish-
ing between different categories of hyponatraemia. This is because 
concentrations of vasopressin are raised both in hypovolaemic states 
and in most chronic hypervolaemic states, as the impaired circulation 
in those disorders activates vasopressin release through non-osmotic 
mechanisms. Indeed, patients with these disorders may have higher cir-
culating vasopressin (ADH) levels than patients with SIADH. The only dis-
orders listed in Box 19.10 in which vasopressin is suppressed are primary 
polydipsia and iatrogenic water intoxication, where the hypo-osmolar 
state inhibits vasopressin release from the pituitary. Plasma vasopressin 
measurements are no longer used in routine practice since it is unstable 
and have been replaced by measurements of copeptin. This is a pep-
tide derived from the carboxyl terminal of the vasopressin precursor and 
acts as a surrogate for vasopressin. Copeptin measurements can be 
useful in the differential diagnosis of patients with the combination of 
hyponatraemia and polyuria.
Management
The treatment of hyponatraemia is critically dependent on its rate of 
development, severity, presence of symptoms and underlying cause. 
If hyponatraemia has developed rapidly (<48 hrs) and there are signs 
of cerebral oedema, such as obtundation or convulsions, sodium lev-
els should be restored rapidly to normal by infusion of hypertonic (3%) 
sodium chloride. A common approach is to give an initial bolus of 150 mL 
over 20 minutes, which may be repeated once or twice over the initial 
hours of observation, depending on the neurological response and rise 
in plasma sodium.
Rapid correction of hyponatraemia that has developed more slowly 
(>48 hrs) can be hazardous, since brain cells adapt to slowly developing 
hypo-osmolality by reducing the intracellular osmolality, thus maintaining 
normal cell volume (see Fig. 19.6). Under these conditions, an abrupt 
increase in extracellular osmolality can lead to water shifting out of neu-
rons, abruptly reducing their volume and causing them to detach from 
their myelin sheaths. The resulting ‘myelinolysis’ can produce permanent 
structural and functional damage to mid-brain structures, and is gener-
ally fatal. The rate of correction of the plasma Na concentration in chronic 
asymptomatic hyponatraemia should not exceed 10 mmol/L/24 hrs, and 
an even slower rate is generally safer.
The underlying cause should also be treated. For hypovolaemic 
patients, this involves controlling the source of sodium loss, and admin-
istering intravenous saline if clinically warranted. Patients with euvolae-
mic hyponatraemia generally respond to uid restriction in the range of 
600–1000 mL/24 hrs, accompanied where possible by withdrawal of the 
precipitating stimulus (such as drugs causing SIADH). In patients with 
persistent hyponatraemia due to prolonged SIADH, oral urea therapy 
(30–45 g/day) can be used, which provides a solute load to promote 
water excretion. Oral vasopressin receptor antagonists such as tolvaptan 
may also be used to block the vasopressin-mediated component of 
water retention in a range of hyponatraemic conditions, but concerns 
exist with regard to the risk of overly rapid correction of hyponatraemia 
with these agents. Hypervolaemic patients with hyponatraemia need 
treatment of the underlying condition, accompanied by cautious use of 
diuretics in conjunction with strict uid restriction. Potassium-sparing 
diuretics may be particularly useful in this context when there is signif-
icant secondary hyperaldosteronism.
Hypernatraemia
Hypernatraemia is dened to exist when the serum Na is >145 mmol/L. 
The causes are summarised in Box 19.13, grouped according to any 
associated disturbance in total body sodium content.
Pathophysiology
Hypernatraemia occurs due to inadequate concentration of the urine in 
the face of restricted water intake. This can arise because of failure to 
generate an adequate medullary concentration gradient in the kidney due 
to low GFR or loop diuretic therapy, but more commonly is caused by fail-
ure of the vasopressin system. This can occur because of pituitary dam-
age (cranial diabetes insipidus) or because the collecting duct cells are 
Acute
hyponatraemia
Slowly
developing
hyponatraemia
Normal
cerebral
cell
Plasma
osmo
290
Osmo
290
Osmo
290
Osmo
290
H2O
H2O
Loss of cellular
osmolytes
Osmo
220
Cerebral swelling
→ cerebral oedema
Osmo
220
Plasma
osmo
220
No change in
cerebral cell size
Plasma
osmo falls 
abruptly
290→220
Plasma
osmo falls
gradually
290→220
Fig. 19.6 Hyponatraemia and the brain. Numbers represent osmolality (osmo) in 
mOsmol/kg.
19.12  Symptoms and severity of hyponatraemia
Severity
Serum sodium
Symptoms
Mild
130–135 mmol/L
None
Moderate
125–129 mmol/L
Nausea
Delirium
Headache
Severe
<124 mmol/L
Vomiting
Somnolence
Seizures
Coma
Cardiorespiratory 
arrest

[[p675]]
626    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Clinical features
Patients with hypernatraemia generally have reduced cerebral function, either 
as a primary problem or as a consequence of the hypernatraemia itself, which 
results in dehydration of neurons and brain shrinkage. In the presence of an 
intact thirst mechanism and preserved capacity to obtain and ingest water, 
hypernatraemia may not progress very far. If adequate water is not obtained, 
dizziness, delirium, weakness and, ultimately, coma and death can result.
As outlined above, copeptin can be used in the diagnosis of water 
regulation disorders as a surrogate marker of vasopressin release. It is 
used in this regard to distinguish between central and nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus.
Management
Treatment of hypernatraemia depends on both the rate of development 
and the underlying cause. If there is reason to think that the condition has 
developed rapidly, neuronal shrinkage may be acute and relatively rapid 
correction may be attempted. This can be achieved by infusing an appro-
priate volume of intravenous uid (isotonic 5% dextrose or hypotonic 
0.45% saline) at an initial rate of 50–70 mL/hr. In older, institutionalised 
patients, however, it is more likely that the disorder has developed slowly, 
and extreme caution should be exercised in lowering plasma sodium to 
Low serum sodium (<135mmol/L) 
Check urine osmolality
Excessive water intake
Measure urine sodium
Normal
Abnormal
<100mOsmol/kg
>100mOsmol/kg
Low intravascular
volume
Evidence of kidney
disease?
< 30mmol/L
>30mmol/L
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Pancreatitis
Cirrhosis
Heart failure
Nephrotic
syndrome
Check for
evidence of
hypovolaemia
Signs of volume
depletion?
Signs of fluid
overload?
Signs of hypovolaemia
Normal ECF volume
Diuretics
Adrenal insufficiency
SIADH
Hypothyroidism
Check urea, glucose, lipids,
immunoglobulins
Hypotonic hyponatraemia
(osmolality <275mOsmol/kg)
Primary polydipsia
Beer potomania
Low solute intake
Consider non-hypotonic
hyponatraemia
Yes
No
Hyponatraemia
may be secondary
to kidney disease
Investigate and treat
underlying disorder
Fig. 19.7 Algorithm for the diagnosis of hyponatraemia. (ECF = extracellular uid; SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) secretion)
19.13  Causes of hypernatraemia
Volume status
Examples
Hypovolaemic
Renal sodium losses:
 Diuretic therapy (especially osmotic diuretic, or 
loop diuretic during water restriction)
Glycosuria (hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state)
Gastrointestinal sodium losses:
Colonic diarrhoea
Skin sodium losses:
Excessive sweating
Euvolaemic
Diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic)
Hypervolaemic
Enteral or parenteral feeding
Intravenous or oral salt administration
Chronic kidney disease (during water restriction)
unable to respond to circulating vasopressin concentrations in the face 
of restricted water intake (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). Whatever the 
underlying cause, sustained or severe hypernatraemia generally reects 
an impaired thirst mechanism or responsiveness to thirst.

[[p676]]
Potassium homeostasis    627
19
avoid the risk of cerebral oedema. Where possible, the  underlying cause 
should also be addressed (see Box 19.13).
Older adult patients are predisposed, in different circumstances, to 
both hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia, and a high index of suspicion 
of these electrolyte disturbances is appropriate in older patients with 
recent alterations in behaviour (Box 19.14).
Potassium homeostasis
Potassium is the major intracellular cation (see Fig. 19.1), and the steep 
concentration gradient for potassium across the cell membrane of excit-
able cells plays an important part in generating the resting membrane 
potential and allowing the propagation of the action potential that is cru-
cial to normal functioning of nerve, muscle and cardiac tissues. Control 
of body potassium balance is described below.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The kidneys normally excrete some 90% of the daily intake of potassium, 
typically 80–100 mmol/24 hrs. Potassium is freely ltered at the glomerulus; 
around 65% is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule and a further 25% in the 
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Little potassium is transported in 
the early distal tubule but a signicant secretory ux of potassium into the 
urine occurs in the late distal tubule and cortical collecting duct to ensure 
that the amount removed from the blood is proportional to the ingested load.
The mechanism for potassium secretion in the distal parts of the 
nephron is shown in panel (D) of Figure 19.2. Movement of potassium 
from blood to lumen is dependent on active uptake across the basal 
cell membrane by the Na,K-ATPase, followed by diffusion of potassium 
through the ROMK channel into the tubular uid. The electrochemical 
gradient for potassium movement into the lumen is contributed to both 
by the high intracellular potassium concentration and by the negative 
luminal potential difference relative to the blood.
A number of factors inuence the rate of potassium secretion. Luminal 
inuences include the rate of sodium delivery and uid ow through the 
late distal tubule and cortical collecting ducts. This is a major factor 
responsible for the increased potassium loss that accompanies diuretic 
treatment. Agents interfering with the generation of the negative lumi-
nal potential also impair potassium secretion, and this is the basis of 
reduced potassium secretion associated with potassium-sparing diuret-
ics such as amiloride. Factors acting on the blood side of this tubular 
segment include plasma potassium and pH, such that hyperkalaemia 
and alkalosis both enhance potassium secretion directly. However, the 
most important factor in the acute and chronic adjustment of potassium 
secretion to match metabolic potassium load is aldosterone.
As shown in Figure 19.8, a negative feedback relationship exists 
between the plasma potassium concentration and aldosterone. In addi-
tion to its regulation by the renin–angiotensin system (see Fig. 20.19), 
aldosterone is released from the adrenal cortex in direct response to 
an elevated plasma potassium. Aldosterone then acts on the kidney to 
enhance potassium secretion, hydrogen secretion and sodium reabsorp-
tion, in the late distal tubule and cortical collecting ducts. The resulting 
increase in excretion of potassium maintains plasma potassium within a 
narrow range (3.5–5.0 mmol/L). Factors that reduce angiotensin II levels 
may indirectly affect potassium balance by blunting the rise in aldoster-
one that would otherwise be provoked by hyperkalaemia. This accounts 
for the increased risk of hyperkalaemia during therapy with ACE inhibitors 
and related drugs.
Presenting problems in potassium homeostasis
Changes in the distribution of potassium between the ICF and ECF com-
partments can alter plasma potassium concentration, without any overall 
change in total body potassium content. Potassium is driven into the 
cells by extracellular alkalosis and by a number of hormones, including 
insulin, catecholamines (through the β2-receptor) and aldosterone. Any 
of these factors can produce hypokalaemia, whereas extracellular aci-
dosis, lack of insulin and insufciency or blockade of catecholamines or 
aldosterone can cause hyperkalaemia due to efux of potassium from 
the intracellular compartment.
Hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia is a common electrolyte disturbance and is dened as 
existing when serum K+ falls below 3.5 mmol/L. The main causes of 
hypokalaemia are shown in Box 19.15
Pathophysiology
Hypokalaemia is generally indicative of abnormal potassium loss from 
the body, through either the kidney or the gastrointestinal tract. Renal 
causes of hypokalaemia can be divided into those with and those with-
out hypertension. Hypokalaemia in the presence of hypertension may be 
due to increased aldosterone secretion in Conn syndrome or a genetic 
defect affecting sodium channels in the distal nephron (Liddle syndrome). 
Excessive intake of liquorice or treatment with carbenoxolone may result 
in a similar clinical picture, due to inhibition of the renal 11βHSD2 enzyme, 
which inactivates cortisol in peripheral tissues.
If blood pressure is normal or low, hypokalaemia can be classied 
according to the associated change in acid–base balance. Inherited 
19.14  Hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia in old age
 Decline in GFR: older patients are predisposed to both hyponatraemia and 
hypernatraemia, mainly because, as glomerular ltration rate declines with age, 
the capacity of the kidney to dilute or concentrate the urine is impaired.
 Hyponatraemia: occurs when free water intake continues in the presence of a 
low dietary salt intake and/or diuretic drugs (particularly thiazides).
 Vasopressin release: water retention is aggravated by any condition that 
stimulates vasopressin release, especially heart failure. Moreover, the 
vasopressin response to non-osmotic stimuli may be brisker in older subjects. 
Appropriate water restriction may be a key part of management.
 Hypernatraemia: occurs when water intake is inadequate, due to physical 
restrictions preventing access to drinks and/or blunted thirst. Both are 
frequently present in patients with advanced dementia or following a severe 
stroke.
 Dietary salt: hypernatraemia is aggravated if dietary supplements or 
medications with a high sodium content (especially effervescent preparations) 
are administered. Appropriate prescription of uids is a key part of 
management.
Kidney
K+
excretion
Adrenal
cortex
(Zona glomerulosa)
Plasma [K+]
Plasma [K+]
K+ intake
Negative
feedback
Aldosterone
Fig. 19.8 Feedback control of plasma potassium concentration.

[[p677]]
628    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
defects in tubular transport should be suspected when hypokalaemia 
occurs in association with hypotension and alkalosis, provided that 
diuretic use has been excluded. One such disease is Bartter syndrome, 
in which sodium reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of Henle is 
defective, usually due to a loss-of-function variant of the NKCC2 trans-
porter. The clinical and biochemical features are similar to those in chronic 
treatment with furosemide. In Gitelman syndrome there is a loss-of-function 
variant affecting the NCCT transporter in the early distal tubule. The clin-
ical and biochemical features are similar to chronic thiazide treatment. 
Note that while both Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are characterised 
by hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia, urinary calcium excretion is 
increased in Bartter syndrome but decreased in Gitelman syndrome, 
analogous to the effects of the loop and thiazide diuretics, respectively, 
on calcium transport (see Box 19.9).
If hypokalaemia occurs in the presence of a normal blood pressure 
and metabolic acidosis, renal tubular acidosis (proximal or ‘classical’ 
distal) should be suspected.
When hypokalaemia is due to potassium wasting through the gas-
trointestinal tract, the cause is usually obvious clinically. In some cases, 
when there is occult induction of vomiting, hypokalaemia is characteris-
tically associated with metabolic alkalosis, due to loss of gastric acid. If, 
however, potassium loss has occurred through the surreptitious use of 
aperients, the hypokalaemia is generally associated with metabolic aci-
dosis. In both cases, urinary potassium excretion is low unless there is 
signicant extracellular volume depletion, which can raise urinary potas-
sium levels by stimulating aldosterone production.
Hypokalaemia can also be caused by redistribution of potassium into 
cells as outlined above or as the result of K+ ux into muscle in hypo-
kalaemic periodic paralysis, which is associated with variants in several 
genes that regulate transmembrane ion ow into muscle cells. Finally, 
reduced dietary intake of potassium can contribute to hypokalaemia but 
is seldom the only cause, except in extreme cases.
Clinical features
Patients with mild hypokalaemia (plasma K+ 3.0–3.5 mmol/L) are gener-
ally asymptomatic, but more profound reductions in plasma potassium 
often lead to muscular weakness and associated tiredness. Ventricular 
ectopic beats or more serious arrhythmias may occur and the arrhythmo-
genic effects of digoxin may be potentiated. Typical electrocardiogram 
(ECG) changes occur, affecting the T wave in particular. Functional bowel 
obstruction may occur due to paralytic ileus. Long-standing hypokalae-
mia may cause renal tubular damage (hypokalaemic nephropathy) and 
can interfere with the tubular response to vasopressin (acquired nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus), resulting in polyuria and polydipsia.
Investigations
Measurement of plasma electrolytes, bicarbonate, urine potassium and 
sometimes of plasma calcium and magnesium is usually sufcient to 
establish the diagnosis. If the diagnosis remains unclear, plasma renin 
should be measured. Levels are low in patients with primary hyperaldos-
teronism and other forms of mineralocorticoid excess, but raised in other 
causes of hypokalaemia. Measurement of urinary potassium may also be 
helpful; if the kidney is the route of potassium loss, the urine potassium 
is high (>30 mmol/24 hrs), whereas if potassium is being lost through the 
gastrointestinal tract, the kidney retains potassium, resulting in a lower 
urinary potassium (generally <20 mmol/24 hrs). It should be noted, how-
ever, that if gastrointestinal uid loss is also associated with hypovolae-
mia, activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system may occur, 
causing increased loss of potassium in the urine.
The cause of hypokalaemia may remain unclear despite the above 
investigations when urinary potassium measurements are inconclusive 
and the history is incomplete or unreliable. Many such cases are associ-
ated with metabolic alkalosis, and in this setting the measurement of urine 
chloride concentration can be helpful. A low urine chloride (<30 mmol/L) 
is characteristic of vomiting (spontaneous or self-induced, in which 
chloride is lost in HCl in the vomit), while a urine chloride >40 mmol/L 
suggests diuretic therapy (acute phase) or a tubular disorder such as 
Bartter or Gitelman syndromes. Differentiation between occult diuretic 
use and primary tubular disorders can be achieved by performing a 
screen of urine for diuretic drugs.
Management
Treatment of hypokalaemia involves rst determining the cause and cor-
recting this where possible. If the problem is mainly one of redistribu-
tion of potassium into cells, reversal of the process responsible may be 
sufcient to restore plasma potassium without providing supplements. 
In most cases, however, some form of potassium replacement will be 
required. This can generally be achieved with slow-release potassium 
chloride tablets, but in more acute circumstances intravenous potassium 
chloride may be necessary. The rate of administration depends on the 
severity of hypokalaemia and the presence of cardiac or neuromuscular 
19.15  Causes of hypokalaemia
Cause
Other features and comment
Reduced intake
Dietary deciency
Potassium-free intravenous uids
Urine K+ <20–30 mmol/24 hrs
Redistribution into cells
Alkalosis
Insulin
Catecholamines
β adrenergic agonists
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
Caused by ux of K+ into cells
Increased urinary excretion
Activation of mineralocorticoid 
receptor:
Urine K+ > 20–30 mmol/24 hrs
 Conn syndrome
 Cushing’s syndrome
 Glucocorticoid excess
 Carbenoxolone/liquorice
Associated with hypertension with 
alkalosis
Genetic disorders:
 Liddle syndrome
Associated with hypertension with 
alkalosis
 Bartter syndrome
 Gitelman syndrome
 Associated with alkalosis and 
hypomagnesaemia
Renal tubular acidosis
Type 1 (distal)
Type 2 (proximal)
Inherited and acquired forms; 
associated with high serum 
chloride. Type 2 associated with 
glycosuria, aminoaciduria and 
phosphaturia
Acetazolamide
Diuresis:
Associated with acidosis
 Loop diuretics
 Thiazides
  Recovery from acute tubular 
necrosis
  Recovery from renal 
obstruction
  Increased sodium delivery to distal 
tubule
Increased gastrointestinal loss
Upper gastrointestinal tract:
Urine K+ <20–30 mmol/L
 Vomiting
 Nasogastric aspiration
Loss of gastric acid
Associated with metabolic alkalosis
Lower gastrointestinal tract:
 Diarrhoea
 Laxative abuse
 Villous adenoma
 Bowel obstruction/stula
 Ureterosigmoidostomy
Associated with metabolic acidosis

[[p678]]
Potassium homeostasis    629
19
complications, but should generally not exceed 10 mmol of potassium 
per hour. In patients with severe, life-threatening hypokalaemia, infu-
sion rates of up to 20 mmol/hr can be used with continuous cardiac 
monitoring.
In the less common situation where hypokalaemia occurs in the pres-
ence of metabolic acidosis, alkaline salts of potassium, such as potas-
sium bicarbonate, can be given by mouth. If magnesium depletion is 
also present, replacement of magnesium may also be required, since 
low cellular magnesium can promote tubular potassium secretion, caus-
ing ongoing urinary losses. In some circumstances, potassium-sparing 
diuretics, such as amiloride, can assist in the correction of hypokalaemia, 
hypomagnesaemia and metabolic alkalosis, especially when renal loss of 
potassium is the underlying cause.
Hyperkalaemia
Hyperkalaemia is a common electrolyte disorder, which is dened as 
existing when serum K+ is >5 mmol/L. The causes of hyperkalaemia are 
summarised in Box 19.16
Pathophysiology
It is important to remember that hyperkalaemia can be artefactual due 
to haemolysis of blood specimens during collection or in vitro, or due 
to release of potassium from platelets in patients with thrombocytosis.
True hyperkalaemia, however, can occur either because of redistri-
bution of potassium between the ICF and ECF, or because potassium 
intake exceeds excretion. Redistribution of potassium from the ICF to the 
ECF may take place in the presence of systemic acidosis, or when the 
circulating levels of insulin, catecholamines and aldosterone are reduced, 
or when the effects of these hormones are blocked.
High dietary potassium intake may contribute to hyperkalaemia, but 
is seldom the only explanation unless renal excretion mechanisms are 
impaired. The mechanism of hyperkalaemia in acute kidney injury and 
chronic kidney disease is impaired excretion of potassium into the urine 
as the result of a reduced GFR. In addition, acute kidney injury can be 
associated with severe hyperkalaemia when there is an increased potas-
sium load, such as in rhabdomyolysis or in sepsis, particularly when aci-
dosis is present. In chronic kidney disease, adaptation to moderately 
elevated plasma potassium levels commonly occurs. However, acute 
rises in potassium triggered by excessive dietary intake, hypovolaemia or 
drugs (see below) may occur and destabilise the situation.
Hyperkalaemia can also develop when tubular potassium secretory 
processes are impaired, even if the GFR is normal. This can arise in 
association with low levels of aldosterone, as is found in Addison’s 
disease, hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism or inherited disorders 
such as congenital isolated hypoaldosteronism, in which there is a 
defect in aldosterone biosynthesis, and pseudohypoaldosteronism 
type 2 (Gordon syndrome), caused by variants in the WNK2 and 
WNK4 genes, which causes decreased potassium secretion in the 
renal tubules.
Drug-induced causes include ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor 
blockers (ARBs), non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers). In aldosterone deciency or 
aldosterone resistance, hyperkalaemia may be associated with acid 
retention, giving rise to the pattern of hyperkalaemic distal (‘type 4’) renal 
tubular acidosis.
In another group of conditions, tubular potassium secretion is impaired 
as the result of aldosterone resistance. This can occur in a variety of 
diseases in which there is inammation of the tubulointerstitium, such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus; following renal transplantation; during 
treatment with potassium-sparing diuretics; and in a number of inherited 
disorders of tubular transport.
Clinical features
Mild to moderate hyperkalaemia (<6.5 mmol/L) is usually asymptomatic. 
More severe hyperkalaemia can present with progressive muscular 
weakness, but sometimes there are no symptoms until cardiac arrest 
occurs. The typical ECG changes are shown on page 615. Peaking 
of the T wave is an early ECG sign but widening of the QRS complex 
presages a dangerous cardiac arrhythmia. However, these characteristic 
ECG ndings are not always present, even in severe hyperkalaemia.
Investigations
Measurement of electrolytes, creatinine and bicarbonate, when com-
bined with clinical assessment, usually provides the explanation for 
hyperkalaemia. In aldosterone deciency, plasma sodium concentration 
is characteristically low, although this can occur with many causes of 
hyperkalaemia. Addison’s disease should be excluded unless there is an 
obvious alternative diagnosis
Management
Treatment of hyperkalaemia depends on its severity and the rate 
of development, but opinions vary as to what level of serum potas-
sium constitutes severe hyperkalaemia and requires urgent treatment. 
19.16  Causes of hyperkalaemia
Cause
Other features and comment
Artefactual
Haemolysis during venepuncture
Haemolysis in vitro  
Thrombocytosis/leucocytosis
Release of intracellular K+
during sample collection, transit 
or clotting
Increased intake
Dietary potassium
Potassium-containing intravenous uids
Redistribution from cells
Acidosis
Insulin deciency
Severe hyperglycaemia
β-blockers
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis
Rhabdomyolysis
Severe haemolysis
Tumour lysis syndrome
Caused by ux of intracellular 
K+ into plasma
Reduced urinary excretion
Reduced glomerular ltration:
 Acute kidney injury
 Chronic kidney disease
Plasma creatinine typically 
>500 μmol/L (5.67 mg/dL)
Reduced mineralocorticoid receptor 
activation:
 Addison’s disease
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
 Isolated aldosterone deciency
  ACE inhibitors
 Angiotensin-receptor blockers
Both reduce aldosterone levels
 Calcineurin inhibitors
 Spironolactone
 Eplerenone
All block the mineralocorticoid 
receptor
 Heparin
Inhibits aldosterone production
Inhibitors of renin production:
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
β-blockers
Tubulointerstitial disease:
 Interstitial nephritis
 Diabetic nephropathy
 Obstructive uropathy
Other:
 Amiloride
 Gordon syndrome
Blocks K+ exchange in distal 
tubule
Direct effect on K+ transport in 
renal tubule

[[p679]]
630    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Patients who have potassium concentrations <6.5 mmol/L in the 
absence of neuromuscular symptoms or ECG changes can be treated 
with a reduction of potassium intake and correction of predisposing fac-
tors. However, in acute and/or severe hyperkalaemia (plasma potassium 
>6.5–7.0 mmol/L), more urgent measures must be taken (Box 19.17). 
The rst step should be infusion of 10 mL 10% calcium gluconate to 
stabilise conductive tissue membranes (calcium has the opposite effect 
to potassium on conduction of an action potential). Measures to shift 
potassium from the ECF to the ICF should also be applied, as they gen-
erally have a rapid effect and may avert arrhythmias. Ultimately, a means 
of removing potassium from the body is generally necessary. When 
renal function is reasonably preserved, loop diuretics (accompanied by 
intravenous saline if hypovolaemia is present) may be effective. In renal 
failure, dialysis may be required. Ion exchange resins, such as calcium 
resonium (which can be given orally or rectally) and oral sodium polysty-
rene sulfonate (SPS), have traditionally been used to bind and excrete 
gastrointestinal potassium. There are concerns, however, with regard 
to SPS’s lack of proven efcacy and safety, with a number of reports 
of intestinal necrosis associated with its use. Newer cation exchange 
resins, which  include  sodium zirconium cyclosilicate and patiromer 
sorbitex calcium, have been developed. These are safe and effective 
treatments for hyperkalaemia and are preferred to SPS. However, they 
are not yet available in all countries for this indication. 
Acid–base homeostasis
The pH of arterial plasma is normally 7.40, corresponding to an H+ con-
centration of 40nmol/L, and under normal circumstances H+ concen-
trations do not vary outside the range of 37–45nmol/L (pH 7.35–7.43). 
Abnormalities of acid–base balance can occur in a wide range of diseases. 
Increases in H+ concentration cause acidosis with a decrease in pH, 
whereas decreases in H+ concentration cause alkalosis with a rise in pH.
Functional anatomy and physiology
A variety of physiological mechanisms maintain pH of the ECF within 
narrow limits. The rst is the action of blood and tissue buffers, of which 
the most important involves reaction of H+ ions with bicarbonate to form 
carbonic acid, which, under the inuence of the enzyme carbonic anhy-
drase (CA), dissociates to form CO2 and water:
CO
H O
H CO
H
HCO
CA
2
2
2
3
3
+
↔
+
+
−
⇌
This buffer system is important because bicarbonate is present at a 
relatively high concentration in ECF (21–29 mmol/L), and two of its key 
components are under physiological control: CO2 by the lungs, and bicar-
bonate by the kidneys. These relationships are illustrated in Figure 19.9 (a 
form of the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation).
Respiratory compensation for acid–base disturbances can occur 
quickly. In response to acid accumulation, pH changes in the brain-
stem stimulate ventilatory drive which reduces PCO2 and subsequently 
increases pH. Conversely, systemic alkalosis leads to inhibition of venti-
lation, causing a rise in PCO2 and reduction in pH, although it should be 
noted that this mechanism has limited capacity to change pH because 
hypoxia provides an alternative stimulus to drive ventilation.
The kidneys provide a third line of defence against disturbances of 
arterial pH. When acid accumulates due to chronic respiratory or meta-
bolic (non-renal) causes, the kidneys have the capacity to enhance uri-
nary excretion of acid, effectively increasing the plasma bicarbonate.
Renal control of acid–base balance
Regulation of acid–base balance occurs at several sites in the kidney. 
The proximal tubule reabsorbs about 85% of the ltered bicarbonate 
ions, through the mechanism illustrated in panel (A) in Figure 19.2. This 
is dependent on the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which is present both 
in the cytoplasm of the proximal tubular cells and on the luminal surface 
of the brush border membranes. The system has a high capacity for 
reabsorption of ltered bicarbonate but does not lead to signicant acid-
ication of the luminal uid.
Distal nephron segments also have an important role in bicarbonate 
reabsorption and acid excretion. Dissociation of H2CO3 occurs in the dis-
tal tubular cells, under the inuence of carbonic anhydrase generating 
H+ ions and HCO3- ions. The H+ ions are secreted into the lumen by an 
H+-ATPase in the alpha intercalated cells of the cortical collecting duct 
and the outer medullary collecting duct cells and the HCO3 passes across 
the basolateral membrane into the blood. Within the tubular lumen, 
H+ combines with hydrogen phosphate (HPO42 )  in the distal tubular 
lumen to form dihydrogen phosphate (H PO
2
4 ), which is excreted in the 
urine with sodium. Similarly, H+ combines with NH3 in the luminal uid 
to form ammonium (NH4
+) ions, which are trapped and excreted in the 
urine combined with chloride ions. The NH3 necessary for this reaction is 
generated in tubular cells by the enzyme glutaminase which acts on the 
amino acid glutamine. Both of these buffers help to prevent the urinary 
pH falling below 5, which would create an unfavourable gradient that 
would stop further secretion of H+ ions into the urine.
Titratable acid and ammonium excretion removes approximately 
1 mmol/kg of hydrogen ions from the body per day, which equates to 
the non-volatile acid load arising from the metabolism of dietary protein. 
The slightly alkaline plasma pH of 7.4 (H+ 40 nmol/L) that is maintained 
19.17  Treatment of severe hyperkalaemia
Objective
Therapy
Stabilise cell membrane 
potential1
IV calcium gluconate (10 mL of 10% solution)
Shift K+ into cells
Inhaled β2-adrenoceptor agonist
IV glucose (50 mL of 50% solution) and 5–10 
IU rapidly acting insulin
IV sodium bicarbonate2
Remove K+ from body
IV furosemide and normal saline3
Ion-exchange resin orally or rectally
Dialysis
1If severe hyperkalaemia (K+ typically > 6.5 mmol/L). 2If acidosis present. 3If adequate residual 
renal function.
(IV = intravenous)
pH = 6.1 + log
[HCO3
− ]
0.03 × PCO2
1° changes
in metabolic
disturbances
2° changes
after renal
compensation*
2° changes
after respiratory
compensation
1° changes
in respiratory
disturbances
Fig. 19.9 Relationship between pH, PCO2 (in mmHg) and plasma bicarbonate 
concentration (in mmol/L).*Note that changes in HCO3− concentration are also 
part of the renal correction for sustained metabolic acid–base disturbances as long 
as the kidney itself is not the cause of the primary disturbance.

[[p680]]
Acid–base homeostasis    631
19
during health can be accounted for by the kidney’s ability to generate an 
acidic urine (typically pH 5–6 (H+ 1000–10 000 nmol/L), in which the net 
daily excess of metabolic acid produced by the body can be excreted.
Presenting problems in acid–base balance
Patients with disturbances of acid–base balance may present clinically 
either with the effects of tissue malfunction due to disturbed pH (such 
as altered cardiac and central nervous system function), or with second-
ary changes in respiration that occur as a response to the underlying 
metabolic change (such as Kussmaul respiration during metabolic aci-
dosis). The clinical picture is often dominated by the underlying cause 
rather than the acid–base abnormality itself. Frequently, acid–base dis-
turbances only become evident when the venous plasma bicarbonate 
concentration is measured and found to be abnormal, or when blood 
gas analysis shows abnormalities in pH, PCO2 or bicarbonate.
The most common patterns of abnormality in blood gas parameters 
are shown in Box 19.18. Interpretation of arterial blood gases in respira-
tory failure is described in Box 17.16
In metabolic disturbances, respiratory compensation is almost imme-
diate, so that the predicted compensatory change in PCO2 is achieved 
soon after the onset of the metabolic disturbance. In respiratory disor-
ders, on the other hand, a small initial change in bicarbonate occurs as 
a result of chemical buffering of CO2, chiey within red blood cells, but 
over days and weeks the kidney achieves further compensatory changes 
in bicarbonate concentration as a result of chronic adjustments in acid 
secretory capacity. When the clinically obtained acid–base parameters 
do not accord with the predicted compensation shown, a mixed acid–
base disturbance should be suspected.
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic acidosis occurs when an acid other than carbonic acid (due to 
CO2 retention) accumulates in the body, resulting in a fall in the plasma bicar-
bonate. The causes of metabolic acidosis are summarised in Box19.19, 
subdivided into two categories, depending on whether the anion gap is 
normal or raised. When plasma bicarbonate falls, another anion needs to 
take its place. This is either chloride (normal anion gap) or an unmeasured 
anion (raised anion gap). The causes are discussed in more detail below.
Pathophysiology
Metabolic acidosis with a normal anion gap occurs when there is 
 poisoning with or therapeutic infusion of a chloride-containing acid such 
as hydrochloric acid or ammonium chloride or when there is a primary 
loss of bicarbonate from the ECF (via the GI tract or from the kidneys). 
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) can be caused by a defect in one of three 
processes:
 impaired bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule (proximal 
RTA)
 impaired acid secretion in the late distal tubule or cortical collecting 
duct intercalated cells (classical distal RTA)
 impaired sodium reabsorption in the late distal tubule or cortical 
collecting duct, which is associated with reduced secretion of both 
potassium and H+ ions (hyperkalaemic distal RTA).
Various subtypes of RTA are recognised and the most common 
causes are shown in Box 19.20. The inherited forms of RTA are due to 
variants in the genes that regulate acid or bicarbonate transport in the 
renal tubules (see Fig. 19.2).
Acidosis with an increased anion gap is most commonly seen in 
ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis and late kidney failure, where there is endog-
enous production of anions distinct from Cl  and HCO3 . Ketoacidosis 
is caused by insulin deciency and is exacerbated by catecholamine and 
stress hormone excess, which combine to cause lipolysis and the for-
mation of acidic ketones (acetoacetate, 3-hydroxybutyrate and acetone). 
The most common cause of ketoacidosis is diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA); 
its aetiology and management are discussed in Chapter 21. Starvation 
ketoacidosis occurs when there is reduced food intake in situations of 
high glucose demand, such as in neonates, and in pregnant or breast-
feeding women. In alcoholic ketoacidosis, there is usually a background 
of chronic malnutrition and a recent alcohol binge. Two subtypes of lactic 
acidosis have been dened:
19.18  Principal patterns of acid–base disturbance
Disturbance
Blood H+
Primary change
Compensatory response
Predicted compensation
Metabolic acidosis
>401
HCO3
< 24 mmol/L
PCO2 <5.33kPa2
PCO2 fall in kPa = 0.16 × HCO3  fall in mmol/L
Metabolic alkalosis
<401
HCO3
>24 mmol/L
PCO2 >5.33kPa2,3
PCO2 rise in kPa = 0.08 × HCO3  rise in mmol/L
Respiratory acidosis
>401
PCO2 >5.33 kPa2
HCO3
>24 mmol/L
Acute: HCO3 rise in mmol/L = 0.75 × PCO2 rise in kPa
Chronic: HCO3 rise in mmol/L = 2.62 × PCO2 rise in kPa
Respiratory alkalosis
<401
PCO2 <5.33 kPa2
HCO3
<24 mmol/L
Acute: HCO3 fall in mmol/L = 1.50 × PCO2 fall in kPa
Chronic: HCO3 fall in mmol/L = 3.75 × PCO2 fall in kPa
1H+ of 40nmol/L = pH of 7.40. 2PCO2 of 5.33kPa = 40 mmHg. 3PCO2 does not rise above 7.33kPa (55 mmHg) because hypoxia then intervenes to drive respiration.
19.19  Causes of metabolic acidosis
Disorder
Mechanism
Normal anion gap
Ingestion or infusion of inorganic 
acid
Gastrointestinal HCO3 loss
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
Therapeutic infusion of or poisoning 
with NH4Cl, HCl
Loss of HCO3 in diarrhoea, small 
bowel stula, urinary diversion 
procedure
Urinary loss of HCO3 in proximal RTA; 
impaired tubular acid secretion in 
distal RTA
Increased anion gap
Endogenous acid load
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Accumulation of ketones1 with 
hyperglycaemia
Lactic acidosis
Shock, liver disease, drugs
Kidney disease
Accumulation of organic acids
Exogenous acid load
Aspirin poisoning
Accumulation of salicylate2
Methanol poisoning
Accumulation of formate
Ethylene glycol poisoning
Accumulation of glycolate, oxalate
 1Ketones include acid anions acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate. 2Salicylate poisoning is also 
associated with respiratory alkalosis due to direct ventilatory stimulation.

[[p681]]
632    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
 type I, due to tissue hypoxia and peripheral generation of lactate, as 
in patients with circulatory failure and shock
 type II, due to impaired metabolism of lactate, as in liver disease or 
by a number of drugs and toxins, including metformin, which inhibit 
lactate metabolism.
 
Metabolic acidosis with an increased anion gap may also be a 
consequence of exogenous acid loads from poisoning with aspirin, 
methanol or ethylene glycol.Typically, metabolic acidosis in chronic 
kidney disease is associated wth a normal anion gap until late in the 
disease process when the gap widens due to the lack of excretion of 
anions such as phosphate, sulphate and urate.
Clinical features
Normal anion gap metabolic acidosis is usually due either to bicarbonate 
loss in diarrhoea, where the clinical diagnosis is generally obvious, or 
to RTA. Although some forms of RTA are inherited, it may also be an 
acquired disorder, and in these circumstances the discovery of metabolic 
acidosis may serve as an early clue to the underlying diagnosis. The 
presentation of increased anion gap acidosis is usually dominated by 
clinical features of the underlying disease, such as uncontrolled diabetes 
mellitus, kidney failure or shock, or may be suggested by the clinical 
history of starvation, alcoholism or associated symptoms, such as visual 
complaints in methanol poisoning.
Investigations
The different types of metabolic acidosis can be distinguished by blood 
gas measurements, along with measurements of creatinine, electro-
lytes and bicarbonate. Under normal circumstances, the anion gap, 
dened as the numerical difference between the main measured cat-
ions (Na+ + K+) and the anions (Cl
+ HCO3 ) is about 5–11 mmol/L. 
This gap is normally made up of various unmeasured anions, such as 
phosphate and sulphate, as well as albumin. RTA should be suspected 
when there is a hyperchloraemic acidosis with a normal anion gap in 
the absence of gastrointestinal disturbance. The diagnosis can be con-
rmed by nding an inappropriately high urine pH (>5.5) in the presence 
of systemic acidosis. Sometimes, distal RTA may be incomplete, such 
that the plasma bicarbonate concentration may be normal. In this case, 
an acid challenge test can be performed by administration of an acid 
load in the form of ammonium chloride to reduce plasma bicarbonate. 
The diagnosis of incomplete distal RTA can be conrmed if the urine pH 
fails to fall below 5.3 in the presence of a low bicarbonate.
The different subtypes of RTA can be differentiated by various bio-
chemical features. Patients with proximal and distal RTA often present 
with features of profound hypokalaemia, while type IV RTA is associated 
with hyperkalaemia. Proximal RTA is frequently associated with urinary 
wasting of amino acids, phosphate and glucose (Fanconi syndrome), as 
well as bicarbonate and potassium. Patients with this disorder can lower 
the urine pH when the acidosis is severe and plasma bicarbonate levels 
have fallen below 16 mmol/L, since distal H+ secretion mechanisms are 
intact. In the classical form of distal RTA, however, acid accumulation 
is relentless and progressive, resulting in mobilisation of calcium from 
bone and osteomalacia with hypercalciuria, renal stone formation and 
nephrocalcinosis. Potassium is also lost in classical distal RTA, while it is 
retained in hyperkalaemic distal RTA.
Investigations in patients with raised anion gap metabolic acidosis 
show features of the underlying cause, such as reduced GFR in kidney 
failure and raised urine or blood ketones in ketoacidosis. In DKA, blood 
glucose is raised, while in starvation and alcoholic acidosis blood glu-
cose is not elevated and may be low. Measurement of plasma lactate is 
helpful in the diagnosis of lactic acidosis when values are increased over 
the normal maximal level of 2 mmol/L.
Management
The rst step in management of metabolic acidosis is to identify and 
correct the underlying cause when possible (see Box 19.19). This 
may involve controlling diarrhoea, treating diabetes mellitus, correcting 
shock, stopping drugs that might cause the condition, or using dialy-
sis to remove toxins. Since metabolic acidosis is frequently associated 
with sodium and water depletion, resuscitation with intravenous uids is 
often needed. In alcoholism and starvation ketosis, intravenous glucose 
is indicated. By stimulating endogenous insulin secretion, this will reverse 
hepatic ketone production. Malnourished patients may also require thia-
min, potassium, magnesium and phosphate supplements. Use of intra-
venous bicarbonate in metabolic acidosis is controversial. Because rapid 
correction of acidosis can induce hypokalaemia or a fall in plasma ionised 
calcium, the use of bicarbonate infusions is best reserved for situations 
where the underlying disorder cannot be readily corrected and acidosis 
is severe (H+ >100 nmol/L, pH < 7.00) or associated with evidence of 
tissue dysfunction.
The acidosis in RTA can sometimes be controlled by treating the 
underlying cause (see Box 19.20), but usually supplements of sodium 
and potassium bicarbonate are also necessary in types I and II RTA to 
achieve a target plasma bicarbonate level of >18 mmol/L and normokal-
aemia. In type IV RTA, loop diuretics, thiazides or udrocortisone (as 
appropriate to the underlying diagnosis) may be effective in correcting 
the acidosis and the hyperkalaemia.
Metabolic alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis is characterised by an increase in the plasma bicar-
bonate concentration and the plasma pH (see Box 19.18). There is a 
compensatory rise in PCO2 due to hypoventilation but this is limited by 
the need to avoid hypoxia. Classical causes include Conn syndrome, 
Cushing’s syndrome and glucocorticoid therapy. Occasionally, overuse 
of antacid salts for treatment of dyspepsia produces a similar pattern.
Pathophysiology
Metabolic alkalosis is best classied according to the accompanying 
changes in ECF volume. Hypovolaemic metabolic alkalosis is the most 
common pattern. This can be caused by sustained vomiting, in which 
acid-rich uid is lost directly from the body, or by treatment with loop 
diuretics or thiazides. In the case of sustained vomiting, loss of gastric 
acid is the immediate cause of the alkalosis, but several factors act to 
sustain or amplify this in the context of volume depletion (Fig. 19.10). 
Loss of sodium and uid leads to hypovolaemia and secondary hyper-
aldosteronism, triggering proximal sodium bicarbonate reabsorption 
and additional acid secretion by the distal tubule. Hypokalaemia occurs 
due to potassium loss in the vomitus and by the kidney as the result of 
19.20  Causes of renal tubular acidosis
Proximal renal tubular acidosis (type II RTA)
 Inherited:
Fanconi syndrome
Cystinosis
Wilson’s disease
 Paraproteinaemia:
Myeloma
Amyloidosis
 Heavy metal toxicity:
Lead, cadmium and mercury 
poisoning
 Drugs:
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Ifosfamide
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
Classical distal renal tubular acidosis (type I RTA)
 Inherited
 Autoimmune diseases:
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Sjögren syndrome
 Hyperglobulinaemia
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
 Toxins and drugs:
Toluene
Lithium
Amphotericin
Hyperkalaemic distal renal tubular acidosis (type IV RTA)
 Hypoaldosteronism (primary or 
secondary)
 Obstructive nephropathy
 Renal transplant rejection
 Drugs:
Amiloride
Spironolactone

[[p682]]
Magnesium homeostasis    633
19
secondary hyperaldosteronism, and itself is a stimulus to acid secretion. 
Additionally, the compensatory rise in PCO2 further enhances tubular 
acid secretion. The net result is sustained metabolic alkalosis with an 
inappropriately acid urine, which cannot be corrected until the decit in 
circulating volume has been replaced.
Normovolaemic (or hypervolaemic) metabolic alkalosis occurs when 
bicarbonate retention and volume expansion occur simultaneously.
Clinical features
Clinically, apart from manifestations of the underlying cause, there may 
be few symptoms or signs related to alkalosis itself. When the rise in 
systemic pH is abrupt, however, plasma ionised calcium falls and signs 
of increased neuromuscular irritability, such as tetany, may develop.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be conrmed by measurement of electrolytes and 
arterial blood gases.
Management
Metabolic alkalosis with hypovolaemia can be corrected by intravenous 
infusions of 0.9% saline with potassium supplements. This reverses 
the secondary hyperaldosteronism and allows the kidney to excrete 
the excess alkali in the urine. Management of metabolic alkalosis in the 
absence of hypovolaemia should focus on management of the underly-
ing endocrine cause such as Conn syndrome, Cushing’s syndrome or 
corticosteroid excess.
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis occurs when there is accumulation of CO2 due to 
type II respiratory failure. This results in a rise in the PCO2, with a com-
pensatory increase in plasma bicarbonate concentration, particularly 
when the disorder is of long duration and the kidney has fully developed 
its capacity for increased acid excretion.
This acid–base disturbance can arise from lesions anywhere along the 
neuromuscular pathways from the brain to the respiratory muscles that 
result in impaired ventilation. It can also arise during intrinsic lung disease 
if there is signicant mismatching of ventilation and perfusion.
Clinical features are primarily those of the underlying cause of the res-
piratory disorder, such as paralysis, chest wall injury or chronic obstruc-
tive lung disease, but the CO2 accumulation may itself lead to drowsiness 
that further depresses respiratory drive.
Management involves correction of causative factors where possible, 
but ultimately ventilatory support may be necessary.
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis develops when there is a period of sustained hyper-
ventilation, resulting in a reduction of PCO2 and increase in plasma pH. If 
the condition is sustained, renal compensation occurs, such that tubular 
acid secretion is reduced and the plasma bicarbonate falls.
Respiratory alkalosis is usually of short duration, occurring in anxiety 
states or as the result of over-vigorous assisted ventilation. It can be pro-
longed in the context of pregnancy, pulmonary embolism, chronic liver 
disease and ingestion of certain drugs such as salicylates that directly 
stimulate the respiratory centre in the brainstem.
Clinical features are those of the underlying cause but agitation asso-
ciated with perioral and digital tingling may also occur, as alkalosis 
promotes the binding of calcium to albumin, resulting in a reduction in 
ionised calcium concentrations. In severe cases, Trousseau’s sign and 
Chvostek’s sign may be positive, and tetany or seizures can occur.
Management involves correction of identiable causes, reduction of anxi-
ety, and a period of rebreathing into a closed bag to allow CO2 levels to rise.
Mixed acid–base disorders
It is not uncommon for more than one disturbance of acid–base metab-
olism to be present at the same time in the same patient: for example, a 
respiratory acidosis due to narcotic overdose with metabolic alkalosis due 
to vomiting. In these situations, the arterial pH will represent the net effect of 
all primary and compensatory changes. Indeed, the pH may be normal, but 
the presence of underlying acid–base disturbances can be gauged from 
concomitant abnormalities in the PCO2 and bicarbonate concentration.
In assessing these disorders, all clinical inuences on the patient’s 
acid–base status should be identied, and reference should be made to 
the table of predicted compensation given in Box 19.18. If the compen-
satory change is discrepant from the rules of thumb provided, more than 
one disturbance of acid–base metabolism may be suspected.
Calcium homeostasis
Disorders of calcium homeostasis are discussed in Chapter 20 and bone 
disease is discussed in Chapter 26
Magnesium homeostasis
Magnesium is mainly an intracellular cation. It is important to the function 
of many enzymes, including the Na,K-ATPase, and can regulate both 
potassium and calcium channels. Its overall effect is to stabilise excitable 
cell membranes.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Renal handling of magnesium involves ltration of free plasma magne-
sium at the glomerulus (about 70% of the total), with extensive reab-
sorption (50%–70%) in the loop of Henle and other parts of the proximal 
and distal renal tubule. Magnesium reabsorption is also enhanced by 
parathyroid hormone (PTH).
Vomiting
Na+Cl−
Metabolic
alkalosis
Gastric loss of
H+Cl−
K+Cl−
Hypovolaemia
↑ Proximal
Na+HCO3−
reabsorption
↑ Renin – 
angiotensin – 
aldosterone
Hypokalaemia
↑ Distal H+
secretion
↑ Renal NH3
synthesis
↑ H+ excretion
Fig. 19.10 Generation and maintenance of metabolic alkalosis during 
prolonged vomiting. Loss of H+Cl− generates metabolic alkalosis, which is 
maintained by renal changes.

[[p683]]
634    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Presenting problems in magnesium homeostasis
Disturbances in magnesium homeostasis usually occur because of 
increased loss of magnesium through the gut or kidney or inability to 
excrete magnesium normally in patients with renal impairment.
Hypomagnesaemia
Hypomagnesaemia is dened as existing when plasma magnesium concen-
trations are below the reference range of 0.75–1.0 mmol/L (1.5–2.0 mEq/L).
Pathophysiology
Hypomagnesaemia usually is a reection of magnesium depletion 
(Box19.21), which can be caused by excessive magnesium loss from the 
gastrointestinal tract (notably in chronic diarrhoea) or the kidney (during 
prolonged use of loop diuretics). Excessive alcohol ingestion can cause 
magnesium depletion through both gut and renal losses. Some inherited 
tubular transport disorders, such as Gitelman and Bartter syndromes, 
can also result in urinary magnesium wasting. Magnesium depletion has 
important effects on calcium homeostasis because magnesium is required 
for the normal secretion of PTH in response to a fall in serum calcium, and 
because hypomagnesaemia causes end-organ resistance to PTH.
Clinical features
Mild degrees of hypomagnesaemia may be asymptomatic but more 
severe hypomagnesaemia may be associated with symptoms of hypocal-
caemia, such as tetany, cardiac arrhythmias (notably torsades de pointes), 
central nervous excitation and seizures, vasoconstriction and hyperten-
sion. Hypomagnesaemia and magnesium depletion are also associated 
(through uncertain mechanisms) with hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia, 
which may contribute to some of the clinical manifestations.
Management
The underlying cause should be identied and treated where possible. 
When symptoms are present, the treatment of choice is intravenous 
magnesium chloride at a rate not exceeding 0.5 mmol/kg in the rst 
24 hours. If intravenous access is not feasible, magnesium sulphate can 
be given intramuscularly. Oral magnesium salts have limited effectiveness 
due to poor absorption and may cause diarrhoea. If hypomagnesaemia 
is caused by diuretic treatment, adjunctive use of a potassium-sparing 
agent can also help by reducing magnesium loss into the urine.
Hypermagnesaemia
This is a much less common abnormality than hypomagnesaemia. 
Predisposing conditions include acute kidney injury, chronic kidney dis-
ease and adrenocortical insufciency. The condition is generally precipi-
tated in patients at risk from an increased intake of magnesium, or from 
the use of magnesium-containing medications, such as antacids, laxa-
tives and enemas.
Clinical features include bradycardia, hypotension, reduced con-
sciousness and respiratory depression.
Management involves ceasing all magnesium-containing drugs and 
reducing dietary magnesium intake, improving renal function if possible, 
and promoting urinary magnesium excretion using a loop diuretic with 
intravenous hydration, if residual renal function allows. Calcium gluco-
nate may be given intravenously to ameliorate cardiac effects. Dialysis 
may be necessary in patients with poor renal function.
Phosphate homeostasis
Inorganic phosphate (mainly present as HPO42
) is intimately involved 
in cell energy metabolism, intracellular signalling and bone and min-
eral homeostasis (Ch. 26). The normal plasma concentration is 0.8–
1.4 mmol/L (2.48–4.34 mg/dL).
Functional anatomy and physiology
Phosphate is freely ltered at the glomerulus and approximately 65% is 
reabsorbed by the proximal tubule, through an apical sodium– phosphate 
co-transport carrier. A further 10%–20% is reabsorbed in the distal 
tubules, leaving a fractional excretion of some 10% to pass into the urine, 
usually as H PO
2
4
. Proximal reabsorption is decreased by PTH, bro-
blast growth factor 23 (FGF23), volume expansion, osmotic diuretics and 
glucose infusion.
Presenting problems in phosphate homeostasis
The following section deals primarily with conditions that cause acute 
disturbances in serum phosphate concentrations. Chronic disorders that 
are accompanied by phosphate depletion, such as osteomalacia and 
hypophosphataemic rickets, are discussed in Chapter 26. Acute kidney 
injury and chronic kidney disease, which are associated with hyperphos-
phataemia, are discussed below and also in Chapter 18
Hypophosphataemia
Hypophosphataemia is dened as existing when serum phosphate 
values fall below 0.8 mmol/L (2.48 mg/dL). The causes are shown in 
Box19.22, subdivided into the underlying pathogenic mechanisms.
Pathophysiology
Phosphate may redistribute into cells during periods of increased energy 
utilisation (such as refeeding after a period of starvation) and during 
systemic alkalosis. However, severe hypophosphataemia usually repre-
sents an overall body decit due to either inadequate intake or absorp-
tion through the gut, or excessive renal losses, most notably in primary 
19.21  Causes of hypomagnesaemia
Mechanism
Examples
Inadequate intake
Starvation
Malnutrition
Alcoholism
Parenteral nutrition
Excessive losses
Gastrointestinal
Prolonged vomiting/nasogastric aspiration
Chronic diarrhoea/laxative abuse
Malabsorption
Small bowel bypass surgery
Fistulae
Proton pump inhibitors
Urinary
Diuretic therapy
Alcohol
Tubulotoxic drugs:
Gentamicin
Cisplatin
Herceptin
Volume expansion
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Post-obstructive diuresis
Recovery from acute tubular necrosis
Inherited tubular transport defect:
Bartter syndrome
Gitelman syndrome
Primary renal magnesium wasting
Miscellaneous
Acute pancreatitis
Foscarnet therapy
Proton pump inhibitor therapy
Hungry bone syndrome
Diabetes mellitus

[[p684]]
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism    635
19
hyperparathyroidism or as the result of acute plasma volume expansion, 
osmotic diuresis and diuretics acting on the proximal renal tubule. Less 
common causes include inherited defects of proximal sodium– phosphate 
co-transport and tumour-induced osteomalacia due to ectopic produc-
tion of the hormone FGF23.
Clinical features
The clinical features of phosphate depletion are wide-ranging, reecting 
the involvement of phosphate in many aspects of metabolism. Defects 
appear in the blood (impaired function and survival of all cell lineages), 
skeletal muscle (weakness, respiratory failure), cardiac muscle (con-
gestive cardiac failure), smooth muscle (ileus), central nervous system 
(decreased consciousness, seizures and coma) and bone (osteomalacia 
and rickets in severe prolonged hypophosphataemia).
Investigations
Measurement of creatinine, electrolytes, phosphate, albumin, calcium 
and alkaline phosphatase should be performed. In selected cases, 
measurement of PTH and 25(OH)D and FGF23 may be helpful. The com-
bination of hypophosphataemia and hypercalcaemia suggests primary 
hyperparathyroidism, which should be further investigated by meas-
urements of PTH. The combination of hypophosphataemia with raised 
FGF23 levels and normal levels of 25(OH)D suggests either hereditary 
hypophosphataemic rickets or tumour-induced osteomalacia.
Management
Management of hypophosphataemia due to decreased dietary intake 
or excessive losses involves administering oral phosphate supplements 
and high-protein/high-dairy dietary supplements that are rich in naturally 
occurring phosphate. Intravenous treatment with sodium or potassium 
phosphate salts can be used in critical situations, but there is a risk of 
precipitating hypocalcaemia and metastatic calcication. Management 
of primary hyperparathyroidism is discussed in Chapter 18 and of 
hypophosphataemic rickets in Chapter 26
Hyperphosphataemia
Hyperphosphataemia is most commonly caused by acute kidney injury 
or chronic kidney disease. Rarely, hyperphosphataemia can occur in 
association with hypercalcaemia in the inherited disorder tumoral calci-
nosis due to loss-of-function variants in FGF23 or GALTN3
Pathophysiology
In acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease, the primary cause is 
reduced phosphate excretion as the result of a low GFR. In contrast, 
the hyperphosphataemia in hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypo-
parathyroidism is due to increased tubular phosphate reabsorption. 
Redistribution of phosphate from cells into the plasma can also be a con-
tributing factor in the tumour lysis syndromes and other catabolic states. 
Phosphate accumulation can be aggravated in any of these conditions 
if the patient takes phosphate-containing preparations or inappropriate 
vitamin D therapy.
Clinical features
The clinical features relate to hypocalcaemia and metastatic calcication, 
particularly in chronic kidney disease with tertiary hyperparathyroidism 
(when a high calcium–phosphate product occurs). Tumoral calcinosis is 
characterised by musculoskeletal pain due to deposition of calcium and 
phosphate in the joints and soft tissues.
Management
Hyperphosphataemia in patients with kidney disease should be treated 
with dietary phosphate restriction and the use of oral phosphate binders. 
Hyperphosphataemia in hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathy-
roidism does not usually require treatment. Hyperphosphataemia associ-
ated with tumour lysis syndromes and catabolic states can be treated with 
intravenous normal saline, which is given to promote phosphate excretion.
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism
The three main biological classes of lipid are:
 cholesterol, which is composed of hydrocarbon rings
 triglycerides (TGs), which are esters composed of glycerol linked to 
three long-chain fatty acids
 phospholipids, which are composed of a hydrophobic ‘tail’ consist-
ing of two long-chain fatty acids linked through glycerol to a hydro-
philic head containing a phosphate group.
Phospholipids are present in cell membranes and are important sig-
nalling molecules.
Despite their poor water solubility, lipids need to be absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract and transported throughout the body. This is 
achieved by incorporating lipids within lipoproteins. Plasma cholesterol 
and TGs are clinically important because they are major treatable risk 
factors for cardiovascular disease, while severe hypertriglyceridaemia 
also predisposes to acute pancreatitis.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Lipids are transported and metabolised by apolipoproteins, which com-
bine with lipids to form spherical or disc-shaped lipoproteins, consisting 
of a hydrophobic core and a less hydrophobic coat (Fig. 19.11). The 
structure of some apolipoproteins also enables them to act as enzyme 
co-factors or cell receptor ligands. Variations in lipid and apolipoprotein 
composition result in distinct classes of lipoprotein that perform specic 
metabolic functions.
Processing of dietary lipid
The mechanisms responsible for intestinal absorption of dietary lipid are 
described in Chapter 23 but the most salient features relevant to lipid 
metabolism are summarised in Figure 19.12. Enterocytes lining the gut 
extract mono and diglycerides and free fatty acids from micelles. These 
are re-esteried into TGs, which are combined with a truncated form 
of apolipoprotein B (Apo B48) as it is synthesised. Intestinal cholesterol 
derived from dietary and biliary sources is also absorbed through a specic 
intestinal membrane transporter termed NPC1L1. This produces chylomi-
crons containing TG and cholesterol ester that are secreted basolaterally 
into lymphatic lacteals and carried to the circulation through the thoracic 
duct. On entering the blood stream, nascent chylomicrons are modied by 
further exchange of apolipoproteins. Chylomicron TGs are hydrolysed by 
lipoprotein lipase located on the endothelium of tissue capillary beds. This 
releases fatty acids that are used locally for energy production or stored as 
TG in muscle or fat. The residual ‘remnant’ chylomicron particle is avidly 
19.22  Causes of hypophosphataemia
Mechanism
Examples
Redistribution into cells
Refeeding after starvation
Respiratory alkalosis
Treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis
Inadequate intake or 
absorption
Malnutrition
Malabsorption
Chronic diarrhoea
Phosphate binders
Antacids
Vitamin D deciency or resistance
Increased renal excretion
Hyperparathyroidism
Extracellular uid volume expansion with 
diuresis
Osmotic diuretics
Fanconi syndrome
Familial hypophosphataemic rickets
Tumour-induced hypophosphataemic rickets

[[p685]]
636    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
cleared by low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLRs) and other receptors 
in the liver, which recognise Apo E on the remnant lipoproteins. Complete 
absorption of dietary lipids takes about 6–10 hours, so chylomicrons are 
usually undetectable in the plasma after a 12-hour fast.
The main dietary determinants of plasma cholesterol concentrations 
are the intake of saturated and trans-unsaturated fatty acids, which 
reduce LDLR activity (see below), whereas dietary cholesterol has sur-
prisingly little effect on plasma cholesterol levels. Plant sterols and drugs 
that inhibit cholesterol absorption are effective because they also reduce 
the re-utilisation of biliary cholesterol. The dietary determinants of plasma 
TG concentrations are complex since excessive intake of carbohydrate, 
fat or alcohol may all contribute to increased plasma TG by different 
mechanisms.
Endogenous lipid synthesis
In the fasting state, the liver is the major source of plasma lipids (see 
Fig.19.12). The liver may acquire lipids by uptake, synthesis or conversion 
from other macronutrients. These lipids are transported to other tissues 
by secretion of very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), which are rich in 
Apolipoprotein
Free
cholesterol
Phospholipid
Triglyceride
Cholesteryl
ester
Fig. 19.11 Structure of lipoproteins.
Synthesis
Oxidation
FFA
TG
Bile acids (BA)
Apo B100
Cholesterol
HMGCoAR
Synthesis
Liver
HL
SRB1
FFA
LPL
LPL
LDLR
degraded
in lysosome
ABCA1
ABCG1
Lipid rafts
Cholesterol
Oxidation
Peripheral
tissues
TG
LCAT
HDL
iHDL
Lipid-poor Apo A1
C
CE
TG
CE
LDLR
degraded in
lysosome
LDLR
degraded in
lysosome
CE
TG
TG
TG
CE
iHDL
IDL
TG
CE
Chylomicron
remnant
iHDL
iHDL
TG
TG
TG
CE
Chylomicron
VLDL
LDL
Dietary TG,
C and CE
Biliary BA and
C excretion
BA
reabsorption
Post-prandial
Endogenous TG supply
Endogenous cholesterol supply
Reverse cholesterol transport
Biliary excretion/enterohepatic
circulation
Lymph
TG
TG
TG
CE
Chylomicron
Small
intestine
iHDL
LDLR
PCSK9
Fig. 19.12 Absorption, transport and storage of lipids. Pathways of lipid transport are shown; in addition, cholesterol ester transfer protein exchanges triglyceride and 
cholesterol ester between very low-density lipoprotein/chylomicrons and high-/low-density lipoprotein, and free fatty acids released from peripheral lipolysis can be taken up in 
the liver. (ABCA1/ABCG1 = adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette A1/G1; Apo = apolipoprotein; BA = bile acids; C = cholesterol; CE = cholesterol ester; FFA = free fatty acids; 
HDL = mature high-density lipoprotein; HL = hepatic lipase; HMGCoAR = hydroxy-methyl-glutaryl-co-enzyme A reductase; IDL = intermediate-density lipoprotein; iHDL = immature 
high-density lipoprotein; LCAT = lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; LDLR = low-density lipoprotein receptor (Apo B100 receptor); LPL = 
lipoprotein lipase; PCSK9 = proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9; SRB1 = scavenger receptor B1; TG = triglyceride; VLDL = very low-density lipoprotein)

[[p686]]
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism    637
19
TG but differ from chylomicrons in that they are less massive and con-
tain full-length Apo B100. Following secretion into the circulation, VLDLs 
undergo metabolic processing similar to that of chylomicrons. Hydrolysis 
of VLDL TG releases fatty acids to tissues and converts VLDLs into ‘rem-
nant’ particles, referred to as intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs). Most 
IDLs are rapidly cleared by LDLRs in the liver but some are processed by 
hepatic lipase, which converts the particle to an LDL by removing TG and 
most materials other than Apo B100, and free and esteried cholesterol. 
The catabolism of TG-rich chylomicrons and VLDL by lipoprotein lipase is 
modulated by Apos C2 and C3 on the surface of these particles.
Cholesterol transport
The LDL particles act as a source of cholesterol for cells and tissues 
(see Fig. 19.12). LDL cholesterol is internalised by receptor-mediated 
endocytosis via the LDLR. Delivery of cholesterol by this mechanism 
contributes to the homeostatic control of intracellular cholesterol levels 
via sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP), which coordi-
nates intracellular cholesterol metabolism via several mechanisms. 
Decline in SREBP down-regulates expression of LDLR and reduces 
the synthesis and activity of the rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol 
synthesis, hydroxy- methyl-glutaryl-co-enzyme A (HMGCoA) reductase. 
Counterintuitively, this is accompanied by an increase in an impor-
tant regulator of LDLR levels, proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9 
(PCSK9), which targets LDLR for degradation. Intracellular free cho-
lesterol concentrations are maintained within a narrow range by the 
inhibitory effects of LDL on expression of LRLR, modulation of the half-
life of LDLR through PCSK9, and control of cholesterol synthesis and 
esterication.
Peripheral tissues are guarded against excessive cholesterol accumu-
lation by high-density lipoproteins (HDLs; see Fig. 19.12). Lipid-poor Apo 
A1 (derived from the liver, intestine and the outer layer of chylomicrons 
and VLDL) accepts cellular cholesterol and phospholipid from a specic 
membrane transporter known as the ATP-binding cassette A1 (ABCA1). 
This produces small HDLs that are able to accept more free cholesterol 
from cholesterol-rich regions of the cell membrane known as ‘rafts’ via 
another membrane transporter (ABCG1). The cholesterol that has been 
accepted by these small HDLs is esteried by lecithin cholesterol acyl 
transferase (LCAT), thus maintaining an uptake gradient and remodelling 
the particle into a mature spherical HDL. These HDLs release their cho-
lesterol to the liver and other cholesterol-requiring tissues via the scaven-
ger receptor B1 (SRB1).
The cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP) in plasma allows transfer 
of cholesterol from HDLs or LDLs to VLDLs or chylomicrons in exchange 
for TG. When TG is elevated, the action of CETP may reduce HDL cho-
lesterol and remodel LDLs into ‘small, dense’ LDL particles that may 
be more atherogenic in the blood-vessel wall. Animal species that lack 
CETP seem resistant to atherosclerosis.
Lipids and cardiovascular disease
Plasma lipoprotein levels are major modiable risk factors for cardiovas-
cular disease. Increased levels of atherogenic lipoproteins (especially 
LDL, but also IDL, and possibly chylomicron remnants) contribute to the 
development of atherosclerosis. A sub-population of LDL particles bears 
an additional protein known as apolipoprotein (a), which shares homol-
ogy with plasminogen. The combination of LDL and apolipoprotein (a) is 
known as lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a)). It transports oxidised phospholipid and is 
regarded as atherogenic because its plasma concentration is an independ-
ent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Following chemical modications 
such as oxidation, Apo B-containing lipoproteins are no longer cleared 
by the normal LDLR pathway. They trigger a self-perpetuating inamma-
tory response, during which they are taken up by macrophage ‘scavenger 
receptors’ to form foam cells, a hallmark of atherosclerotic lesions. These 
processes also have an adverse effect on endothelial function.
Conversely, HDL removes cholesterol from the tissues to the liver, 
where it is metabolised and excreted in bile. HDL may also counteract 
some components of the inammatory response, such as the expression 
of vascular adhesion molecules by the endothelium. Low HDL choles-
terol levels (HDL-C) are usually associated with TG elevation. This inverse 
relationship may confound the associations between HDL-C and/or TG 
with atherosclerosis.
Investigations
Lipid measurements are usually performed for the following reasons:
 screening for primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular 
disease
 investigation of patients with clinical features of lipid disorders and 
their relatives
 monitoring of response to diet, weight control and medication.
Abnormalities of lipid metabolism most commonly come to light fol-
lowing these tests. Convenient non-fasting measurements of total cho-
lesterol (TC) and HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) allow estimation of non-HDL 
cholesterol (non-HDLC, calculated as TC − HDL-C). A 12-hour fasting 
sample is required to standardise TG measurement and allow calculation 
of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) according to the Friedewald formula:
LDL
C
TC
HDL
C
TG 2.2 mmol/L
−
−
−
−
=
(
/
)
or
LDL
C
TC
HDL
C
TG/ 5 mg/dL
−
−
−
−
=
(
)
The formula becomes unreliable when TG levels exceed 4 mmol/L 
(350 mg/dL). Measurements of non-HDLC or Apo B100 may assess 
risk of cardiovascular disease more accurately than LDL-C, particu-
larly when TG levels are increased. Furthermore, non-fasting TG 
is a more sensitive marker of the risk of cardiovascular disease. A 
12-hour fast is still required for formal diagnosis of hypertriglyceri-
daemia or use of the Friedewald equation. Consideration must be 
given to confounding factors, such as recent illness, after which cho-
lesterol, LDL-C and HDL-C levels temporarily decrease in proportion 
to severity of the episode. Results that will affect major decisions, 
such as initiation of drug therapy, should be conrmed with a repeat 
measurement.
Elevated levels of TG are common in obesity, diabetes and insulin 
resistance and are frequently associated with low HDL and increased 
‘small, dense’ LDL. Under these circumstances, LDL-C may under- 
estimate risk. This is one situation in which measurement of non-HDLC 
or Apo B may provide more accurate risk assessment.
Presenting problems in lipid metabolism
Hyperlipidaemia can occur in association with various diseases and 
drugs, as summarised in Box 19.23. Overt or subclinical hypothy-
roidism may cause hypercholesterolaemia. Measurement of thyroid 
function is warranted in most cases, even in the absence of typical 
symptoms and signs.
Once secondary causes are excluded, primary lipid abnormalities may 
be diagnosed. Primary lipid abnormalities can be classied according 
to the predominant lipid problem: hypercholesterolaemia, hypertrigly-
ceridaemia or mixed hyperlipidaemia (Box 19.24). Although single-gene 
disorders are encountered in all three categories, most cases are due 
to multiple-gene (polygenic) loci interacting with environmental factors. 
The clinical features and complications of dyslipidaemia vary somewhat 
between these causes.
Hypercholesterolaemia
Hypercholesterolaemia is a polygenic disorder that is the most com-
mon cause of a mild to moderate increase in LDL-C (Box 19.24). 
Physical signs, such as corneal arcus, xanthelasma, tendon xanthoma 
and eruptive xanthoma (see p. 615) may be found in this as well as 
other forms of hyperlipidaemia. The risk of cardiovascular disease is 

[[p687]]
638    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
proportional to the degree of LDL-C (or Apo B) elevation, but is mod-
ied by other major risk factors, including low HDL-C and high Lp(a).
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a more severe disorder with 
a prevalence of approximately 0.3% in most populations. It is usually 
caused by loss-of-function variants affecting the LDLR gene, which 
results in an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. A similar syn-
drome can arise with loss-of-function variants in the ligand-binding 
domain of Apo B100 or gain-of-function variants in PCSK9, which pro-
mote LDLR degradation. Pathological variants can be detected in one of 
these three genes by genetic testing in about 70% of patients with FH. 
Most patients with FH have LDL-C levels that are approximately twice 
as high as in normal subjects of the same age and gender. FH may be 
accompanied by xanthomas of the Achilles or extensor digitorum ten-
dons (p. 614), which are strongly suggestive of FH. The onset of corneal 
arcus before age 40 is also suggestive of this condition. Identication 
of an index case of FH (the rst case of FH in a family) should trigger 
genetic and biochemical screening of other family members, which is a 
cost-effective method for case detection. Affected individuals should be 
managed from childhood (Box 19.25) because affected patients face the 
risk of a 20–40-year acceleration of the risk of premature cardiovascular 
disease.
Homozygous FH may occur sporadically, especially in populations 
in which there is a ‘founder’ gene effect or consanguineous marriage. 
Homozygosity results in more extensive xanthomas and precocious 
cardiovascular disease, often in childhood. Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia 
refers to increased levels of HDL-C. This condition rarely causes cardio-
vascular disease, but it may reect HDL dysfunction, so it should not be 
regarded as universally benign.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia, and dysbetalipoproteinaemia, 
may present with the pattern of predominant hypercholesterolaemia (see 
‘Mixed hyperlipidaemia’ below).
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Hypertriglyceridaemia also usually involves polygenic factors (see 
Box19.24). Other common causes include excess alcohol intake, med-
ications (such as β-blockers and retinoids), type 2 diabetes, impaired 
glucose tolerance, central obesity or other manifestations of insulin resist-
ance and impaired absorption of bile acids. It is often accompanied by 
post-prandial hyperlipidaemia and reduced HDL-C, both of which may 
contribute to cardiovascular risk. Excessive intake of alcohol or dietary 
fat, or other exacerbating factors, may precipitate a massive increase in 
TG levels, which, if they exceed 10 mmol/L (880 mg/dL), may pose a risk 
of acute pancreatitis.
Monogenic forms of hypertriglyceridaemia also occur due to loss- 
of-function variants in the genes encoding lipoprotein lipase and Apo C2, 
which coordinate the lipolytic breakdown of TG-rich lipoproteins. These 
cause recessively inherited severe hypertriglyceridaemia that is not read-
ily amenable to drug treatment. It may present in childhood with episodes 
of acute abdominal pain or pancreatitis. In common with other causes of 
severe hypertriglyceridaemia, hepatomegaly, lipaemia retinalis and erup-
tive xanthomas may occur (p. 614). Familial hypertriglyceridaemia may 
also be inherited in a dominant manner due to loss-of-function variants 
in the APOA5 gene, which encodes Apo A5 – a co-factor that is essen-
tial for lipoprotein lipase activity. Conversely, loss-of-function variants for 
genes encoding ANGPTL 3 and 4, or Apo C3, may increase lipoprotein 
lipase activity and reduce TG. Individuals with APOA5 variants have an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease whereas those with ANGPTL3, 
ANGPTL4 and APOC3 variants have a reduced risk.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia, and dysbetalipoproteinaemia, 
may present with the pattern of predominant hypertriglyceridaemia (see 
‘Mixed hyperlipidaemia’, below).
19.24  Classication of hyperlipidaemia
Disease
Elevated lipid results
Elevated lipoprotein
CHD risk
Pancreatitis risk
Predominant hypercholesterolaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TC ± TG
LDL ± VLDL
+
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (LDLR defect, 
defective Apo B100, increased function of PCSK9)
TC ± TG
LDL ± VLDL
+++
Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia
TC ± TG
HDL
–
–
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TG
VLDL ± LDL
Variable
+
Lipoprotein lipase deciency
TG ≫ TC
Chylo
?
+++
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia
TG > TC
VLDL ± chylo
?
++
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
Polygenic (majority)
TC + TG
VLDL + LDL
Variable
+
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia*
TC and/or TG
LDL and/or VLDL
++
+
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia*
TC and/or TG
IDL
+++
+
*Familial combined hyperlipidaemia and dysbetalipoproteinaemia may also present as predominant hypercholesterolaemia or predominant hypertriglyceridaemia.
(Apo B100 = apolipoprotein B100; CHD = coronary heart disease; chylo = chylomicrons; HDL = high-density lipoprotein; IDL = intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL = low-density lipoprotein;  
LDLR = low-density lipoprotein receptor; TC = total cholesterol; TG = triglycerides; VLDL = very low-density lipoprotein)
+ = slightly increased risk; ++ = increased risk; +++ = greatly increased risk; ? = risk unclear
19.23  Causes of secondary hyperlipidaemia
Secondary hypercholesterolaemia
Moderately common
 Drugs:
Diuretics
Ciclosporin
Glucocorticoids
Androgens
Antiretroviral agents
 Hypothyroidism
 Pregnancy
 Cholestatic liver disease
Less common
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Anorexia nervosa
 Porphyria
 Hyperparathyroidism
Secondary hypertriglyceridaemia
Common
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus
 Chronic renal disease
 Abdominal obesity
 Excess alcohol
 Hepatocellular disease
 Drugs:
β-blockers
Retinoids
Glucocorticoids
Antiretroviral agents

[[p688]]
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism    639
19
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
It is difcult to dene quantitatively the distinction between predominant 
hyperlipidaemias and mixed hyperlipidaemia. The term ‘mixed’ usually 
implies the presence of hypertriglyceridaemia, as well as an increase 
in LDL-C or IDL. Treatment of massive hypertriglyceridaemia may 
reduce TG faster than cholesterol, thus temporarily mimicking mixed 
hyperlipidaemia.
Primary mixed hyperlipidaemia is usually polygenic and, like predomi-
nant hypertriglyceridaemia, often occurs in association with type 2 diabe-
tes, impaired glucose tolerance, central obesity or other manifestations 
of insulin resistance. Both components of mixed hyperlipidaemia may 
contribute to the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia is a term used to identify an 
inherited tendency towards the over-production of atherogenic Apo 
B-containing lipoproteins. It results in elevation of cholesterol, TG or both 
in different family members at different times. It is associated with an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease, but it does not produce any 
pathognomonic physical signs. In practice, this relatively common con-
dition is substantially modied by factors such as age and weight. It may 
not be a monogenic condition, but rather one end of a heterogeneous 
spectrum that overlaps insulin resistance.
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia (also referred to as type 3 hyperlipidaemia, 
broad-beta dyslipoproteinaemia or remnant hyperlipidaemia) involves 
accumulation of roughly equimolar levels of cholesterol and TG. It is 
caused by homozygous inheritance of the Apo E2 allele, which is the 
isoform least avidly recognised by the LDLR. In conjunction with other 
exacerbating factors, such as obesity or diabetes, it leads to accumu-
lation of atherogenic IDL and chylomicron remnants. Premature cardio-
vascular disease is common, as is peripheral vascular disease. It may 
also result in the formation of palmar xanthomas, tuberous xanthomas 
or tendon xanthomas.
Rare dyslipidaemias
Several rare disturbances of lipid metabolism have been described 
(Box19.26). They provide important insights into lipid metabolism and its 
impact on risk of cardiovascular disease.
Fish eye disease, Apo A1 Milano and lecithin cholesterol acyl trans-
ferase (LCAT) deciency demonstrate that very low HDL-C levels do 
not necessarily cause cardiovascular disease, but Apo A1 deciency, 
and possibly Tangier disease, demonstrate that low HDL-C can be 
atherogenic under some circumstances. PCSK9 gain-of-function and 
autosomal recessive FH variants reveal the importance of proteins that 
chaperone the LDLR. Sitosterolaemia and cerebrotendinous xanthoma-
tosis demonstrate that sterols other than cholesterol can cause xantho-
mas and cardiovascular disease, while PCSK9 loss-of-function variants 
abetalipoproteinaemia and hypobetalipoproteinaemia suggest that low 
levels of Apo B-containing lipoproteins reduce the risk of cardiovascu-
lar disease. Adverse health outcomes associated with extremely low 
plasma lipid levels in the latter two conditions are attributable to fat-solu-
ble vitamin deciency, or impaired transport of lipid from intestine or liver.
Principles of management
Assessment of absolute risk of cardiovascular disease, treatment of all 
modiable risk factors and optimisation of lifestyle, especially diet and 
exercise, are central to management in all cases. Lipid-lowering therapies 
have a key role in the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascu-
lar diseases. Patients with the greatest absolute risk of cardiovascular 
 disease derive the greatest absolute benet from treatment. Public health 
organisations recommend thresholds for the introduction of lipid-lowering 
therapy based on the identication of patients in very high-risk categories, 
or those calculated to be at high absolute risk according to algorithms 
or tables. The large epidemiological studies on which risk assessment is 
based should be recalibrated for the local population where possible. The 
decision to commence lipid-lowering therapy is usually made on the basis 
of the lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease which takes lipid concentra-
tions into account along with other risk factors and age. This diminishes 
the pressure to treat older adults who are less likely to benet and sup-
ports earlier intervention in patients who are not yet in old age. Recently 
released guidelines include ACC/AHA or ESC/EAS guidelines, which differ 
in some respects (see ‘Further information’). Important common themes 
include additional clinical input for risk calculation tables, expanded lists 
of risk-enhancing factors, use of coronary calcium scores in intermedi-
ate-risk patients and adoption of more aggressive LDL-C treatment goals. 
Target levels for LDL-C are at less than 1.8 mmol/l (70 mg/dL) on one 
hand, or less than 1.4 mmol/l in addition to 50% reduction on the other.
Non-pharmacological management
Patients with lipid abnormalities should receive medical advice and, if 
necessary, dietary counselling couched in terms of practical dietary and 
culinary advice:
 replace sources of saturated fat and cholesterol with alternative 
foods, such as lean meat, low-fat dairy products, polyunsaturated 
spreads and low-glycaemic-index carbohydrates
 reduce energy-dense foods such as fats and soft drinks, while 
increasing activity and exercise to maintain or lose weight
 increase consumption of cardioprotective and nutrient-dense foods, 
such as vegetables, unrened carbohydrates, sh, pulses, nuts, 
legumes and fruit
 adjust alcohol consumption, reducing intake if excessive or if associ-
ated with hypertension, hypertriglyceridaemia or central obesity
 achieve additional benets with preferential intake of foods contain-
ing lipid-lowering nutrients such as n-3 fatty acids, dietary bre and 
plant sterols
 reduce intake of saturated and trans-unsaturated fat to less than 
7%–10% of total energy
 reduce intake of cholesterol to <250 mg/day.
These measures should achieve a response within 3–4 weeks but 
dietary adjustment may need to be introduced gradually. Although 
19.26  Miscellaneous and rare forms of hyperlipidaemia
Condition
Lipoprotein pattern
CVD risk
Tangier disease
Very low HDL, low TC
+
Apo A1 deciency
Very low HDL
++
Apo A1 Milano
Very low HDL
–
Fish eye disease
Very low HDL, high TG
–
LCAT deciency
Very low HDL, high TG
?
Autosomal recessive 
FH
Very high LDL
++
Sitosterolaemia
High plant sterols including 
sitosterol
+
Cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis
Bile acid defect (cholestanol 
accumulation)
+
+ = slightly increased risk; ++ = increased risk
(CVD = cardiovascular disease; FH = familial hypercholesterolaemia; HDL = high-density 
lipoprotein; LCAT = lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase; LDL = low-density lipoprotein;  
TC = total cholesterol; TG = triglycerides)
19.25  Familial hypercholesterolaemia in adolescence
 Statin treatment: may be required from the age of about 10. It does not 
compromise normal growth and maturation.
 Smoking: patients should be strongly advised not to smoke.
 Adherence to medication: critically important to the success of treatment. 
Simple regimens should be used and education and support provided.

[[p689]]
640    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
hyperlipidaemia in general, and hypertriglyceridaemia in particular, can 
be very responsive to these measures, LDL-C reductions are often only 
modest in routine clinical practice. Explanation, encouragement and 
persistence are often required to assist patient adherence. Even minor 
weight loss can substantially reduce cardiovascular risk, especially in 
centrally obese patients.
All other modiable cardiovascular risk factors should be assessed 
and treated. If possible, intercurrent drug treatments that adversely affect 
the lipid prole should be replaced.
Pharmacological management
The main diagnostic categories provide a useful framework for man-
agement and the selection of rst-line pharmacological treatment (Fig. 
19.13). Depending on the response, treatment with more than one 
drug may be required. Advances in understanding the genetic factors 
that regulate lipid metabolism have led to the identication of several 
new lipid-lowering agents. Monoclonal antibodies and antisense mRNA 
therapies directed against PCSK9 are already used in clinical practice 
whereas antisense mRNA directed against apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3) 
and angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) are under investigation for the treat-
ment of hypercholesterolaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia.
Hypercholesterolaemia
The drugs used in the treatment of hypercholesterolaemia target the 
pathways responsible for cholesterol synthesis, its clearance from the 
circulation, or its absorption from the diet. Homeostatic mechanisms 
orchestrated by steroid regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) to 
maintain intracellular cholesterol concentrations, blunt the effectiveness 
of statins, ezetimibe and resins but this does not apply to PCSK9 inhibi-
tors, which are extremely effective cholesterol-lowering agents, as sum-
marised in (Fig. 19.14).
Statins
Statins reduce cholesterol synthesis by inhibiting the HMGCoA reduc-
tase enzyme. The reduction in cholesterol synthesis up-regulates pro-
duction of the LDLR, which increases clearance of LDL and its precursor, 
IDL, resulting in a secondary reduction in LDL synthesis. Statins reduce 
LDL-C by up to 60%, reduce TG by up to 40% and increase HDL-C by 
up to 10%. They also reduce the concentration of intermediate metabo-
lites such as isoprenes, which may lead to other effects such as suppres-
sion of the inammatory response. There is clear evidence of protection 
against total and coronary mortality, stroke and cardiovascular events 
across the spectrum of cardiovascular disease risk.
Statins are generally well tolerated and serious side-effects are infre-
quent. Liver function test abnormalities and muscle problems, such as 
myalgia, asymptomatic increase in creatine kinase (CK), myositis and, 
infrequently, rhabdomyolysis, are the most common. Side-effects are 
more likely in older adults and in patients who are debilitated or receiving 
other drugs that interfere with statin degradation, which usually involves 
cytochrome P450 3A4 or glucuronidation.
PCSK9 inhibitors
Several drugs have been developed that neutralise PCSK9, an enzyme 
that degrades the LDLR. This causes levels of LDLR to increase, which 
markedly reduces LDL-C by clearing LDL from the circulation. The 
PCSK9 inhibitors currently available are the monoclonal antibodies (Mab) 
evolocumab and alirocumab, which are administered by subcutaneous 
injection every 2–4 weeks, and the PCSK9 antisense mRNA inclisiran, 
which is administered subcutaneously every 6 months. These drugs are 
all highly effective. Inclisiran inhibits PCSK9 by binding to and degrad-
ing its mRNA intracellularly whereas the Mab bind and inhibit PCSK9 
at the cell surface. Reductions in LDL-C of about 50%–60% have been 
observed with these agents in patients who have not responded ade-
quately to standard lipid-lowering therapy and this has been accompa-
nied by a reduction in the risk of cardiovascular events of about 15%. 
The reason PCSK9 inhibitors are so highly effective is that they do not 
lower intracellular levels of cholesterol and hence do not trigger the com-
pensatory mechanisms that blunt the effect of other cholesterol-lowering 
medications (Fig. 19.14). The PCSK9 inhibitors also act synergistically 
with statins and ezetimibe and lower lipoprotein (a) by mechanisms that 
are unclear.
Ezetimibe
Ezetimibe inhibits activity of the intestinal mucosal transporter NPC1L1, 
which is responsible for absorption of dietary and biliary cholesterol. The 
resulting depletion of hepatic cholesterol up-regulates hepatic LDLR pro-
duction. This mechanism of action is synergistic with the effect of statins. 
Monotherapy in a 10 mg/day dose reduces LDL-C by 15%–20%. Slightly 
Predominant
hypercholesterolaemia
Mixed
hyperlipidaemia
Predominant
hypertriglyceridaemia
Commence statin
and increase dose
to reach target
Inadequate response?
Inadequate response?
Inadequate response?
Inadequate response?
Add ezetemibe
Commence fibrate
Add PCSK9 inhibitor
Inadequate response?
Add PCSK9 inhibitor
Add fish oil, reaffirm
lifestyle measures,
consider medium-chain
TG substitutes
Commence statin with
fibrate or statin with
fish oil or ezetimibe
with fibrate
Initiate lifestyle
measures, optimise
diabetic control, avoid
TG-elevating drugs
Fig. 19.13 Flow chart for the drug treatment of hyperlipidaemia. Triglyceride (TG) elevating drugs include glucocorticoids, antipsychotics, isotretinoin and β-blockers. See 
text for more details of drugs and dosages. (PCSK9 = proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9)

[[p690]]
Lipids and lipoprotein metabolism    641
19
greater (17%–25%) incremental LDL-C reduction occurs when ezetimibe 
is added to statins. Ezetimibe is well tolerated, and evidence of a bene-
cial effect on cardiovascular disease endpoints is now available. Plant 
sterol-supplemented foods, which also reduce cholesterol absorption, 
lower LDL-C by 7%–15%.
Bile acid-sequestering resins
Drugs in this class include colestyramine, colestipol and colesevelam, 
although their use and availability is declining. They prevent the reab-
sorption of bile acids, thereby increasing de novo bile acid synthesis from 
hepatic cholesterol. The depletion of bile acids is sensed via the farnesyl 
X receptor and the response may also improve glucose metabolism. The 
resultant depletion of hepatic cholesterol up-regulates LDLR activity and 
reduces LDL-C in a manner that is synergistic with the action of statins. 
Resins may increase TG or interfere with bioavailability of other drugs. 
Colesevelam has fewer gastrointestinal effects than the other drugs in 
this class.
Combination therapy
In many patients, treatment of predominant hypercholesterolaemia can 
be achieved by diet plus the use of a statin in sufcient doses to achieve 
target LDL-C levels. Patients who do not reach LDL targets on the high-
est tolerated statin dose, or who are intolerant of statins, may receive 
plant sterols, ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitors, or resins. Ezetimibe and resins 
are safe and effective in combination with a statin because the mech-
anisms of action of individual therapies complement each other while 
blunting each other’s compensatory mechanisms.
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Predominant hypertriglyceridaemia can be treated with one of the 
TG-lowering drugs described below, in combination with lifestyle meas-
ures such as weight reduction, reduction in alcohol consumption and 
optimisation of diabetic control.
Fibrates
These stimulate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) 
alpha, which controls the expression of gene products that mediate 
the metabolism of TG and HDL. As a result, synthesis of fatty acids, 
TG and VLDL is reduced, while that of lipoprotein lipase, which catabo-
lises TG, is enhanced. In addition, production of Apo A1 and ABC A1 is 
up-regulated leading to increased reverse cholesterol transport via HDL. 
Consequently, brates reduce TG by up to 50% and increase HDL-C by 
up to 20%, but LDL-C changes are variable.
Fewer large-scale trials have been conducted with brates than with 
statins. The results are less conclusive, but reduced rates of cardiovas-
cular disease have been reported with brate therapy in the subgroup 
of patients with low HDL-C levels and elevated TG (TG >2.3 mmol/L 
(200 mg/dL)). Fibrates are usually well tolerated but share a similar 
side-effect prole to statins. In addition, they may increase the risk of 
cholelithiasis and prolong the action of anticoagulants. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that they may also have a protective effect against 
diabetic microvascular complications.
Highly polyunsaturated long-chain n-3 fatty acids
These include eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA), which comprise approximately 30% of the fatty acids in sh oil. 
Both are potent inhibitors of VLDL TG formation. Intakes of more than 2 g 
n-3 fatty acid (equivalent to 6 g of most forms of sh oil) per day lower TG 
in a dose-dependent fashion. Up to 50% reduction in TG may be achieved 
with 15 g sh oil per day. Changes in HDL-C are variable but sh oils do 
not usually reduce LDL-C. Fish oil fatty acids have also been shown to 
inhibit platelet aggregation and improve cardiac arrhythmia in animal mod-
els. Dietary and pharmacological trials suggest that n-3 fatty acids may 
reduce mortality from coronary heart disease. The benet of n-3 fatty acid 
supplements has been conrmed in a recent trial amongst hypertriglycer-
idaemic patients. They appear to be safe and well tolerated. Dietary sh 
consumption is the preferred source for the general population.
Sterol-
responsive
genes
LDL is
removed
from
circulation
LDLR
accumulates
Without PCSK9 inhibitors
(intracellular cholesterol depletion)
With PCSK9 inhibitors
(LDLR retention)
PCSK9
inhibitors
HMG-CoA
LDLR
Key
PCSK9
PCSK9 inhibitor
LDL cholesterol
HMGCoAR
Cholesterol
Cholesterol
Statins
SREBP
Increased LDLR
synthesis 
Increased plasma
LDL uptake
Ezetimibe
Resins
Bile acids
Cholesterol
absorption
Bile acids
NPC L1
Serum
cholesterol
falls
Multiple genes
for intra-cellular
cholesterol
homeostasis
NPC1 L1
Fig. 19.14 Mechanism of action for cholesterol-lowering drugs. Traditional cholesterol-lowering drugs such as statins and ezetimibe lower intracellular cholesterol, 
causing activation of steroid regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) which increases expression of sterol responsive genes, particularly LDLR, leading to lower plasma 
LDL. Activation of SREBP also stimulates cholesterol synthesis and absorption which may blunt the therapeutic response to these drugs. SREBP also ne-tunes the restoration 
of intracellular cholesterol by up-regulating PCSK9 which assists degradation of LDLRs. Inhibitors of PCSK9 do not affect intracellular cholesterol but instead work by causing 
LDLR to accumulate at the cell surface thereby removing cholesterol bound to LDL from the circulation. (HMGCoA = hydroxy-methyl-glutaryl-co-enzyme A; HMGCoAR = 
hydroxy-methyl-glutaryl-co-enzyme A reductase; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; LDLR = low-density lipoprotein receptor; PCSK9 = proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9)

[[p691]]
642    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Patients with predominant hypertriglyceridaemia who do not respond 
to lifestyle intervention can be treated with brates or n-3 fatty acids, 
depending on individual response and tolerance. If target levels are not 
achieved, brates and sh oil can be combined along with lifestyle meas-
ures, optimising diabetic control and avoidance of drugs that raise tri-
glycerides. Massive hypertriglyceridaemia may require more aggressive 
limitation of dietary fat intake (<10%–20% energy as fat). Any degree 
of insulin deciency should be corrected because insulin is required for 
optimal activity of lipoprotein lipase. The initial target for patients with 
massive hypertriglyceridaemia is TG <10 mmol/L (880 mg/dL), to reduce 
the risk of acute pancreatitis.
Mixed hyperlipidaemia
Mixed hyperlipidaemia can be difcult to treat. First-line therapy with stat-
ins alone is unlikely to achieve target levels once fasting TGs exceed 
approximately 4 mmol/L (350 mg/dL). Fibrates are rst-line therapy for 
dysbetalipoproteinaemia, but they may not control the cholesterol com-
ponent in other forms of mixed hyperlipidaemia. Combination therapy is 
often required. Effective combinations include:
 statin plus fenobrate (recognising that the risk of myopathy is 
increased with gembrozil, but fenobrate is relatively safe in this 
regard)
 statin plus sh oil when TG is not too high
 brate plus ezetimibe when cholesterol is not too high.
Monitoring of therapy
The effects of lipid-lowering therapy should be assessed after 6weeks 
(12weeks for brates). At this point, it is prudent to review side-effects, 
lipid response (see target levels above), CK and liver function tests. 
During longer-term follow-up, adherence to treatment, diet and exercise 
should be assessed, with monitoring of weight, blood pressure and lipid 
levels. The presence of cardiovascular symptoms or signs should be 
noted, and absolute cardiovascular risk assessed periodically. Effective 
statin therapy may be associated with a paradoxical and as yet unex-
plained increase in coronary calcium score.
It is not necessary to perform routine checks of CK and liver func-
tion unless symptoms occur, or if statins are used in combination with 
brates, or other drugs that may interfere with their clearance. If myalgia 
or weakness occurs in association with CK elevation over 5–10 times 
the upper limit of normal, or if sustained alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
elevation more than 2–3 times the upper limit of normal occurs that is 
not accounted for by fatty liver, treatment should be discontinued and 
alternative therapy sought.
The principles of the management of dyslipidaemia can be applied 
broadly, but the objectives of treatment in old age (Box 19.27) and the 
safety of pharmacological therapy in pregnancy (Box 19.28) warrant spe-
cial consideration.
Inherited metabolic disorders
Inherited metabolic disorders are a large group of rare genetic diseases 
which result in disordered cellular metabolism. The majority are caused 
by variants in single genes that code for enzymes, leading to defective or 
absent enzyme activity. This leads to: (1) the accumulation of toxic metab-
olites that lie upstream within the pathway or (2) an inability to synthesise 
essential metabolites that are required for cellular function (Fig. 19.15). 
The vast majority of disorders are autosomal recessive.
Newborn screening, the availability of specic therapies, increased 
access to genetic testing and the recognition of attenuated, later-onset 
forms has led to a signicant increase in the incidence and prevalence 
of inherited metabolic disorders, many of which are treatable. Treatment 
options are rapidly expanding with the use of gene therapies, RNA-
based therapies and precision medicine techniques.
Disorders of amino acid metabolism
Inherited disorders of amino acid metabolism usually present in the neo-
natal period, but some disorders, especially of amino acid transport, may 
not present until later in life.
Phenylketonuria
The identication and successful dietary treatment of babies with phe-
nylketonuria (PKU) has profoundly changed the outcome of this disor-
der, with patients now expected to live normal lives. PKU is caused by 
loss-of-function variants in the PAH gene, which encodes phenylalanine 
hxdroxylase, an enzyme required for the degradation of phenylalanine, 
an essential amino acid. Undegraded phenylalanine accumulates, caus-
ing direct neurotoxicity and profound neurodevelopmental disability. 
Treatment involves lifelong adherence to a low-phenylalanine diet with 
additional amino acid and nutrient supplements. Early and adequate 
dietary treatment prevents major neurodisability, and lifelong adherence 
is thought to prevent psychiatric morbidity and improve cognitive func-
tion. Treatment with sapropterin, which acts as a co-factor for pheny-
lalanine hydroxylase, has been shown to reduce blood phenylalanine 
concentrations and increase phenylalanine tolerance in adults and chil-
dren with PKU. However, its use is limited to patients with milder variants 
as well as by cost.
Maternal phenylketonuria syndrome, causing microcephaly, develop-
mental delay and cardiac defects, is caused by exposure of the devel-
oping fetus to high levels of phenylalanine. Strict dietary adherence, both 
preconception and during pregnancy, prevents any deleterious effects in 
the offspring.
Homocystinuria
Homocystinuria is usually caused by variants in the CBS gene, leading to 
defective activity of the enzyme cystathione beta-synthase. This prevents 
homocysteine degradation, and causes toxic accumulation of homocyst-
eine and methionine (upstream of the metabolic block). Multiple body sys-
tems are affected, including the central nervous system (developmental 
delay, intellectual disability, seizures and psychiatric disturbance); skeleton 
(tall stature, osteoporosis); eye (ectopia lentis – lens displacement) and 
cardiovascular system (arterial and venous thromboembolic disease). The 
19.27  Management of hyperlipidaemia in old age
 Prevalence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: greatest in old age.
 Associated cardiovascular risk: lipid levels become less predictive, as do other 
risk factors apart from age itself.
 Benet of statin therapy: maintained up to the age of 80 years but evidence is 
lacking beyond this.
 Life expectancy and statin therapy: lives saved by intervention are associated 
with shorter life expectancy than in younger patients, and so the impact of 
statins on quality-adjusted life years is smaller in old age. 
19.28  Dyslipidaemia in pregnancy
 Lipid metabolism: lipid and lipoprotein levels increase during pregnancy. This 
includes an increase in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, which resolves post-
partum. Remnant dyslipidaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia may be exacerbated 
during pregnancy.
 Treatment: dyslipidaemia is rarely thought to warrant urgent treatment 
so pharmacological therapy is usually contraindicated when conception or 
pregnancy is anticipated. Teratogenicity has been reported with systemically 
absorbed agents, and non-absorbed agents may interfere with nutrient 
bioavailability.
 Monitoring: while still uncommon among women of child-bearing age, 
cardiovascular disease is increasing in prevalence. Pre-conception 
cardiovascular review should be considered for women at high risk to optimise 
medications for pregnancy and to ensure that the patient will be able to 
withstand the demands of pregnancy and labour.

[[p692]]
Inherited metabolic disorders    643
19
phenotypic spectrum is extremely variable and adults may present later in 
life, often with thromboembolic disease. Treatment aims to reduce homo-
cysteine levels – through vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) – which acts as a cofactor 
to increase CBS enzyme activity, betaine, folate and vitamin B12 (to utilise 
the alternative homocysteine remethylation pathway) and consumption of 
a low-methionine diet. Early treatment and good compliance can prevent 
many of the expected complications.
Disorders of the urea cycle
Ammonia is generated by metabolism in all organs and transported to 
the liver for disposal by the urea cycle. Defects in any of the six urea 
cycle enzymes prevents normal ammonia degradation and can lead to 
life-threatening hyperammonaemia.
Ornithine tricarboxylase deciency
Ornithine tricarboxylase (OTC) deciency is the most common urea cycle 
disorder, and is an X-linked recessive disorder. Males often have severe 
neonatal disease, but the phenotypic spectrum, especially among women, 
is extremely wide. It may present later in life, often following a physiological 
stress such as trauma, surgery or post-partum. Acute hyperammonaemia 
may present as unexplained encephalopathy, often with respiratory alka-
losis. If unrecognized, it can rapidly lead to cerebral oedema and death. 
Severe, neonatal onset disease can be treated by liver transplantation 
(the donated liver has normal enzyme activity). Later-onset disease can 
be managed with a protein-restricted diet, arginine supplementation and 
urea-scavenging medication (sodium benzoate and sodium or glycerol 
phenylbutyrate) to promote nitrogen excretion via alternative pathways.
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
Galactosaemia
Inherited variations in the GALT gene, causing loss of function of the 
enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase, lead to galactosae-
mia and an inability to metabolise galactose. In countries that do not 
screen for galactosaemia, patients usually present with neonatal crisis, 
with life-threatening liver and kidney failure, diarrhoea and cataracts, 
often complicated by fulminant sepsis. Treatment is with a lactose- and 
galactose-free diet. This effectively prevents acute symptoms, but even 
with treatment there is almost always neuropsychological impairment 
and many patients exhibit slowly progressive neurological dysfunction 
over time. Premature ovarian failure occurs in almost all affected women.
Glycogen storage diseases
Glycogen storage diseases are a group of rare disorders that result from 
inherited defects in one of the many enzymes responsible for the forma-
tion, mobilisation or breakdown of glycogen, or of utilisation of glucose. 
The classication and enzyme defects responsible are summarised in 
Box 19.29. While glycogen storage disease  type II (Pompe) is listed 
in this box, it is caused by deciency in alpha glucosidase which is a 
lysosomal enzyme responsible for degradation of glycogen. Accordingly 
it is now classied as a lysosomal storage disease. The specic enzyme 
defect predicts symptomology and age of onset. Management is based 
upon avoidance of fasting, dietary modications with frequent adminis-
tration of carbohydrates and carefully managed exercise programmes to 
avoid hypoglycaemia. Enzyme replacement therapy with alglucosidase 
alfa is available for the treatment of Pompe disease.
Disorders of mitochondrial energy metabolism
During fasting or increased energy demand, fatty acid oxidation is an 
important source of mitochondrial energy production. Inherited variants 
causing loss of function in many of the enzymes involved in fatty acid 
oxidation and electron transfer within mitochondria have been identied. 
Many disorders have a catastrophic neonatal presentation, with hypoke-
totic hypoglycaemia, encephalopathy and liver dysfunction. Attenuated 
adult-onset forms are increasingly recognised, often with signicant myo-
pathy and/or acute rhabdomyolysis. Common precipitants in adulthood 
are endurance exercise events, such as running marathons, and alcohol. 
Management centres on the avoidance of fasting and provision of a reg-
ular carbohydrate energy source, with or without dietary modication of 
long chain or medium chain fats. Examples include carnitine palmitoyl-
transferase 2 (CPT2) deciency, very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
(VLCAD) deciency, medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) de-
ciency and multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MADD) deciency.
Lysosomal storage disorders
The lysosome is an organelle responsible for the breakdown and resynthe-
sis of macromolecules – essentially recycling and waste disposal – within 
the cell. Variants in genes encoding specic lysosomal enzymes cause 
loss of enzymatic function, and the accumulation of undegraded or par-
tially degraded macromolecules within the lysosome, eventually leading to 
tissue damage in multiple body systems (Box 19.30). Biologic therapies 
with recombinant enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) have been devel-
oped to correct the metabolic defect and slow disease progression. The 
greatest benet of ERT is seen with early treatment but it does does not 
penetrate the blood–brain barrier and is ineffective in treating neurological 
manifestations of disease. Some diseases appear more amenable to ther-
apy than others. As ever, there is usually a spectrum of disease severity 
depending on the degree of residual enzyme function, and treating partial-
loss-of-function variants with small molecule therapies to improve trafck-
ing or support enzyme function, or as substrate reduction therapy, has 
shown promise as an alternative therapeutic strategy.
The porphyrias
These disorders are caused by enzymatic defects in the heme-bio-
synthesis pathway. Most are partial loss of function, with autosomal 
dominant inheritance and variable penetrance. Diagnosis relies on the 
detection of characteristic biochemical metabolites, as well as genetic 
variants and/or enzyme activity levels (Box 19.31)
Normal metabolic pathway
Substrate
Inherited metabolic disorder
Substrate
1
3
2
Enzyme
Enzyme
Product
Substrate
Substrate
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
Enzyme
Alternative
pathway
Product
Inadequate
synthesis of
essential
product
Accumulation of
substrate that is
toxic at high levels
Accumulation
of metabolite
that is toxic
Fig. 19.15 Pathophysiology of inherited metabolic disorders. Inherited metabolic 
disorders cause disease either because there is lack of synthesis of an essential 
metabolite as the result of enzyme deciency, or because there is accumulation of a 
toxic metabolite upstream of the decient enzyme.

[[p693]]
644    CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLIC MEDICINE 
Acute porphyrias (the neurovisceral form) are characterised by 
acute attacks of abdominal pain and neuropathic symptoms, with 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, tachycardia, hypertension and hypon-
atraemia. Classically, the urine is pigmented, and darkens on expo-
sure to light. The most common form is acute intermittent porphyria, 
caused by variants in PBGD, which encodes the enzyme porpho-
bilinogen deaminase. Attacks are provoked by a relative depletion 
of heme, which removes the negative feedback regulation of the 
heme production pathway and stimulates heme biosynthesis. This 
results in the accumulation of delta- aminolaevulinic acid (ALA) and 
porphobilinogen (PBG) pre-cursors upstream of the metabolic block. 
ALA causes direct neurotoxicity. Urgent testing of urine for the pres-
ence of ALA and/or PBG will conrm the presence of an acute attack, 
and can be useful to differentiate between acute porphyria attacks 
and other causes.
Attacks can be provoked by fasting, trauma, intercurrent infection, 
alcohol, drugs, the menstrual cycle and hormonal contraceptives. A list 
of safe drugs can be found at www.drugs-porphyria.org. Cyclical attacks 
in menstruating women can respond to suppression of the menstrual 
cycle with gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues.
19.29  Glycogen storage diseases*
Type
Enzyme/transporter deciency
Major phenotype
Clinical features/complications
Other names
0
Glycogen synthase
Liver
Fasting ketotic hypoglycaemia, postprandial lactic acidaemia
I
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Liver
Kidney
Neutropenia
Infantile hypoglycaemia, ketosis, lactic acidosis and 
hepatomegaly
Von Gierke
II
Alpha-glucosidase
Muscle
Heart
Brain
Hypotonia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and developmental 
delay in infancy 
Limb girdle myopathy. Respiratory muscle weakness in 
adulthood 
Pompe
III
Glycogen debrancher
Muscle
Heart
Liver
Infantile hepatomegaly and hypoglycaemia. Rhabdomyolysis, 
myopathy and cardiomyopathy in adulthood
Coris/Forbes
IV
Brancher
Muscle
Brain
Liver
Hepatomegaly, liver failure, myopathy
Anderson
V
Myophosphorylase
Muscle
Exercise intolerance and rhabdomyolysis
McArdle
VI
Glycogen phosphorylase
Liver
Hepatomegaly
Hers
VII
Muscle phosphofructokinase
Muscle
Exercise intolerance, rhabdomyolysis
Tarui
IX
Glycogen phosphorylase kinase
Liver
Muscle
Hypoglycaemia
Hepatomegaly
X
Phosphoglcyerate mutase
Muscle
Exercise intolerance, rhabdomyolysis
XI
GLUT-2
Liver
Kidney
Hypoglycaemia, tubular dysfunction, hepatosplenomegaly, 
bone disease
Fanconi–Bickel
*Types II and IV are the most common syndromes. Some rarer causes of glycogen storage disease have not been included in this box.
19.30  Lysosomal storage diseases*
Disease
Enzyme deciency
Inheritance
Clinical features
Treatment
Fabry disease 1
Alpha-galactosidase
XLR
Acroparaesthesia, angiokeratoma, corneal 
verticillata
Kidney disease (proteinuria and progressive CKD)
Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias
Stroke and white matter changes
Enzyme replacement therapy
Small molecule chaperone (amenable 
variants)
Gaucher disease
Glucocerebrocidase
AR
Hepatosplenomegaly
Bone marrow inltration and skeletal disease
Thrombocytopenia
Infantile neuronopathic form
Enzyme replacement therapy (not for 
neuronopathic disease)
Substrate reduction therapies
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Eight different 
enzymes involved in 
the degradation of 
glycosaminoglycans
AR
Vary dependent on syndrome
Skeletal, joint, valvular disease
Characteristic facies
Intellectual disability
Enzyme replacement therapy for MPSI; 
MPSII; MPS IV
Limited by lack of efcacy in CNS 
disease
Gangliosidosis*
GM-1 beta-
galactosidase
GM-2 beta-
hexosaminidase
AR
Severe progressive neurological disease
No specic treatment
*Some rare lysosomal storage diseases have been described which are not included in this box.
(AR = autosomal recessive; CKD = chronic kidney disease; CNS = central nervous system; MPS = mucopolysaccharidosis; XLR = X-linked recessive)

[[p694]]
Further information    645
19
19.31  Diagnostic biochemical ndings in the porphyrias
Biochemical abnormalities (protect specimens from light)
Condition
Urine
Blood
Faeces
Acute intermittent porphyria
↑ALA
↑ PBG
Hereditary coproporphyria
↑ALA
↑ PBG
↑ Copro III
↑ Copro III
Variegate porphyria
↑ALA
↑PBG
↑ Copro III
↑ Proto IX
Erythropoietic protoporphyria
↑ Proto IX
↑ Proto IX
Porphyria cutanea tarda
↑ Uro I
(ALA = delta-aminolaevulinic acid; Copro III = coproporphyrin III; PBG = porphobilinogen; Proto IX = protoporphorin IX; Uro I = uroporphyrin I)
Management centres on the avoidance of provoking factors, and the 
provision of an ‘emergency protocol’ to administer oral carbohydrates 
(glucose polymer) or intravenous dextrose with electrolytes in order to 
terminate an acute attack. In severe cases, intravenous heme arginate 
inhibits the heme biosynthesis pathway, thereby reducing the production 
of toxic metabolites. However, it is an irritant and frequently causes local 
phlebitis. Recently, RNA interference therapy has been shown to inhibit 
ALA synthesis and reduce the rate of acute porphyria attacks in severely 
affected patients.
Cutaneous porphyrias
The cutaneous manifestations of porphyria cutanea tarda, erythropo-
etic porphyria, variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 27. It should be noted, however, 
that variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria can have both 
neurovisceral and cutaneous features.
Further information
Journal articles
Lachmann RH. Treating lysosomal storage disorders: What have we learnt? J 
Inherit Metab Dis 2020;43(1):125–132.
Lilleker JB, Keh YS, Roncaroli F, etal. Metabolic myopathies: a practical 
approach. Pract Neurol 2018;18(1):14–26.
Spasovski G, Vanholder R, Allolio B, etal. Clinical practice guideline on diagnosis 
and treatment of hyponatraemia. Eur J Endocrinol 2014;170:G1–G47.
Stein P, Badminton M, Barth J, etal. Best practice guidelines on clinical 
management of acute attacks of porphyria and their complications. Ann Clin 
Biochem 2013;50(3):217–223.
Walsh S, Unwin R. Renal tubular disorders. Clin Med 2012;12(5):476–479.
Websites
emedicine.medscape.com The Nephrology link on this site contains a useful 
compendium of articles.
escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines/Dyslipidaemias-
Management-of European Cardiac Society guidelines on management of 
hyperlipidaemia.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov The link to OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) provides 
updated information on the genetic basis of metabolic disorders.
porphyria.eu and drugs-porphyria.org Excellent resources on drug safety in 
porphyria.
www.BIMDG.org.uk Emergency treatment guidance for inherited metabolic 
disorders.

[[p695]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p696]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 19.1.  A pregnant woman with phenylketonuria (PKU) attends a routine 
obstetric appointment, worried about the risk of her unborn baby 
inheriting the same condition. What is the risk of the fetus also 
having PKU?
 
A. 1 in 4
 
B. 1 in 2
 
C. Only a risk for male offspring
 
D. <1/50
 
E. No risk
Answer: D.
PKU is autosomal recessive, and only results in disease when two 
faulty copies of the affected gene are inherited. A mother with PKU 
will always pass on one copy to her offspring – who will therefore be 
a carrier. However, the fetus would only be affected if, by chance, her 
partner was also a carrier, and passed on their affected gene (1 in 2 
chance). Population carrier rates are estimated at ~1/50 so the risk of 
the fetus being affected by PKU remains low. However, in some coun-
tries this population carrier frequency would allow access to pre-natal 
testing.
More importantly, the fetus is at signicant risk from high phenylalanine 
levels in the mother, who should follow a strictly managed low-phenylala-
nine diet in order to avoid maternal PKU syndrome.
 19.2.  A 35-year-old man attends the nephrology clinic with proteinuria. 
What features would be suspicious for a diagnosis of Fabry 
disease?
 
A. Pain in hands and feet
 
B. Peri-umbilical skin rash
 
C. Mother had stroke aged 56
 
D. LVH on echocardiogram
 
E. All of the above
Answer: E.
Acroparaesthesia (burning pain in hands and feet) and angiokerato-
mas (small, red, raised spots often around the genitals and umbilicus) 
are features of classical Fabry disease, often present from childhood or 
adolescence. Cardiomyopathy begins to develop in mid-life. Women 
with Fabry disease have a variable presentation, but can present with 
young stroke.
 19.3.  A 59-year-old man presents for cardiovascular risk assessment, 
but he has not fasted for the blood collection that was to be 
performed during his appointment. Which of the following plasma 
lipid or lipoprotein levels is most likely to be signicantly affected 
by his recent consumption of food? 
 
A. HDL cholesterol
 
B. Lipoprotein (a)
 
C. Calculated LDL cholesterol
 
D. Non-HDL cholesterol
 
E. Total cholesterol
Answer: C.
Calculated LDL cholesterol is correct because the calculation includes 
the triglyceride level, which increases following food consumption. The 
effect of food consumption on the other measurements is small by com-
parison, especially in relative terms.
 19.4.  The same 59-year-old man returns with a set of fasting results that 
include: Total cholesterol 6.7 mmol/l (260 mg/dL), fasting triglyceride 
3.3 mmol/l (290 mg/dL), HDL cholesterol 0.9 (35 mmol/L (mg/dL), 
calculated LDL cholesterol 4.3 mmol/L (167mg/dL), non-HDL 
cholesterol 5.8 mmol/L (225 mg/dL) and fasting serum glucose 
6.9 mmol/L (124 mg/dL). The best indicator of the metabolic 
component of his cardiovascular risk is his level of
 
A. HDL cholesterol
 
B. Non-HDL cholesterol
 
C. Fasting plasma glucose
 
D. Calculated LDL cholesterol
 
E. Total cholesterol
Answer: B.
Non-HDL cholesterol is correct because it allows for the presence of 
small dense LDL and other atherogenic lipoproteins. This is particularly 
relevant in hypertriglyceridaemia, with or without accompanying eleva-
tion of fasting plasma glucose. It is more strongly associated with CVD 
in studies where comparison has been made with the other alternatives.
 19.5.  The same 59-year-old man fails to improve his lipid prole 
following diet and exercise advice, and treatment is deemed 
necessary. Which of the following medications may have a 
detrimental effect on the triglyceride component of his lipid 
prole?
 
A. Rosuvastatin
 
B. Ezetimibe
 
C. An anti-PCSK9 monoclonal antibody
 
D. Niacin
 
E. Cholestyramine
Answer: E.
Cholestyramine reduces re-circulation of bile acids, down-regulates 
the FXR receptor and stimulates the replacement of the bile acids by 
conversion of cholesterol via 7-alpha hydroxylase. The response to the 
down-regulation of FXR includes increased synthesis and secretion of tri-
glyceride and VLDL. The other agents have neutral or favourable effects 
on triglyceride levels.
 19.6.  The same 59-year-old man commences atorvastatin 20 mg 
nocte. His follow-up lipid prole and glucose reveal: total cholesterol 
3.7 mmol/L (144 mg/dL), fasting triglyceride 1.1 mmol/L (97 mg/dL), 
HDL cholesterol 1.1 mmol/L (43 mg/dL), calculated LDL cholesterol 
2.1 mmol/L (81 mg/dL), non-HDL cholesterol 2.6 mmol/L (101 mg/dL) 
and fasting serum glucose 8.9 mmol/L (160 mg/dL). A subsequent 
glucose tolerance test is diagnostic of new onset type 2 diabetes. 
The onset of diabetes and the use of statins is
 
A. A completely unrelated phenomenon
 
B. More likely in those with pre-existing impaired fasting glucose
 
C.  A contraindication to statin use due to CVD risk associated 
with type 2 diabetes
 
D. Unrelated to the dose or potency of the statin
 
E.  Inconsistent with the fact that fasting triglyceride has improved
Answer: B.
Type 2 diabetes following statin therapy is likely in those with pre-ex-
isting impaired fasting glucose. It is proportional to the dose and potency 
of the statin, but the CVD benet of the response clearly outweighs the 
CVD risk of the diabetes. Statins modestly improve triglyceride, even in 
the presence of diabetes.

[[p697]]
 19.7.  A 24-year-old man presents for assessment of his lipid prole 
because severe hypercholesterolaemia was detected as part of 
his life insurance application. His LDL cholesterol was 8.2 mmol/L 
(318 mg/dL) and his mother’s level is thought to be even higher.
Which of the following is true?
 
A.  Genetic testing for familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) should 
be performed on his original blood sample as an add-on test
 
B.  In his case, the severity of his LDL cholesterol elevation 
invalidates the use of population-based absolute risk 
calculators
 
C.  The main advantage of genetic diagnosis in FH is that it can 
be used to guide the selection of rst line therapy
 
D.  The very high level of LDL cholesterol makes his continuation 
or cessation of smoking irrelevant from the CVD point of view
 
E.  A non-elevated level of LDL cholesterol earlier in life is 
possible because the metabolic changes associated with FH 
emerge after childhood
Answer: B.
LDL is above the 99th percentile in most cases of FH, so population 
studies do not have sufcient power to estimate the increase in CVD risk. 
Genetic testing requires explanation and counselling, but it cannot guide 
treatment. Smoking amplies CVD risk in FH. FH is manifest from birth.
 19.8.  The same 24-year-old patient undertakes genetic testing, which 
yields a variant of unknown signicance in the LDL receptor gene. 
Which of the following is true?
 
A.  This result explains the increase in LDL cholesterol level in the 
patient and his mother
 
B.  This result can be used to screen his siblings for familial 
hypercholesterolaemia (FH)
 
C.  This result means that there are some cholesterol-lowering 
drugs that will not work in this patient
 
D. Genetic testing is guaranteed to nd the cause of FH in 
   every case
 
E.  The patient should have been counselled before the test 
was performed in case he had any questions, concerns 
or misconceptions, e.g. the need to disclose results for life 
insurance purposes
Answer: E.
Insurance requirements vary between jurisdictions and there are many 
ethical and clinical issues that need to be considered. The test may not 
explain the results in the patient or his mother and it may not be conclu-
sive for screening of siblings. Genetic diagnosis is only achieved in about 
80% of cases with clinical FH and it rarely informs about the effectiveness 
of therapy.

[[p698]]
Endocrinology
20
JDC Newell-Price
FW Gibb
Clinical examination in endocrine disease 648
An overview of endocrinology 650
Functional anatomy and physiology 650
Endocrine pathology 650
Investigation of endocrine disease 650
Presenting problems in endocrine disease 651
The thyroid gland 651
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations 651
Presenting problems in thyroid disease 652
Thyrotoxicosis 652
Hypothyroidism 655
Asymptomatic abnormal thyroid function tests 659
Thyroid lump or swelling 659
Autoimmune thyroid disease 660
Transient thyroiditis 663
Iodine-associated thyroid disease 663
Simple and multinodular goitre 664
Thyroid neoplasia 665
Congenital thyroid disease 667
The reproductive system 667
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations 667
Presenting problems in reproductive disease 668
Delayed puberty 668
Amenorrhoea 669
Male hypogonadism 670
Infertility 671
Gynaecomastia 672
Hirsutism 672
Polycystic ovary syndrome 673
Turner syndrome 674
Klinefelter syndrome 674
The parathyroid glands 675
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations 675
Presenting problems in parathyroid disease 676
Hypercalcaemia 676
Hypocalcaemia 677
Primary hyperparathyroidism 677
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 678
Hypoparathyroidism 678
The adrenal glands 679
Functional anatomy and physiology 679
Presenting problems in adrenal disease 679
Cushing’s syndrome 679
Therapeutic use of glucocorticoids 684
Adrenal insufciency 685
Incidental adrenal mass 687
Primary hyperaldosteronism 687
Phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma 688
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 689
The endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal tract 689
Presenting problems in endocrine pancreas disease 689
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia 689
Gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours 691
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland 691
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations 692
Presenting problems in hypothalamic and pituitary disease 693
Hypopituitarism 694
Pituitary tumour 695
Hyperprolactinaemia/galactorrhoea 696
Prolactinoma 697
Acromegaly 698
Craniopharyngioma 699
Diabetes insipidus 699
Disorders affecting multiple endocrine glands 700
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 700
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes 701
Endocrine effects of cancer immunotherapy 701
Late effects of childhood cancer therapy 701
Opioid-induced endocrine dysfunction 701

[[p699]]
648  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Clinical examination in endocrine disease
Endocrine disease causes clinical syndromes with symptoms and signs involving many organ systems. The emphasis of the clinical examination depends 
on the gland or hormone that is thought to be abnormal.
Diabetes mellitus (described in detail in Ch. 21) and thyroid disease are the most common endocrine disorders.
Hands
Palmar erythema
Tremor
Acromegaly
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Skin
Hair distribution
Dry/greasy
Pigmentation/pallor
Bruising
Vitiligo
Striae
Thickness
Pulse
Atrial fibrillation
Sinus tachycardia
Bradycardia
Breasts
Galactorrhoea
Gynaecomastia
Neck
Voice
  Hoarse, e.g. hypothyroid
  Virilised
Thyroid gland (see opposite)
  Goitre
  Nodules
8
7
7
8
9
10
11
12
6
2
3
4
5
Observation
 Most examination in endocrinology
   is by observation
 Astute observation can often yield
  ‘spot’ diagnosis of endocrine
   disorders
 The emphasis of examination
   varies depending on which gland
   or hormone is thought to be
   involved 
Body fat
Central obesity in Cushing's
syndrome and growth hormone
deficiency
9
Height and weight
Bones
Fragility fractures (e.g. of
vertebrae, neck of femur or
distal radius)
10
Genitalia
Virilisation
Pubertal development
Testicular volume
11
Legs
Proximal myopathy
Myxoedema
12
Blood pressure
Hypertension in Cushing’s
and Conn syndromes,
phaeochromocytoma
Hypotension in adrenal
insufficiency
Eyes
  Graves’ disease
 (see opposite)
  Diplopia
  Visual field defect
  (see opposite)
Hair
  Alopecia
  Frontal balding
Facial features
  Hypothyroid
  Hirsutism
  Acromegaly
  Cushing’s
1
Prognathism in
acromegaly
Acromegalic hands. Note soft
tissue enlargement causing
‘spade-like’ changes
Pigmentation of creases
due to high ACTH levels
in Addison’s disease
Vitiligo in organ-specific
autoimmune disease
Multinodular
goitre
Pretibial myxoedema
in Graves' disease
Head
Mental state
  Lethargy
  Depression
  Delirium
  Libido  
1
2
3
4
6
5

[[p700]]
Clinical examination in endocrine disease  649
20
  Examination of the visual 
elds by confrontation
 Sit opposite patient
 You and patient cover opposite
eyes
 Bring red pin (or wiggling finger)
slowly into view from extreme of
your vision, as shown
 Ask patient to say ‘now’ when it
comes into view
 Continue to move pin into centre
of vision and ask patient to tell
you if it disappears
 Repeat in each of four quadrants
 Repeat in other eye
A bitemporal hemianopia is the
classical finding in pituitary
macroadenomas (p. 695)
 Examination in Graves’ ophthalmopathy
 Inspect from front and side
     Periorbital oedema (Fig. 20.9)
     Conjunctival inflammation
     (chemosis)
     Corneal ulceration
     Proptosis (exophthalmos)*
     Lid retraction*
 Range of eye movements
     Lid lag on descending gaze*
     Diplopia on lateral gaze
 Pupillary reflexes
     Afferent defect (pupils constrict
     further on swinging light to
     unaffected eye, Box 28.21)
 Vision
     Visual acuity impaired
     Loss of colour vision
     Visual field defects
 Ophthalmoscopy
     Optic disc pallor
     Papilloedema
*Note position of eyelids relative to iris.
Normal
Proptosis
Right proptosis and afferent pupillary defect
Lid
retraction
Normal
Normal
descent
Lid lag
descent
Examination of the thyroid gland
Diffuse firm goitre
 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (p. 663)
Diffuse tender goitre
 
Subacute thyroiditis (p. 663)
Abnormal findings
Diffuse soft goitre with bruit
 
Graves’ disease (p. 660)
Multinodular goitre (p. 664)
 
± Retrosternal extension,
     tracheal compression
Solitary nodule (p. 659)
 
Adenoma, cyst or carcinoma
Cervical lymphadenopathy
 
Suggests carcinoma
 Inspect from front to side
 Palpate from behind
Thyroid moves on swallowing
     Check if lower margin is palpable
Cervical lymph nodes
Tracheal deviation
 Auscultate for bruit
Ask patient to hold breath
If present, check for
radiating murmur
 Percuss for retrosternal thyroid
 Consider systemic signs of
   thyroid dysfunction (Box 20.7)
incl. tremor, palmar erythema,
warm peripheries, tachycardia,
lid lag
 Consider signs of Graves’
   disease incl. ophthalmopathy,
   pretibial myxoedema
 Check for Pemberton’s sign,
   i.e. facial engorgement when
   arms raised above head

[[p701]]
650  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Feedback
regulation
Trophic
hormone
Hormone
Binding
protein
Target organ
Metabolism
Endocrine
gland
Pituitary
Neural
control
Action
Receptor
Direct
regulation
Fig. 20.1 An archetypal endocrine axis. Regulation by negative feedback and 
direct control is shown, along with the equilibrium between active circulating free 
hormone and bound or metabolised hormone.
20.1 Classication of endocrine disease
Hormone excess
 Primary gland over-production
 Secondary to excess trophic substance
Hormone deciency
 Primary gland failure
 Secondary to decient trophic hormone
Hormone hypersensitivity
 Failure of inactivation of hormone
 Target organ over-activity/hypersensitivity
Hormone resistance
 Failure of activation by hormone
 Target organ resistance
Non-functioning tumours
 Benign
 Malignant
and thyroid-stimulating hormone deciency). Some pathological pro-
cesses can affect multiple endocrine glands; these may have a genetic 
basis (such as organ-specic autoimmune endocrine disorders and the 
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes) or be a consequence of 
therapy for another disease (e.g. following treatment of childhood cancer 
with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy).
Investigation of endocrine disease
Biochemical investigations play a central role in endocrinology. Most hor-
mones can be measured in blood but the circumstances in which the 
sample is taken are often crucial, especially for hormones with pulsatile 
secretion, such as growth hormone; those that show circadian variation, 
Endocrinology concerns the synthesis, secretion and action of 
hormones. These are chemical messengers released from endocrine 
glands that coordinate the activities of many different cells. Endocrine 
diseases can therefore affect multiple organs and systems. This chapter 
describes the principles of endocrinology before dealing with the function 
and diseases of each gland in turn.
Some endocrine disorders are common, particularly those of the thy-
roid, parathyroid glands, reproductive system and β cells of the pancreas 
(Ch. 21). For example, thyroid dysfunction occurs in more than 10% of 
the population in areas with iodine deciency, such as the Himalayas, 
and 4% of women aged 20–50 years in the UK. Less common endocrine 
syndromes are described later in the chapter.
Few endocrine therapies have been evaluated by randomised con-
trolled trials, in part because hormone replacement therapy (e.g. with 
levothyroxine) has obvious clinical benets and placebo-controlled trials 
would be unethical. Where trials have been performed, they relate mainly 
to use of therapy that is ‘optional’ and/or more recently available, such as 
oestrogen replacement in post-menopausal women, androgen therapy 
in older men and growth hormone replacement.
An overview of endocrinology
Functional anatomy and physiology
Some endocrine glands, such as the parathyroids and pancreas, 
respond directly to metabolic signals, but most are controlled by hor-
mones released from the pituitary gland. Anterior pituitary hormone 
secretion is controlled in turn by substances produced in the hypothal-
amus and released into portal blood, which drains directly down the 
pituitary stalk (Fig. 20.1). Posterior pituitary hormones are synthesised 
in the hypothalamus and transported down nerve axons, to be released 
from the posterior pituitary. Hormone release in the hypothalamus and 
pituitary is regulated by numerous stimuli and through feedback control 
by hormones produced by the target glands (thyroid, adrenal cortex and 
gonads). These integrated endocrine systems are called ‘axes’ and are 
listed in Figure 20.2.
A wide variety of molecules can act as hormones, including peptides 
such as insulin and growth hormone, glycoproteins such as thyroid-
stimulating hormone, and amines such as noradrenaline (norepineph-
rine). The biological effects of hormones are mediated by binding to 
receptors. Many receptors are located on the cell surface. These inter-
act with various intracellular signalling molecules on the cytosolic side of 
the plasma membrane to affect cell function, usually through changes 
in gene expression. Some hormones, most notably steroids, bind to 
specic intracellular receptors. The hormone/receptor complex forms 
a ligand-activated transcription factor, which regulates gene expression 
directly.
The classical model of endocrine function involves hormones synthe-
sised in endocrine glands, which are released into the circulation and act 
at sites distant from those of secretion (as in Fig. 20.1). However, addi-
tional levels of regulation are now recognised. Many other organs secrete 
hormones or contribute to the peripheral metabolism and activation of 
prohormones. A notable example is the production of oestrogens from 
adrenal androgens in adipose tissue by the enzyme aromatase. Some 
hormones, such as neurotransmitters, act in a paracrine fashion to affect 
adjacent cells, or act in an autocrine way to affect behaviour of the cell 
that produces the hormone.
Endocrine pathology
For each endocrine axis or major gland, diseases can be classied as 
shown in Box 20.1. Pathology arising within the gland is often called 
‘primary’ disease (e.g. primary hypothyroidism in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis), 
while abnormal stimulation of the gland is often called ‘secondary’ dis-
ease (e.g. secondary hypothyroidism in patients with a pituitary tumour 

[[p702]]
The thyroid gland  651
20
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations
Thyroid physiology is illustrated in Figure 20.3. The parafollicular C cells 
secrete calcitonin, which is of no apparent physiological signicance in 
humans. The follicular epithelial cells synthesise thyroid hormones by 
incorporating iodine into the amino acid tyrosine on the surface of thy-
roglobulin (Tg), a protein secreted into the colloid of the follicle. Iodide is 
a key substrate for thyroid hormone synthesis; a dietary intake in excess 
of 100 µg/day is required to maintain thyroid function in adults. The thy-
roid secretes predominantly thyroxine (T4) and only a small amount of 
Regulation
Circadian
rhythm
Stress
Cortisol
Osmolality
Intravascular
volume
Oestrogen
Progesterone
Androgen
Prolactin
Inhibin
T3
IGF-1
GnRH
TRH
Dopamine
GHRH
Somatostatin
CRH
Oxytocin
Hypothalamus
TSH
Prolactin
GH
ACTH
Posterior
Pituitary
LH
FSH
Gonads:
testes or
ovaries
Thyroid
Breast
Liver
Adrenal
cortex
Distal
nephron
Uterus
Breast
Oestrogen
Progesterone
Androgen
T4
T3
IGF-1
IGF-BP3
Cortisol
Androgen
Glands/targets
Target
hormones
Function
Reproduction
Metabolism
Lactation
Growth
Stress
Metabolism
Water
balance
Parturition
Lactation
Oestrogen
Stress
Anterior
Vasopressin
Fig. 20.2 The principal endocrine ‘axes’. Some major endocrine glands are not controlled by the pituitary. These include the parathyroid glands (regulated by calcium 
concentrations, p. 675), the adrenal zona glomerulosa (regulated by the renin–angiotensin system, p.679) and the endocrine pancreas (p. 689). Italics show negative regulation. 
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; CRH = corticotrophin-releasing hormone; FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; GH = growth hormone; GHRH = growth hormone-
releasing hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; IGF-1 = insulin-like growth factor-1; IGF-BP3 = IGF-binding protein-3; LH = luteinising hormone: 
T3 = triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine; TRH = thyrotrophin-releasing hormone; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone; vasopressin = antidiuretic hormone (ADH))
20.2 Principles of endocrine investigation
Timing of measurement
 Release of many hormones is rhythmical (pulsatile, circadian or monthly), so 
random measurement may be invalid and sequential or dynamic tests may be 
required
Choice of dynamic biochemical test
 Abnormalities are often characterised by loss of normal regulation of hormone 
secretion
 If hormone deciency is suspected, choose a stimulation test
 If hormone excess is suspected, choose a suppression test
 The more tests there are to choose from, the less likely it is that any single test 
is infallible, so avoid interpreting one result in isolation
Imaging
 ‘Functional’ as well as conventional ‘structural’ imaging can be performed as 
secretory endocrine cells can also take up labelled substrates, e.g. radio-
labelled iodine or octreotide
 Most endocrine glands have a high prevalence of ‘incidentalomas’, so do not 
scan unless the biochemistry conrms endocrine dysfunction or the primary 
problem is a tumour
Biopsy
 Many endocrine tumours are difcult to classify histologically (e.g. adrenal 
carcinoma and adenoma)
such as cortisol; or those that demonstrate monthly variation, such as 
oestrogen or progesterone. Some hormones are labile and need spe-
cial collection, handling and processing requirements, e.g. collection in 
a special tube and/or rapid transportation to the laboratory on ice. Local 
protocols for hormone measurement should be carefully followed. Other 
investigations, such as imaging and biopsy, are more frequently reserved 
for patients who present with a tumour. The principles of investigation 
are shown in Box 20.2. The choice of test is often pragmatic, taking local 
access to reliable sampling facilities and laboratory measurements into 
account.
Presenting problems in endocrine disease
Endocrine diseases present in many different ways and to clinicians in 
many different disciplines. Classical syndromes are described in relation 
to individual glands in the following sections. Often, however, the pres-
entation is with non-specic symptoms (Box 20.3) or with asymptomatic 
biochemical abnormalities. In addition, endocrine diseases are encoun-
tered in the differential diagnosis of common complaints discussed in other 
chapters of this book, including electrolyte abnormalities (Ch. 19, hyper-
tension (Ch. 16), obesity (Ch. 22) and osteoporosis (Ch. 26). Although dis-
eases of the adrenal glands, hypothalamus and pituitary are relatively rare, 
their diagnosis often relies on astute clinical observation in a patient with 
non-specic complaints, so it is important that clinicians are familiar with 
their key features.
The thyroid gland
Diseases of the thyroid, summarised in Box 20.4, predominantly affect 
females and are common, occurring in about 5% of the population. The 
thyroid axis is involved in the regulation of cellular differentiation and 
metabolism in virtually all nucleated cells, so that disorders of thyroid 
function have diverse manifestations. Structural diseases of the thyroid 
gland, such as goitre, commonly occur in patients with normal thyroid 
function.

[[p703]]
652  ENDOCRINOLOGY
triiodothyronine (T3); approximately 85% of T3 in blood is produced from 
T4 by a family of monodeiodinase enzymes that are active in many tis-
sues, including liver, muscle, heart and kidney. Selenium is an integral 
component of these monodeiodinases. T4 can be regarded as a pro-
hormone, since it has a longer half-life in blood than T3 (approximately 
1 week compared with approximately 18 hours), and binds and activates 
thyroid hormone receptors less effectively than T3. T4 can also be con-
verted to the inactive metabolite, reverse T3
T3 and T4 circulate in plasma almost entirely (>99%) bound to trans-
port proteins, mainly thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG). It is the unbound 
or free hormones that diffuse into tissues and exert diverse metabolic 
actions. Some laboratories use assays that measure total T4 and T3 in 
plasma but it is increasingly common to measure free T4 and free T3. The 
theoretical advantage of the free hormone measurements is that they are 
not inuenced by changes in the concentration of binding proteins. For 
example, TBG levels are increased by oestrogen (such as in the com-
bined oral contraceptive pill) and this will result in raised total T3 and T4, 
although free thyroid hormone levels are normal.
Production of T3 and T4 in the thyroid is stimulated by thyrotrophin 
(thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH), a glycoprotein released from the 
thyrotroph cells of the anterior pituitary in response to the hypothalamic 
tripeptide, thyrotrophin-releasing hormone (TRH). A circadian rhythm 
of TSH secretion can be demonstrated with a peak at 0100 hrs and 
trough at 1100 hrs, but the variation is small so that thyroid function 
can be assessed reliably from a single blood sample taken at any 
time of day and does not usually require any dynamic stimulation or 
suppression tests. There is a negative feedback of thyroid hormones 
on the hypothalamus and pituitary such that in thyrotoxicosis, when 
plasma concentrations of T3 and T4 are raised, TSH secretion is sup-
pressed. Conversely, in hypothyroidism due to disease of the thyroid 
gland, low T3 and T4 are associated with high circulating TSH levels. 
The relationship between TSH and T4 is classically described as inverse 
log-linear (Fig. 20.4). The anterior pituitary is, though, very sensitive to 
minor changes in thyroid hormone levels within the reference range. 
For example, in an individual whose free T4 level is usually 15 pmol/L 
(1.17 ng/dL), a rise or fall of 5 pmol/L (0.39 ng/dL) would be associated 
on the one hand with undetectable TSH, and on the other hand with 
a raised TSH. For this reason, TSH is usually regarded as the most 
useful investigation of thyroid function. However, interpretation of TSH 
values without considering thyroid hormone levels may be misleading 
in patients with pituitary disease; for example, TSH is inappropriately 
low or ‘normal’ in secondary hypothyroidism (see Box 20.5 and Box 
20.51). Moreover, TSH may take several weeks to ‘catch up’ with T4
and T3 levels; for example, levothyroxine therapy will raise T4 and T3
levels within approximately 2 weeks but it may take 4–6 weeks for the 
TSH to reach a steady state. Heterophilic antibodies (host antibodies 
with afnity to the animal antibodies used in biological assays) can also 
interfere with the TSH assay and cause a spurious high or low meas-
urement. Common patterns of abnormal thyroid function test results 
and their interpretation are shown in Box 20.5
Other modalities commonly employed in the investigation of thyroid 
disease include measurement of antibodies against the TSH receptor or 
other thyroid antigens (see Box 20.8), radioisotope imaging, ne needle 
aspiration biopsy and ultrasound. Their use is described below.
Presenting problems in thyroid disease
The most common presentations are hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis), 
hypothyroidism and enlargement of the thyroid (goitre or thyroid nodule). 
Widespread availability of thyroid function tests has led to the increas-
ingly frequent identication of patients with abnormal results who either 
are asymptomatic or have non-specic complaints such as tiredness 
and weight gain.
Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis describes a constellation of clinical features arising from 
elevated circulating levels of thyroid hormone. The most common causes 
are Graves’ disease, multinodular goitre, autonomously functioning thy-
roid nodules (toxic adenoma) and thyroiditis (Box 20.6).
Clinical assessment
The clinical manifestations of thyrotoxicosis are shown in Box 20.7 and 
an approach to differential diagnosis is given in Figure 20.5. The most 
common symptoms are weight loss with a normal or increased appetite, 
heat intolerance, palpitations, tremor and irritability. Tachycardia, palmar 
erythema and lid lag are common signs. Not all patients have a palpable 
goitre, but experienced clinicians can discriminate the diffuse soft goi-
tre of Graves’ disease from the irregular enlargement of a multinodular 
goitre. All causes of thyrotoxicosis can cause lid retraction and lid lag, 
due to potentiation of sympathetic innervation of the levator palpebrae 
muscles, but only Graves’ disease causes other features of ophthalmo-
pathy, including periorbital oedema, conjunctival irritation, exophthalmos 
20.3 Examples of non-specic presentations of 
endocrine disease*
Symptom
Most likely endocrine disorder(s)
Lethargy and depression
Hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, 
hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, 
adrenal insufciency, Cushing’s syndrome
Weight gain
Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome
Weight loss
Thyrotoxicosis, adrenal insufciency, 
diabetes mellitus
Polyuria and polydipsia
Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, 
hyperparathyroidism, hypokalaemia  
(Conn syndrome)
Heat intolerance*
Thyrotoxicosis
Palpitation
Thyrotoxicosis, phaeochromocytoma
Headache
Acromegaly, pituitary tumour, 
phaeochromocytoma
Muscle weakness  
(usually proximal)
Thyrotoxicosis, Cushing’s syndrome, 
hypokalaemia (e.g. Conn syndrome), 
hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism
Coarsening of features
Acromegaly, hypothyroidism
*Heat intolerance is a common feature of menopause.
20.4 Classication of thyroid disease
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Graves’ disease
Multinodular goitre
Adenoma
Subacute thyroiditis
TSHoma
Hormone deciency
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Atrophic hypothyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
Hormone resistance
Thyroid hormone resistance 
syndrome
5 -monodeiodinase deciency
Non-functioning 
tumours
Differentiated carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Lymphoma

[[p704]]
The thyroid gland  653
20
and diplopia. Pretibial myxoedema (see p. 663) and the rare thyroid 
acropachy (a periosteal hypertrophy, indistinguishable from nger club-
bing) are also specic to Graves’ disease.
Investigations
The rst-line investigations are serum T3, T4 and TSH. If abnormal values 
are found, the tests should be repeated and the abnormality conrmed 
in view of the likely need for prolonged medical treatment or destructive 
therapy. In most patients, serum T3 and T4 are both elevated, but T4 is 
in the upper part of the reference range and T3 is raised (T3 toxicosis) 
in about 5%. Serum TSH is undetectable in primary thyrotoxicosis, but 
values can be raised in the very rare syndrome of secondary thyrotox-
icosis caused by a TSH-producing pituitary adenoma. When biochem-
ical thyrotoxicosis has been conrmed, measurement of TSH receptor 
antibodies (TRAb, elevated in Graves’ disease; Box 20.8) is recom-
mended. Where TRAb is not available, radioisotope scanning is an alter-
native diagnostic approach, as shown in Figure 20.5. Other non-specic 
abnormalities are common (Box 20.9). An electrocardiogram (ECG) may 
demonstrate sinus tachycardia or atrial brillation.
Radio-iodine uptake tests measure the proportion of isotope that is 
trapped in the whole gland but have been largely superseded by 99mtech-
netium scintigraphy scans, which also indicate trapping, are quicker to 
perform with a lower dose of radioactivity, and provide a higher-resolu-
tion image. In low-uptake thyrotoxicosis, the cause is usually a transient 
thyroiditis. Occasionally, patients induce ‘factitious thyrotoxicosis’ by 
consuming excessive amounts of a thyroid hormone preparation, most 
often levothyroxine. The exogenous levothyroxine suppresses pituitary 
TSH secretion and hence iodine uptake, serum thyroglobulin and release 
Colloid
Follicular
cell
Extracellular
fluid
T4
MIT
DIT
T4
T3
Stimulates all
steps
+ hyperplasia
Iodide
TSH
T3  T4
MIT Tg
DIT
T3
Iodide
MIT Tg
DIT
Tg
1
8
7
8
2
4
1
3
6
5
Protein-bound
T4, T3 ( > 99%)
Increased metabolic rate
Mimic -adrenergic action,
e.g. on heart rate, gut motility
CNS activation
Bone demineralisation
Cellular differentiation
etc.
rT3
T4
T3
8
Blood
Target tissues
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Tyrosine
Monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
Diiodotyrosine (DIT)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Triiodothyronine (T3)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Thyroxine (T4)
HO
O
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Reverse T3 (rT3)
Negative
feedback
3
4
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
HO
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH
Parafollicular (C) cells
Colloid
Follicular
epithelium
Red blood cells
Free T4,T3
( < 1%)
Fig. 20.3 Structure and function of the thyroid gland. (1) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is synthesised and secreted into the colloid of the follicle. (2) Inorganic iodide (I ) is actively 
transported into the follicular cell (‘trapping’). (3) Iodide is transported on to the colloidal surface by a transporter (pendrin, defective in Pendred syndrome, p. 667) and 
‘organied’ by the thyroid peroxidase enzyme, which incorporates it into the amino acid tyrosine on the surface of Tg to form monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). 
(4) Iodinated tyrosines couple to form triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). (5) Tg is endocytosed. (6) Tg is cleaved by proteolysis to free the iodinated tyrosine and thyroid 
hormones. (7) Iodinated tyrosine is dehalogenated to recycle the iodide. (8) T4 is converted to T3 by 5 -monodeiodinase. (CNS = central nervous system; TSH = thyroid-
stimulating hormone)
LogTSH (mlU/L)
Free T4 (pmol/L)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
Fig. 20.4 The relationship between serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 
and free T4. Due to the classic negative feedback loop between T4 and TSH, there is 
an inverse relationship between serum free T4 and the log of serum TSH. To convert 
pmol/L to ng/dL, divide by 12.87.

[[p705]]
654  ENDOCRINOLOGY
20.5  How to interpret thyroid function test results
TSH
T4
T3
Most likely interpretation(s)
Undetectable
Raised
Raised
Primary thyrotoxicosis
Undetectable or low
Raised
Normal
Over-treatment of hypothyroidism with levothyroxine
Factitious thyrotoxicosis
Undetectable
Normal1
Raised
Primary T3 toxicosis
Undetectable
Normal1
Normal1
Subclinical thyrotoxicosis
Undetectable or low
Raised
Low or normal
Non-thyroidal illness
Amiodarone therapy
Undetectable or low
Low
Raised
Over-treatment of hypothyroidism with liothyronine (T3)
Undetectable
Low
Low
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Transient thyroiditis in evolution
Normal
Low
Low2
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Mildly elevated 5–20 mIU/L
Low
Low2
Primary hypothyroidism
Secondary hypothyroidism4
Elevated >20 mIU/L
Low
Low2
Primary hypothyroidism
Mildly elevated 5–20 mIU/L
Normal3
Normal2
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Elevated 20–500 mIU/L
Normal
Normal
Artefact
Heterophilic antibodies (host antibodies with afnity to the animal 
antibodies used in TSH assays)
Elevated
Raised
Raised
Non-adherence to levothyroxine replacement – recent ‘loading’ dose
Secondary thyrotoxicosis4
Thyroid hormone resistance
1Usually upper part of reference range. 2T3 is not a sensitive indicator of hypothyroidism and should not be requested. 3Usually lower part of reference range. 4i.e. Secondary to pituitary or hypothalamic 
disease. Note that TSH assays may report detectable TSH.
(TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)
20.6  Causes of thyrotoxicosis and their relative frequencies
Cause
Frequency1 (%)
Graves’ disease
76
Multinodular goitre
14
Solitary thyroid adenoma
5
Thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s)2
Post-partum2
3
0.5
Iodide-induced
Drugs (amiodarone)2
Radiographic contrast media2
Iodine supplementation programme2
1
Extrathyroidal source of thyroid hormone
Factitious thyrotoxicosis2
Struma ovarii2,3
0.2
TSH-induced
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
Choriocarcinoma and hydatidiform mole4
Follicular carcinoma±metastases
0.2
0.1
1ln a series of 2087 patients presenting to the Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh over a 10-year 
period. 2Characterised by negligible radioisotope uptake. 3i.e. Ovarian teratoma containing 
thyroid tissue. 4Human chorionic gonadotrophin has thyroid-stimulating activity.
(TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)
of negligible iodine uptake, high T4:T3 ratio and a low or undetectable 
thyroglobulin is diagnostic.
Management
Denitive treatment of thyrotoxicosis depends on the underlying cause 
and may include antithyroid drugs, radioactive iodine or surgery. 
A non-selective β-adrenoceptor antagonist (β-blocker), such as pro-
pranolol (160 mg daily), will alleviate but not abolish symptoms in most 
patients within 24–48 hours. Beta-blockers should not be used for 
long-term treatment of thyrotoxicosis but are extremely useful in the 
short term, while patients are awaiting hospital consultation or following 
131I therapy. Verapamil may be used as an alternative to β-blockers, 
e.g. in patients with asthma, but usually is only effective in improving 
tachycardia and has little effect on the other systemic manifestations 
of thyrotoxicosis.
Atrial brillation in thyrotoxicosis
Atrial brillation occurs in about 10% of patients with thyrotoxicosis. The 
incidence is higher in men and increases with age, so that almost half of 
all males with thyrotoxicosis over the age of 60 are affected. Moreover, 
subclinical thyrotoxicosis (see p. 659) is a risk factor for atrial brillation. 
Characteristically, the ventricular rate is little inuenced by digoxin but 
responds to the addition of a β-blocker. Thromboembolic vascular com-
plications are particularly common in thyrotoxic atrial brillation so that 
anticoagulation is required, unless contraindicated. Once thyroid hor-
mone and TSH concentrations have been returned to normal, atrial bril-
lation will spontaneously revert to sinus rhythm in about 50% of patients 
but cardioversion may be required in the remainder.
Thyrotoxic crisis (‘thyroid storm’)
This is a rare but life-threatening complication of thyrotoxicosis. The 
most prominent signs are fever, agitation, delirium, tachycardia or atrial 
brillation and, in the older patient, cardiac failure. Thyrotoxic crisis is a 
of endogenous thyroid hormones. The T4:T3 ratio (typically 30:1 in con-
ventional thyrotoxicosis) is increased to above 70:1 because circulating 
T3 in factitious thyrotoxicosis is derived exclusively from the peripheral 
monodeiodination of T4 and not from thyroid secretion. The combination 

[[p706]]
The thyroid gland  655
20
medical emergency and has a mortality of 10% despite early recognition 
and treatment. It is most commonly precipitated by infection in a patient 
with previously unrecognised or inadequately treated thyrotoxicosis. It 
may also develop in known thyrotoxicosis shortly after thyroidectomy in 
an ill-prepared patient or within a few days of 131I therapy, when acute 
radiation damage may lead to a transient rise in serum thyroid hormone 
levels. Urgent specialist endocrine input should be sought in cases of 
suspected ‘thyroid storm’, both to conrm the diagnosis and provide 
advice on appropriate treatment.
Patients should be rehydrated and given propranolol, either orally 
(80 mg 4 times daily) or intravenously (1–5 mg 4 times daily). Both glu-
cocorticoids (hydrocortisone 100 mg IV every 8 hours) and iodine are 
important in reducing the conversion of T4 to active T3. Sodium ipodate, a 
radiographic contrast medium (500 mg per day orally), will restore serum 
T3 levels to normal in 48–72 hours. Where sodium ipodate is not availa-
ble, potassium iodide or Lugol’s solution are reasonable alternatives. Oral 
propylthiouracil (PTU) (200 mg every 4 hours) should be given to inhibit 
20.7  Clinical features of thyroid dysfunction
Common
Weight loss despite normal or 
increased appetite
Heat intolerance, sweating
Palpitations, tremor
Dyspnoea, fatigue
Irritability, emotional lability
Weight loss
Tremor
Palmar erythema
Sinus tachycardia
Lid retraction, lid lag
Weight gain
Cold intolerance
Fatigue, somnolence
Dry skin
Dry hair
Menorrhagia
Weight gain
Less common
Osteoporosis (fracture, loss of height)
Diarrhoea, steatorrhoea
Angina
Ankle swelling
Anxiety, psychosis
Muscle weakness
Periodic paralysis (predominantly in 
Chinese and other Asian groups)
Pruritus, alopecia
Amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea
Infertility, spontaneous abortion
Loss of libido, impotence
Excessive lacrimation
Goitre with bruit1
Atrial brillation2
Systolic hypertension/increased  
pulse pressure
Cardiac failure2
Hyper-reexia
Ill-sustained clonus
Proximal myopathy
Bulbar myopathy2
Constipation
Hoarseness
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Alopecia
Aches and pains
Muscle stiffness
Deafness
Depression
Infertility
Hoarse voice
Facial features:
Purplish lips
Malar ush
Periorbital oedema
Loss of lateral eyebrows
Anaemia
Carotenaemia
Erythema ab igne
Bradycardia hypertension
Delayed relaxation of reexes
Dermal myxoedema
Rare
Vomiting
Apathy
Anorexia
Exacerbation of asthma
Gynaecomastia
Spider naevi
Onycholysis
Pigmentation
Psychosis (myxoedema madness)
Galactorrhoea
Impotence
Ileus, ascites
Pericardial and pleural effusions
Cerebellar ataxia
Myotonia
1ln Graves’ disease only. 2Features found particularly in older patients.
the synthesis of new thyroid hormone. PTU is preferred to carbimazole 
(20 mg every 6 hours) as it also inhibits the conversion of T4 to T3. If the 
patient is unconscious or uncooperative, PTU and propranolol can be 
administered by nasogastric tube. After 10–14 days the patient can usu-
ally be maintained on carbimazole alone.
Hyperthyroidism in old age
Some of the diagnostic and management challenges of hyperthyroidism 
in older people are highlighted in Box 20.12
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a common condition with various causes (Box 20.10), 
but autoimmune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) and thyroid failure 
following 131I or surgical treatment of thyrotoxicosis account for over 90% 
of cases, except in areas where iodine deciency is endemic. Women are 
affected approximately six times more frequently than men.
20.8  Prevalence of thyroid autoantibodies (%)
Antibodies to:
Thyroid peroxidase1
Thyroglobulin
TSH receptor2
Normal population
8–27
5–20
0
Graves’ disease
50–80
50–70
>95
Autoimmune hypothyroidism
90–100
80–90
10–20
Multinodular goitre
~30–40
~30–40
0
Transient thyroiditis
~30–40
~30–40
0
1Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies are the principal component of what was previously measured as thyroid ‘microsomal’ antibodies. 2Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies (TRAb) can be 
agonists (stimulatory, causing Graves’ thyrotoxicosis) or antagonists (‘blocking’, causing hypothyroidism).

[[p707]]
656  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Clinical assessment
The clinical presentation depends on the duration and severity of the 
hypothyroidism. Those in whom complete thyroid failure has developed 
insidiously over months or years may present with many of the clinical 
features listed in Box 20.7. A consequence of prolonged hypothyroidism 
is the inltration of many body tissues by the mucopolysaccharides hya-
luronic acid and chondroitin sulphate, resulting in a low-pitched voice, 
poor hearing, slurred speech due to a large tongue, and compression 
of the median nerve at the wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome). Inltration of 
the dermis gives rise to non-pitting oedema (myxoedema), which is most 
marked in the skin of the hands, feet and eyelids. The resultant periorbital 
pufness is often striking and may be combined with facial pallor due to 
vasoconstriction and anaemia, or a lemon-yellow tint to the skin caused 
by carotenaemia, along with purplish lips and malar ush. Most cases of 
hypothyroidism are not clinically obvious, however, and a high index of 
suspicion needs to be maintained so that the diagnosis is not overlooked 
in individuals complaining of non-specic symptoms such as tiredness, 
weight gain, depression or carpal tunnel syndrome.
TSH and T3 ± T4
Scenario?
Not available
Positive
Negative
Clinically thyrotoxic
Repeat when acute
illness has resolved
Possible non-thyroidal illness
Any features of non-Graves’
thyrotoxicosis?
 Recent (< 6 months) pregnancy
 Neck pain/flu-like illness
 Drugs (amiodarone, T4)3
 Palpable multinodular goitre
   or solitary nodule
Any features of Graves’ disease?
 Diffuse goitre with bruit
 Ophthalmopathy2
 Pretibial myxoedema
Yes
No
No
Thyroid scintigraphy4
TSH receptor antibodies1
Low-uptake thyrotoxicosis
 Transient thyroiditis
 Extrathyroidal T4 source
Toxic
multinodular goitre
Graves’
disease
Toxic
adenoma
Fig. 20.5 Establishing the differential diagnosis in thyrotoxicosis. 1Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor antibodies are very rare in patients without autoimmune 
thyroid disease but occur in only 80%–95% of patients with Graves’ disease; a positive test is therefore conrmatory but a negative test does not exclude Graves’ disease. 
Other thyroid antibodies (e.g. anti-peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies) are unhelpful in the differential diagnosis since they occur frequently in the population and are 
found with several of the disorders that cause thyrotoxicosis. 2Graves’ ophthalmopathy refers to clinical features of exophthalmos and periorbital and conjunctival oedema, not 
simply the lid lag and lid retraction that can occur in all forms of thyrotoxicosis. 3Scintigraphy is not necessary in most cases of drug-induced thyrotoxicosis. 4 99mTechnetium 
pertechnetate scans of patients with thyrotoxicosis. In low-uptake thyrotoxicosis, most commonly due to a viral, post-partum or iodine-induced thyroiditis, there is negligible 
isotope detected in the region of the thyroid, although uptake is apparent in nearby salivary glands (not shown here). In a toxic adenoma there is lack of uptake of isotope by 
the rest of the thyroid gland due to suppression of serum TSH. In multinodular goitre there is relatively low, patchy uptake within the nodules; such an appearance is not always 
associated with a palpable thyroid. In Graves’ disease there is diffuse uptake of isotope.
20.9  Non-specic laboratory abnormalities in thyroid 
dysfunction*
Thyrotoxicosis
 Serum enzymes: raised alanine aminotransferase, γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT), 
and alkaline phosphatase from liver and bone
 Raised bilirubin
 Mild hypercalcaemia
 Glycosuria: associated diabetes mellitus, ‘lag storage’ glycosuria
Hypothyroidism
 Serum enzymes: raised creatine kinase, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH)
 Hypercholesterolaemia
 Anaemia: normochromic normocytic or macrocytic
 Hyponatraemia
*These abnormalities are not useful in differential diagnosis, so the tests should be avoided 
and any further investigation undertaken only if abnormalities persist when the patient is 
euthyroid.

[[p708]]
The thyroid gland  657
20
20.10  Causes of hypothyroidism
Causes
Anti-TPO 
antibodies1
Goitre2
Autoimmune
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Spontaneous atrophic hypothyroidism
Graves’ disease with TSH receptor-blocking 
antibodies
++
+
±
±
Iatrogenic
Radioactive iodine ablation
Thyroidectomy
+
+
±
Drugs
Carbimazole, methimazole, propylthiouracil
Amiodarone
Lithium
+
+
±
±
±
Transient thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
Post-partum thyroiditis
+
+
±
±
Iodine deciency
e.g. In mountainous regions
–
++
Congenital
Dyshormonogenesis
Thyroid aplasia
++
Inltrative
Amyloidosis, Riedel’s thyroiditis, sarcoidosis etc.
+
++
Secondary hypothyroidism
TSH deciency
–
–
1As shown in Box 20.8, thyroid autoantibodies are common in the healthy population, so might be 
present in anyone. ++ high titre; + more likely to be detected than in the healthy population; 
– not especially likely. 2Goitre: – absent; ± may be present; ++ characteristic.
(TPO = thyroid peroxidase; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)
The key discriminatory features in the history and examination are 
highlighted in Figure 20.6. Care must be taken to identify patients with 
transient hypothyroidism, in whom life-long levothyroxine therapy is 
inappropriate. This can be observed during the rst 6 months after 131I 
treatment of Graves’ disease, in the post-thyrotoxic phase of subacute 
thyroiditis and in post-partum thyroiditis. In these conditions, levothyrox-
ine treatment is not always necessary, as the patient may be asympto-
matic during the short period of thyroid failure.
Investigations
In the vast majority of cases, hypothyroidism results from an intrinsic 
disorder of the thyroid gland (primary hypothyroidism). In this situation, 
serum T4 is low and TSH is elevated, usually in excess of 20 mIU/L. 
Measurements of serum T3 are unhelpful since they do not discriminate 
reliably between euthyroidism and hypothyroidism. Measurement of 
thyroid peroxidase antibodies is helpful but further investigations are rarely 
required (Fig. 20.6). Secondary hypothyroidism is rare and is caused by 
failure of TSH secretion in an individual with hypothalamic or anterior 
pituitary disease. Other non-specic abnormalities are shown in Box 
20.9. In severe, prolonged hypothyroidism, the ECG classically demon-
strates sinus bradycardia with low-voltage complexes and ST-segment 
and T-wave abnormalities.
Management
Treatment is with levothyroxine replacement. The average replacement 
dose of levothyroxine is 1.6 μg/kg, which equates to around 100 μg in 
a 70 kg adult. In healthy younger adults it is safe to commence an esti-
mated full dose. In older individuals, and those with a history of cardio-
vascular disease, it is customary to start with a low dose of 50 µg per day 
for 3 weeks before increasing to the estimated full dose. Levothyroxine 
has a half-life of 7 days so it should always be taken as a single daily 
dose and at least 10 weeks should pass before repeating thyroid func-
tion tests (as TSH takes several weeks to reach a steady state) and 
adjusting the dose. Patients feel better within 2–3 weeks. Reduction in 
weight and periorbital pufness occurs quickly but the restoration of skin 
Fig. 20.6 An approach to adults with suspected primary hypothyroidism. This scheme ignores congenital causes of hypothyroidism (see Box 20.10), such as thyroid 
aplasia and dyshormonogenesis (associated with nerve deafness in Pendred syndrome, p. 667), which are usually diagnosed in childhood. 1Immunoreactive thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) may be detected at normal or even modestly elevated levels in patients with pituitary failure; unless T 4 is only marginally low, TSH should be >20 mIU/L to 
conrm the diagnosis of primary hypothyroidism. 2The usual abnormality in sick euthyroidism is a low TSH but any pattern can occur. 3Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies 
are highly sensitive but not very specic for autoimmune thyroid disease (see Boxes 20.8 and 20.10). 4Specialist advice is most appropriate where indicated. Secondary 
hypothyroidism is rare, but is suggested by deciency of pituitary hormones or by clinical features of pituitary tumour such as headache or visual eld defect (p. 695). Rare 
causes of hypothyroidism with goitre include dyshormonogenesis and inltration of the thyroid (see Box 20.10).
TSH and T4
Scenario?
TSH < 20 mlU/L1
Repeat when acute
illness has resolved
Possible non-thyroidal illness2
Relevant drugs?
 Amiodarone
 Lithium
Any features of transient
 thyroiditis?
 Neck pain
 < 12 months post-partum
 Recent symptoms of
 thyrotoxicosis
No
Yes
Permanent T4 replacement
Any features of secondary
hypothyroidism? 4
Thyroid ablation?
No
Positive
antithyroid
peroxidase
antibodies?3
No
No
TSH > 20 mlU/L
Consider
rare causes
and refer to
specialist4
Spontaneous
atrophic
hypothyroidism
Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis
Temporary T4 replacement4
 After 4 months with normal TSH,
   reduce to 50 g/day for 6 weeks
 and repeat TSH
 If normal, stop T4 for 6 weeks
   and repeat
Yes
T4 replacement for
as long as other
drug is required
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Goitre?



[[p709]]
658  ENDOCRINOLOGY
and hair texture and resolution of any effusions may take 3–6 months. As 
illustrated in Figure 20.6, most patients do not require specialist review 
but will need life-long levothyroxine therapy.
The dose of levothyroxine should be adjusted to maintain serum 
TSH within the reference range. To achieve this, serum T4 often needs 
to be in the upper part of the reference range because the T3 required 
for receptor activation is derived exclusively from conversion of T4 within 
the target tissues, without the usual contribution from thyroid secretion. 
Some physicians advocate combined replacement with T4 (levothyrox-
ine) and T3 (liothyronine) or preparations of animal thyroid extract but 
this approach remains controversial and is not supported by robust 
evidence. Some patients remain symptomatic despite normalisation of 
TSH and may wish to take extra levothyroxine, which suppresses TSH. 
However, suppressed TSH is a risk factor for osteoporosis and atrial 
brillation (see below; subclinical thyrotoxicosis), so this approach can-
not be recommended.
It is important to measure thyroid function every 1–2 years once the 
dose of levothyroxine is stabilised. This encourages adherence to ther-
apy and allows adjustment for variable underlying thyroid activity and 
other changes in levothyroxine requirements (Box 20.11). Some patients 
have a persistent elevation of serum TSH despite an ostensibly adequate 
replacement dose of levothyroxine; most commonly, this is a conse-
quence of suboptimal concordance. There may be differences in bio-
availability between the numerous generic preparations of levothyroxine 
and so, if an individual is experiencing marked changes in serum TSH 
despite optimal adherence, the prescription of a branded preparation of 
levothyroxine could be considered. There is some limited evidence that 
suggests levothyroxine absorption may be better when the drug is taken 
before bed. In some individuals with variable concordance, levothyroxine 
is taken diligently or even in excess for a few days prior to a clinic visit, 
resulting in the seemingly anomalous combination of a high serum T4 and 
high TSH (see Box 20.5).
Levothyroxine replacement in ischaemic heart disease
Hypothyroidism and ischaemic heart disease are common conditions 
that often occur together. Although angina may remain unchanged in 
severity or paradoxically disappear with restoration of metabolic rate, 
exacerbation of myocardial ischaemia, infarction and sudden death 
are recognised complications of levothyroxine replacement, even using 
doses as low as 25 µg per day. In patients with known ischaemic heart 
disease, thyroid hormone replacement should be introduced at low 
dose and increased very slowly under specialist supervision. Coronary 
intervention may be required if angina is exacerbated by levothyroxine 
replacement therapy.
Hypothyroidism in old age
Box 20.12 illustrates some of the diagnostic and management chal-
lenges of hypothyroidism in older people.
Hypothyroidism in pregnancy
Women with hypothyroidism usually require an increased dose of levo-
thyroxine in pregnancy; inadequately treated hypothyroidism in preg-
nancy has been associated with impaired cognitive development 
in the fetus. This is discussed in more detail on page 1273 (see also 
Box 20.13).
20.12  The thyroid gland in old age
Thyrotoxicosis
 Causes: commonly due to multinodular goitre.
 Clinical features: apathy, anorexia, proximal myopathy, atrial brillation and 
cardiac failure predominate.
 Non-thyroidal illness: thyroid function tests are performed more frequently in 
older patients but interpretation may be altered by intercurrent illness.
Hypothyroidism
 Clinical features: non-specic features, such as physical and mental slowing, 
are often attributed to increasing age and the diagnosis is delayed.
 Myxoedema coma: more likely in older people.
 Levothyroxine dose: to avoid exacerbating latent or established heart disease, 
the starting dose should be 25–50 µg daily. Levothyroxine requirements fall with 
increasing age and few patients need more than 100 µg daily.
 Other medication (see Box 20.10): may interfere with absorption or 
metabolism of levothyroxine, necessitating an increase in dose.
20.11  Situations in which an adjustment of the dose of 
levothyroxine may be necessary
Increased dose required
Pregnancy or oestrogen therapy
 Increases concentration of serum thyroxine-binding globulin
Use of other medication
 Increase T4 clearance: phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampicin, 
sertraline*, chloroquine*
 Interfere with intestinal T4 absorption: colestyramine, sucralfate, aluminium 
hydroxide, ferrous sulphate, dietary bre supplements, calcium carbonate
After surgical or 131I ablation of Graves’ disease
 Reduces thyroidal secretion with time
Malabsorption
Decreased dose required
Ageing
 Decreases T4 clearance
Graves’ disease developing in patient with long-standing primary 
hypothyroidism
 Switch from production of blocking to stimulating TSH receptor antibodies
*Mechanism not fully established.
20.13  Thyroid disease in pregnancy
Normal pregnancy
 Trimester-specic reference ranges: should be used to interpret thyroid 
function test results in pregnancy.
Iodine deciency
 Iodine requirements: increased in pregnancy. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) recommends a minimum intake of 250 µg/day.
 Iodine deciency: the major cause of preventable impaired cognitive 
development in children worldwide.
Hypothyroidism
 Impaired cognitive development in the offspring: may be associated with 
hypothyroidism that is not adequately treated.
 Levothyroxine replacement therapy dose requirements: increase by 
30%–50% from early in pregnancy. Monitoring to maintain TSH results within 
the trimester-specic reference range is recommended in early pregnancy and 
at least once in each trimester.
Thyrotoxicosis
 Gestational thyrotoxicosis: associated with multiple pregnancies and 
hyperemesis gravidarum. Transient and usually does not require antithyroid drug 
treatment.
 Graves’ disease: the most common cause of sustained thyrotoxicosis in 
pregnancy.
 Antithyroid drugs: propylthiouracil should be used in the rst trimester, with 
carbimazole substituted in the second and third trimesters.
Post-partum thyroiditis
 Screening: not recommended for every woman, but thyroid function should 
be tested 4–6 weeks post partum in those with a personal history of thyroid 
disease, goitre or other autoimmune disease including type 1 diabetes, in those 
known to have positive antithyroid peroxidase antibodies, or when there is 
clinical suspicion of thyroid dysfunction.

[[p710]]
The thyroid gland  659
20
Myxoedema coma
This is a very rare presentation of hypothyroidism in which there is a 
depressed level of consciousness, usually in an older patient who 
appears myxoedematous. Body temperature may be as low as 25°C, 
convulsions are not uncommon, and cerebrospinal uid (CSF) pressure 
and protein content are raised. The mortality rate is 50% and survival 
depends on early recognition and treatment of hypothyroidism and other 
factors contributing to the altered consciousness level, such as medica-
tion, cardiac failure, pneumonia, dilutional hyponatraemia and respiratory 
failure.
Myxoedema coma is a medical emergency and treatment must begin 
before biochemical conrmation of the diagnosis. Suspected cases 
should be treated with an intravenous injection of 20 µg liothyronine, fol-
lowed by further injections of 20 µg 3 times daily until there is sustained 
clinical improvement. In survivors, there is a rise in body temperature 
within 24 hours and, after 48–72 hours, it is usually possible to switch 
patients to oral levothyroxine in a dose of 50 µg daily. Unless it is apparent 
that the patient has primary hypothyroidism, the thyroid failure should 
also be assumed to be secondary to hypothalamic or pituitary disease 
and treatment given with hydrocortisone 100 mg intramuscularly 3 times 
daily, pending the results of T4, TSH and cortisol measurement. Other 
measures include slow rewarming, cautious use of intravenous uids, 
broad-spectrum antibiotics and high-ow oxygen.
Symptoms of hypothyroidism with normal  
thyroid function tests
The classic symptoms of hypothyroidism are, by their very nature, 
non-specic (see Box 20.3). There is a wide differential diagnosis for 
symptoms such as ‘fatigue’, ‘weight gain’ and ‘low mood’. As has been 
noted, outside the context of pituitary and hypothalamic disease, serum 
TSH is an excellent measure of an individual’s thyroid hormone status. 
However, some individuals believe that they have hypothyroidism despite 
normal serum TSH concentrations. There are a large number of websites 
that claim that serum TSH is not a good measure of thyroid hormone 
status and suggest that other factors, such as abnormalities of T4 to T3
conversion, may lead to low tissue levels of active thyroid hormones. 
Such websites often advocate a variety of tests of thyroid function of 
dubious scientic validity, including measurement of serum reverse T3, 
24-hour urine T3, basal body temperature, skin iodine absorption, and 
levels of selenium in blood and urine. Individuals who believe they have 
hypothyroidism, despite normal conventional tests of thyroid function, 
can be difcult to manage. They require reassurance that their symptoms 
are being taken seriously and that organic disease has been carefully 
considered; if their symptoms persist, referral to a team specialising in 
medically unexplained symptoms should be considered.
Asymptomatic abnormal thyroid function tests
One of the most common problems in medical practice is how to man-
age patients with abnormal thyroid function tests who have no obvious 
signs or symptoms of thyroid disease. These can be divided into three 
categories.
Subclinical thyrotoxicosis
Serum TSH is undetectable and serum T3 and T4 are at the upper end 
of the reference range. This combination is most often found in older 
patients with multinodular goitre. These patients are at increased risk 
of atrial brillation and osteoporosis, and hence the consensus view is 
that they have mild thyrotoxicosis and require therapy, either with 131I 
or low dose thionamide. Otherwise, annual review is essential, as the 
conversion rate to overt thyrotoxicosis with elevated T4 and/or T3 con-
centrations is 5% each year.
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Serum TSH is raised and serum T3 and T4 concentrations are at the lower 
end of the reference range. This may persist for many years, although 
there is a risk of progression to overt thyroid failure, particularly if antibod-
ies to thyroid peroxidase are present or if the TSH rises above 10 mIU/L. 
In patients with non-specic symptoms, a trial of levothyroxine therapy 
may be appropriate. In those with positive autoantibodies or a TSH 
greater than 10 mIU/L, it is better to treat the thyroid failure early rather 
than risk loss to follow-up and subsequent presentation with profound 
hypothyroidism. Levothyroxine should be given in a dose sufcient to 
restore the serum TSH concentration to normal.
Non-thyroidal illness (‘sick euthyroidism’)
This typically presents with a low serum TSH, raised T4 and normal or 
low T3 in a patient with systemic illness who does not have clinical evi-
dence of thyroid disease. These abnormalities are caused by decreased 
peripheral conversion of T4 to T3 (with conversion instead to reverse T3), 
altered levels of binding proteins and their afnity for thyroid hormones, 
and often reduced secretion of TSH. During convalescence, serum TSH 
concentrations may increase to levels found in primary hypothyroidism. 
As thyroid function tests are difcult to interpret in patients with non-thy-
roidal illness, it is wise to avoid performing thyroid function tests unless 
there is clinical evidence of concomitant thyroid disease. If an abnormal 
result is found, treatment should only be given with specialist advice and 
the diagnosis should be re-evaluated after recovery.
Thyroid lump or swelling
A lump or swelling in the thyroid gland can be a source of considerable 
anxiety for patients. There are numerous causes but, broadly speaking, 
a thyroid swelling is either a solitary nodule, a multinodular goitre or a 
diffuse goitre (Box 20.14). Nodular thyroid disease is more common in 
women and occurs in approximately 30% of the adult female popula-
tion. The majority of thyroid nodules are impalpable but may be iden-
tied when imaging of the neck is performed for another reason, such 
as during Doppler ultrasonography of the carotid arteries or computed 
tomographic pulmonary angiography. Increasingly, thyroid nodules are 
identied during staging of patients with cancer with computed tomo-
graphy (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission 
tomography (PET) scans. Palpable thyroid nodules occur in 4%–8% of 
adult women and 1%–2% of adult men, and classically present when the 
individual (or a friend or relative) notices a lump in the neck. Multinodular 
goitre and solitary nodules sometimes present with acute painful enlarge-
ment due to haemorrhage into a nodule.
Patients with thyroid nodules often worry that they have cancer but 
the reality is that only 5%–10% of thyroid nodules are malignant. A nod-
ule presenting in childhood or adolescence, particularly if there is a past 
history of head and neck irradiation, or one presenting in an older patient 
should heighten suspicion of a primary thyroid malignancy. The presence 
of cervical lymphadenopathy also increases the likelihood of malignancy. 
20.14  Causes of thyroid enlargement
Diffuse goitre
 Simple goitre
 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis1
 Graves’ disease
 Drugs: iodine, amiodarone, lithium
 Iodine deciency (endemic goitre)1
 Suppurative thyroiditis2
 Transient thyroiditis2
 Dyshormonogenesis1
 Inltrative: amyloidosis, sarcoidosis 
etc.
 Riedel’s thyroiditis2
Multinodular goitre
Solitary nodule
 Colloid cyst
 Hyperplastic nodule
 Follicular adenoma
 Papillary carcinoma
 Follicular carcinoma
 Medullary cell carcinoma
 Anaplastic carcinoma
 Lymphoma
 Metastasis
1Goitre likely to shrink with levothyroxine therapy. 2Usually tender.

[[p711]]
660  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Rarely, a secondary deposit from a renal, breast or lung carcinoma pre-
sents as a painful, rapidly growing, solitary thyroid nodule. Thyroid nod-
ules identied on PET scanning have an approximately 33% chance of 
being malignant.
Clinical assessment and investigations
Swellings in the anterior part of the neck most commonly originate in the 
thyroid and this can be conrmed by demonstrating that the swelling 
moves on swallowing. It is often possible to distinguish clinically between 
the three main causes of thyroid swelling. There is a broad differential 
diagnosis of anterior neck swellings, which includes lymphadenopathy, 
branchial cysts, dermoid cysts and thyroglossal duct cysts (the latter are 
classically located in the midline and move on protrusion of the tongue). 
An ultrasound scan should be performed urgently, if there is any doubt 
as to the aetiology of an anterior neck swelling.
Serum T3, T4 and TSH should be measured in all patients with a goitre 
or solitary thyroid nodule. The nding of biochemical thyrotoxicosis or 
hypothyroidism (both of which may be subclinical) should lead to investi-
gations, as already described in Box 20.5 and on page 657.
Thyroid scintigraphy
Thyroid scintigraphy with 99mtechnetium should be performed in an indi-
vidual with a low serum TSH and a nodular thyroid to conrm the pres-
ence of an autonomously functioning (‘hot’) nodule (see Fig. 20.5). In 
such circumstances, further evaluation is not necessary. ‘Cold’ nodules 
on scintigraphy have a much higher likelihood of malignancy, but the 
majority are benign and so scintigraphy is not routinely used in the eval-
uation of thyroid nodules when TSH is normal.
Thyroid ultrasound
If thyroid function tests are normal, an ultrasound scan will often deter-
mine the nature of the thyroid swelling. Ultrasound can establish whether 
there is generalised or localised swelling of the thyroid. Inammatory 
disorders causing a diffuse goitre, such as Graves’ disease and 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, demonstrate a diffuse pattern of hypoecho-
genicity and, in the case of Graves’ disease, increased thyroid blood 
ow may be seen on colour-ow Doppler (although ultrasound should 
not form part of the routine investigation of Graves’ disease). The pres-
ence of thyroid autoantibodies will support the diagnosis of Graves’ dis-
ease or Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, while their absence in a younger patient 
with a diffuse goitre and normal thyroid function suggests a diagnosis 
of ‘simple goitre’.
Ultrasound can readily determine the size and number of nodules 
within the thyroid and can distinguish solid nodules from those with a 
cystic element. Ultrasound is used increasingly as the key investigation 
in dening the risk of malignancy in a nodule. Size of the nodule is not a 
predictor of the risk of malignancy but there are other ultrasound char-
acteristics that are associated with a higher likelihood of malignancy. 
These include hypoechogenicity, intranodular vascularity, the presence of 
microcalcication and irregular or lobulated margins. A purely cystic nod-
ule is highly unlikely to be malignant and a ‘spongiform’ appearance is 
also highly predictive of a benign aetiology. Each individual nodule within 
a multinodular goitre has the same risk of malignancy as a solitary nod-
ule. Thyroid ultrasonography is a highly specialised investigation and the 
accurate stratication of risk of malignancy of a thyroid nodule requires 
skill and expertise.
Fine needle aspiration cytology
Fine needle aspiration cytology is recommended for thyroid nodules that 
are suspicious for malignancy or are radiologically indeterminate. Fine 
needle aspiration of a thyroid nodule can be performed in the outpatient 
clinic, usually under ultrasound guidance. Aspiration may be therapeutic 
for a cyst, although recurrence on more than one occasion is an indica-
tion for surgery or alcohol ablation. Fine needle aspiration cytology can-
not differentiate between a follicular adenoma and a follicular carcinoma, 
and in 10%–20% of cases an inadequate specimen is obtained.
Management
Nodules with a benign appearance on ultrasound may be observed in an 
ultrasound surveillance programme; when the suspicion of malignancy is 
very low, the patient may be reassured and discharged. In regions with 
borderline low iodine intake, there is evidence that levothyroxine therapy, in 
doses that suppress serum TSH, may reduce the size of some nodules. 
This should not be routine practice in iodine-sufcient populations.
Nodules that are suspicious for malignancy are treated by surgical 
excision, by either lobectomy or thyroidectomy. Nodules that are radi-
ologically and/or cytologically indeterminate are more of a management 
challenge and often end up being surgically excised. Molecular tech-
niques may, in the future, improve the diagnostic accuracy of thyroid 
cytology and allow a more conservative strategy for individuals with an 
indeterminate biopsy. Nodules in which malignancy is conrmed by for-
mal histology are treated as described on page 665.
A diffuse or multinodular goitre may also require surgical treatment for 
cosmetic reasons or if there is compression of local structures (resulting 
in stridor or dysphagia). 131I therapy may also cause some reduction in 
size of a multinodular goitre. Levothyroxine therapy may shrink the goitre 
of Hashimoto’s disease, particularly if serum TSH is elevated.
Autoimmune thyroid disease
Thyroid diseases are amongst the most prevalent antibody-medi-
ated autoimmune diseases and are associated with other organ-spe-
cic autoimmune diseases. Autoantibodies may produce inammation 
and destruction of thyroid tissue, resulting in hypothyroidism, goitre 
(in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) or sometimes even transient thyrotoxicosis 
(‘Hashitoxicosis’), or they may stimulate the TSH receptor to cause 
thyrotoxicosis (in Graves’ disease). There is overlap between these 
conditions, since some patients have multiple autoantibodies.
Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease can occur at any age but is unusual before puberty and 
most commonly affects women aged 30–50 years. The most common 
manifestation is thyrotoxicosis with or without a diffuse goitre. The clinical 
features and differential diagnosis are described on page 652. Graves’ 
disease also causes ophthalmopathy and, rarely, pretibial myxoedema 
(p. 663). These extrathyroidal features usually occur in thyrotoxic patients 
but can arise in the absence of thyroid dysfunction.
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis
Pathophysiology
The thyrotoxicosis results from the production of IgG antibodies directed 
against the TSH receptor on the thyroid follicular cell, which stimulate 
thyroid hormone production and proliferation of follicular cells, leading 
to goitre in the majority of patients. These antibodies are termed thy-
roid-stimulating immunoglobulins or TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) and 
can be detected in the serum of >95% of patients with Graves’ dis-
ease. The concentration of TRAb in the serum is presumed to uctuate 
to account for the natural history of Graves’ thyrotoxicosis (Fig. 20.7). 
Thyroid failure seen in some patients may result from the presence of 
blocking antibodies against the TSH receptor, and from tissue destruc-
tion by cytotoxic antibodies and cell-mediated immunity.
Graves’ disease has a strong genetic component. There is 20%–40% 
concordance for thyrotoxicosis between monozygotic twins but only 5% 
concordance between dizygotic twins. Genome-wide association stud-
ies have identied several genes associated with susceptibility. These 
include HLA-DRß-Arg74, CTLA4, PTPN22, TSHR1, CD25 and CD40. 
Many of these loci have been implicated in the pathogenesis of other 
autoimmune diseases.
A suggested trigger for the development of thyrotoxicosis in genet-
ically susceptible individuals may be infection with viruses or bacteria. 

[[p712]]
The thyroid gland  661
20
Time in years
0
1
2
3
4
5
Thyrotoxic
Euthyroid
Hypothyroid
A
B
C
Fig. 20.7 Natural history of the thyrotoxicosis of Graves’ disease.
minority who experience a single short-lived episode followed by prolonged remission 
and, in some cases, by the eventual onset of hypothyroidism.
20.15 Comparison of treatments for the thyrotoxicosis of Graves’ disease
Management
Common indications
Contraindications
Disadvantages/complications
Antithyroid drugs  
(carbimazole, propylthiouracil)
First episode in patients <40 years
Breastfeeding (propylthiouracil 
suitable)
Hypersensitivity rash 2%
Agranulocytosis 0.2%
Hepatotoxicity (with propylthiouracil) – 
very rare but potentially fatal
>50% relapse rate usually within  
2 years of stopping drug
Thyroidectomy
Large goitre
Poor drug adherence, especially in 
young patients
Recurrent thyrotoxicosis after course 
of antithyroid drugs in young patients
Previous thyroid surgery
Dependence on voice, e.g. singer, 
lecturer1
Hypothyroidism (~25%)
Transient hypocalcaemia (10%)
Permanent hypoparathyroidism (1%)
Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy1 (1%)
Radio-iodine
Patients >40 years2
Recurrence following surgery 
irrespective of age
Other serious comorbidity
Pregnancy or planned pregnancy 
within 6 months of treatment
Active Graves’ ophthalmopathy3
Hypothyroidism: ~40% in rst year, 
80% after 15 years
Most likely treatment to result in 
exacerbation of ophthalmopathy3
1lt is not only vocal cord palsy due to recurrent laryngeal nerve damage that alters the voice following thyroid surgery; the superior laryngeal nerves are frequently transected and this results in minor 
changes in voice quality. 2ln many institutions, 131I is used more liberally and is prescribed for much younger patients. 3The extent to which radio-iodine exacerbates ophthalmopathy is controversial and 
practice varies; some use prednisolone to reduce this risk.
In regions of iodine deciency, iodine supplementation can precipitate 
thyrotoxicosis, but only in those with pre-existing subclinical Graves’ dis-
ease. Smoking is associated with Graves’ thyrotoxicosis and strongly 
linked with the development of ophthalmopathy.
Management
Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis respond to β-blockade but denitive treat-
ment requires control of thyroid hormone secretion. The different options 
are compared in Box 20.15. Some clinicians adopt an empirical approach 
of prescribing a course of antithyroid drug therapy and then recommend-
ing 131I or surgery if relapse occurs. In many centres, however, 131I is 
used extensively as a rst-line therapy, given the high risk of relapse fol-
lowing a course of antithyroid drugs (>60%). A number of observational 
studies have linked therapeutic 131I with increased incidence of some 
malignancies, particularly of the thyroid and gastrointestinal tract, but 
the results have been inconsistent; the association may be with Graves’ 
disease rather than its therapy, and the magnitude of the effect, if any, is 
small. Experience from the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
in 1986 suggests that younger people are more sensitive to radiation-
induced thyroid cancer.
Antithyroid drugs The most commonly used are carbimazole and its 
active metabolite, methimazole (not available in the UK). Propylthiouracil 
is equally effective. These drugs reduce the synthesis of new thyroid 
hormones by inhibiting the iodination of tyrosine (see Fig. 20.3). 
Carbimazole may also have an immunosuppressive action, leading to a 
reduction in serum TRAb concentrations, but this is not enough to inu-
ence the natural history of the thyrotoxicosis signicantly.
Antithyroid drugs are typically introduced at high doses (carbimazole 
40–60 mg daily or propylthiouracil 400–600 mg daily), although lower 
doses are reasonable in individuals with only modest elevation of T4 and 
T3. Usually, this results in subjective improvement within 10–14 days and 
renders the patient clinically and biochemically euthyroid at 6–8 weeks. 
At this point, the dose can be reduced and titrated to maintain T4 and 
TSH within their reference range. In most patients, carbimazole is con-
tinued at 5–20 mg per day for 12–18 months in the hope that remission 
will occur. Between 50% and 70% of patients with Graves’ disease will 
subsequently relapse, usually within 2 years of stopping treatment. Risk 
factors for relapse include younger age, male sex, presence of a goitre 
and higher TRAb titres at both diagnosis and cessation of antithyroid 
therapy. Rarely, T4 and TSH levels uctuate between those of thyrotox-
icosis and hypothyroidism at successive review appointments, despite 
good drug adherence, presumably due to rapidly changing concentra-
tions of TRAb. In these patients, satisfactory control can be achieved 
by blocking thyroid hormone synthesis with carbimazole 30–40 mg daily 
and adding levothyroxine 100–150 µg daily as replacement therapy (a 
‘block and replace’ regimen).
Antithyroid drugs can have adverse effects. The most common is 
a rash. Agranulocytosis is a rare but potentially serious complication 
(0.2%–0.5%) that cannot be predicted by routine measurement of white 
blood cell count but which is reversible on stopping treatment. Patients 
should be warned to stop the drug and seek medical advice immedi-
ately, should a severe sore throat or fever develop while on treatment. 
Propylthiouracil is associated with a small but denite risk of hepato-
toxicity, which, in some instances, has resulted in liver failure requiring 
liver transplantation, and even in death. It should therefore be considered 
second-line therapy to carbimazole and be used only during pregnancy 
or breastfeeding, or if an adverse reaction to carbimazole has occurred.
Thyroid surgery Patients should be rendered euthyroid with antithyroid 
drugs before operation. Oral potassium iodide, 60 mg three times daily, 
is often added for 10 days before surgery to inhibit thyroid hormone 
release and reduce the size and vascularity of the gland, making sur-
gery technically easier. The optimal surgical approach is a ‘near-total’ 

[[p713]]
662  ENDOCRINOLOGY
thyroidectomy, leaving behind only a small portion of gland adjacent to 
the recurrent laryngeal nerves. This strategy invariably results in perma-
nent hypothyroidism and is probably associated with a higher risk of 
hypoparathyroidism, compared to ‘subtotal’ thyroidectomy, but maxim-
ises the potential for cure of thyrotoxicosis.
Radioactive iodine 131I is administered orally as a single dose and is 
trapped and organied in the thyroid (see Fig. 20.3). 131I emits both 
β and γ radiation and, although it decays within a few weeks, it has 
long-lasting inhibitory effects on survival and replication of follicu-
lar cells. The variable radio-iodine uptake and radiosensitivity of the 
gland means that the choice of dose is empirical; in most centres, 
approximately 400–600 MBq (approximately 10–15 mCi) is adminis-
tered. This regimen is effective in 75% of patients within 4–12 weeks. 
During the lag period, symptoms can be controlled by a β-blocker or, 
in more severe cases, by carbimazole. However, carbimazole reduces 
the efcacy of 131I therapy because it prevents organication of 131I in 
the gland, and so should be avoided until 48 hours after radio-iodine 
administration. If thyrotoxicosis persists after 6 months, a further dose 
of 131I can be given. The disadvantage of 131I treatment is that the major-
ity of patients eventually develop hypothyroidism. 131I is usually avoided 
in patients with Graves’ ophthalmopathy and evidence of signicant 
active orbital inammation. It can be administered with caution in those 
with mild or ‘burnt-out’ eye disease, when it is customary to cover 
the treatment with a 6-week tapering course of oral prednisolone. 
In women of reproductive age, pregnancy must be excluded before 
administration of 131I and avoided for at least 6 months thereafter; 
men are also advised to use strict contraceptive measures for at least 
4 months after receiving 131I, to avoid the possibility of conceiving with 
sperm that have been exposed to radioactive iodine.
Thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy Thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy may be asso-
ciated with signicant maternal and fetal morbidity. Management is very 
specialised and is discussed on page 1273 (see also Box 20.13).
Thyrotoxicosis in adolescence Thyrotoxicosis can occasionally occur in 
adolescence and is almost always due to Graves’ disease. The pres-
entation may be atypical and management challenging, as summarised 
in Box 20.16
Graves’ ophthalmopathy
This condition is immunologically mediated with the TSH receptor iden-
tied as the main autoantigen. Within the orbit (and the dermis) there is 
cytokine-mediated proliferation of broblasts that secrete hydrophilic gly-
cosaminoglycans. The resulting increase in interstitial uid content, com-
bined with a chronic inammatory cell inltrate, causes marked swelling 
and ultimately brosis of the extraocular muscles (Fig. 20.8) and a rise in 
retrobulbar pressure. The eye is displaced forwards (proptosis, exoph-
thalmos) and in severe cases there is optic nerve compression.
Ophthalmopathy, like thyrotoxicosis (see Fig. 20.7), typically follows 
an episodic course and it is helpful to distinguish patients with active 
inammation (periorbital oedema and conjunctival inammation with 
changing orbital signs) from those in whom the inammation has ‘burnt 
out’. Eye disease is detectable in up to 50% of thyrotoxic patients at 
presentation (although moderate to severe in only 5%), but active ocu-
lar inammation may occur before or after thyrotoxic episodes (exoph-
thalmic Graves’ disease). Ophthalmopathy is more common in men 
and cigarette smokers. It may be exacerbated by radioiodine therapy 
and poor control of thyroid function, especially hypothyroidism. The 
most frequent presenting symptoms are related to increased exposure 
of the cornea, resulting from proptosis and lid retraction. There may be 
excessive lacrimation made worse by wind and bright light, a ‘gritty’ 
sensation in the eye and pain due to conjunctivitis or corneal ulceration. 
In addition, there may be reduction of visual acuity and/or visual elds 
as a consequence of corneal oedema or optic nerve compression. 
Other signs of optic nerve compression include reduced colour vision 
and a relative afferent pupillary defect (see page 649, Fig. 30.6 and 
Box 30.8). If the extraocular muscles are involved and do not act in 
concert, diplopia results.
The majority of patients require no treatment other than reassurance. 
Smoking cessation should be actively encouraged. Methylcellulose 
eye drops and gel counter the gritty discomfort of dry eyes, and tinted 
glasses or side shields attached to spectacle frames reduce the exces-
sive lacrimation triggered by sun or wind. In patients with mild Graves’ 
ophthalmopathy, oral selenium (100 µg twice daily for 6 months) 
improves quality of life, reduces ocular involvement and slows progres-
sion of disease; the mechanism of action is not known but may relate to 
an antioxidant effect. Moderate to severe ophthalmopathy is optimally 
managed by an expert multidisciplinary service. More severe inamma-
tory episodes are treated with glucocorticoids (e.g. pulsed intravenous 
methylprednisolone) and sometimes orbital radiotherapy. In recent 
years evidence has emerged to support the use of immunosuppres-
sive therapies (e.g. rituximab and tocilizumab) and the IGF-1 receptor 
inhibitor teprotumumab in moderate to severe ophthalmopathy. Loss 
of visual acuity is an indication for urgent surgical decompression of 
the orbit. In ‘burnt-out’ disease, surgery to the extraocular muscles, 
20.16  Thyrotoxicosis in adolescence
 Presentation: may present with a deterioration in school performance or 
symptoms suggestive of attention decit hyperactivity disorder.
 Antithyroid drug therapy: prolonged courses may be required because 
remission rates following an 18-month course of therapy are much lower than 
in adults.
 Adherence: adherence to antithyroid drug therapy is often suboptimal, resulting 
in poor disease control that may adversely affect performance at school.
 Radio-iodine therapy: usually avoided in adolescents because of concerns 
about risk of future malignancy.
A
B
Fig. 20.8 Graves’ disease. 
The main symptoms were diplopia in all directions of gaze and reduced visual acuity 
in the left eye. The periorbital swelling is due to retrobulbar fat prolapsing into the 
eyelids, and increased interstitial uid as a result of raised intraorbital pressure. 
most obvious at the apex of the left orbit (arrow), where compression of the optic 
nerve caused reduced visual acuity.

[[p714]]
The thyroid gland  663
20
and later the eyelids, may improve diplopia, conjunctival exposure and 
cosmetic appearance.
Pretibial myxoedema
This inltrative dermopathy occurs in fewer than 5% of patients with 
Graves’ disease and has similar pathological features as occur in the 
orbit. It takes the form of raised pink-coloured or purplish plaques on the 
anterior aspect of the leg, extending on to the dorsum of the foot (see 
p. 648). The lesions may be itchy and the skin may have a ‘peau d’or-
ange’ appearance with growth of coarse hair; less commonly, the face 
and arms are affected. Treatment is rarely required but in severe cases 
topical glucocorticoids may be helpful.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (or ‘chronic autoimmune thyroiditis’) is charac-
terised by destructive lymphocytic inltration of the thyroid, ultimately 
leading to a varying degree of brosis and thyroid enlargement. It has 
atrophic and goitrous variants.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis increases in incidence with age and affects 
approximately 3.5 per 1000 women and 0.8 per 1000 men each year. 
Many present with a small or moderately sized diffuse goitre, which is 
characteristically rm or rubbery in consistency. Around 25% of patients 
are hypothyroid at presentation. In the remainder, serum T4 is normal 
and TSH normal or raised, but these patients are at risk of developing 
overt hypothyroidism in future years. Antithyroid peroxidase antibodies 
are present in the serum in more than 90% of patients with Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis. There is an increased risk of thyroid lymphoma, although this 
is exceedingly rare.
Levothyroxine therapy is indicated as treatment for hypothyroidism 
and also to shrink an associated goitre. In this context, the dose of lev-
othyroxine should be sufcient to suppress serum TSH to low but detect-
able levels.
Transient thyroiditis
Subacute (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
In its classical painful form, subacute thyroiditis is a transient inamma-
tion of the thyroid gland occurring after infection with Coxsackie, mumps 
or adenoviruses. There is pain in the region of the thyroid that may radiate 
to the angle of the jaw and the ears, and is made worse by swallow-
ing, coughing and movement of the neck. The thyroid is usually palpably 
enlarged and tender. Systemic upset is common. Affected patients are 
usually females aged 20–40 years. Painless transient thyroiditis can also 
occur after viral infection and in patients with underlying autoimmune 
disease. The condition can also be precipitated by drugs, including inter-
feron-α and lithium.
Irrespective of the clinical presentation, inammation in the thyroid 
gland occurs and is associated with release of colloid and stored thy-
roid hormones, but also with damage to follicular cells and impaired 
synthesis of new thyroid hormones. As a result, T4 and T3 levels are 
raised for 4–6 weeks until the pre-formed colloid is depleted. Thereafter, 
there is usually a period of hypothyroidism of variable severity before 
the follicular cells recover and normal thyroid function is restored within 
4–6 months (Fig. 20.9). In the thyrotoxic phase, the iodine uptake is 
low because the damaged follicular cells are unable to trap iodine and 
because TSH secretion is suppressed. Low-titre thyroid autoantibodies 
appear transiently in the serum, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR) is usually raised. High-titre autoantibodies suggest an underlying 
autoimmune pathology and greater risk of recurrence and ultimate pro-
gression to hypothyroidism.
The pain and systemic upset usually respond to simple measures 
such as non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Occasionally, 
however, it may be necessary to prescribe prednisolone 40 mg daily for 
3–4 weeks. The thyrotoxicosis is mild and treatment with a β-blocker is 
usually adequate. Antithyroid drugs are of no benet because thyroid 
hormone synthesis is impaired rather than enhanced. Careful monitoring 
of thyroid function and symptoms is required so that levothyroxine can 
be prescribed temporarily in the hypothyroid phase. Care must be taken 
to identify patients presenting with hypothyroidism who are in the later 
stages of a transient thyroiditis, since they are unlikely to require life-long 
levothyroxine therapy (see Fig. 20.6).
Post-partum thyroiditis
The maternal immune response, which is modied during pregnancy to 
allow survival of the fetus, is enhanced after delivery and may unmask 
previously unrecognised subclinical autoimmune thyroid disease. 
Surveys have shown that transient biochemical disturbances of thyroid 
function occur in 5%–10% of women within 6 months of delivery (see 
Box 20.13). Those affected are likely to have antithyroid peroxidase anti-
bodies in the serum in early pregnancy. Symptoms of thyroid dysfunction 
are rare and there is no association between postnatal depression and 
abnormal thyroid function tests. However, symptomatic thyrotoxicosis 
presenting for the rst time within 12 months of childbirth is likely to be 
due to post-partum thyroiditis and the diagnosis is conrmed by a neg-
ligible radio-isotope uptake. The clinical course and treatment are sim-
ilar to those of painless subacute thyroiditis (see above). Post-partum 
thyroiditis tends to recur after subsequent pregnancies, and eventually 
patients progress over a period of years to permanent hypothyroidism 
(see also Box 20.13).
Iodine-associated thyroid disease
Iodine deciency
Iodine is an essential micronutrient and is a key component of T4 and 
T3. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a daily intake 
of iodine of 150 µg/day for adult men and women; higher levels are rec-
ommended for pregnant women (see p. 1273) as iodine deciency is 
associated with impaired fetal brain development, and severe deciency 
can cause cretinism. Dietary sources of iodine include seafood, dairy 
products, eggs and grains. Dietary iodine deciency is a major worldwide 
public health issue, with an estimated one-third of the world popula-
tion living in areas of iodine insufciency. Iodine deciency is particularly 
common in Central Africa, South-east Asia and the Western Pacic. It is 
associated with the development of thyroid nodules and goitre (endemic 
goitre); the reduced substrate available for thyroid hormone produc-
tion increases thyroid activity to maximise iodine uptake and recycling, 
and this acts as a potent stimulus for enlargement of the thyroid and 
nodule formation. Most affected patients are euthyroid with normal or 
raised TSH levels, although hypothyroidism can occur with severe iodine 
Thyrotoxic
Hypothyroid
Euthyroid
Reference
range
0
2
4
6
Months
T4, T3
TSH
Fig. 20.9 Thyroid function tests in an episode of transient thyroiditis. This 
pattern might be observed in classical subacute (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis, painless 
thyroiditis or post-partum thyroiditis. The duration of each phase varies between 
patients. (T3 = triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)

[[p715]]
664  ENDOCRINOLOGY
deciency. Suspected iodine deciency can be assessed by measuring 
iodine in urine (either a 24-hour collection or a spot sample). Endemic 
goitre can be treated by iodine supplementation, and a reduction in 
nodule and goitre size can be seen, particularly if it is commenced in 
childhood. Iodine deciency is not associated with an increased risk of 
Graves’ disease or thyroid cancer, but the high prevalence of nodular 
autonomy does result in an increased risk of thyrotoxicosis and this risk 
may be further increased by iodine supplementation. Conversely, iodine 
supplementation may also increase the prevalence of subclinical hypo-
thyroidism and autoimmune hypothyroidism. These complex effects of 
iodine supplementation are further discussed below.
Iodine-induced thyroid dysfunction
Iodine has complex effects on thyroid function. Very high concentrations 
of iodine inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis and release (known as the 
Wolff–Chaikoff effect) and this forms the rationale for iodine treatment 
in thyroid crisis and prior to thyroid surgery for thyrotoxicosis. This is an 
autoregulatory response to protect the body from the sudden release of 
large amounts of thyroid hormone in response to the ingestion of a sub-
stantial load of iodine. This effect only lasts for about 10 days, after which 
it is followed by an ‘escape phenomenon’: essentially, the return to nor-
mal organication of iodine and thyroid peroxidase action (see Fig. 20.3). 
Therefore, if iodine is given to prepare an individual with Graves’ disease 
for surgery, the operation must happen within 10–14 days; otherwise, a 
signicant relapse of the thyrotoxicosis could occur.
Iodine deciency and underlying thyroid disease can both moderate 
the effects of iodine on thyroid function. In iodine-decient parts of the 
world, transient thyrotoxicosis may be precipitated by prophylactic iodin-
isation programmes. In iodine-sufcient areas, thyrotoxicosis can be 
precipitated by iodine-containing radiographic contrast medium or 
expectorants in individuals who have underlying thyroid disease pre-
disposing to thyrotoxicosis, such as multinodular goitre or Graves’ 
disease in remission. Induction of thyrotoxicosis by iodine is called the 
Jod–Basedow effect. Chronic excess iodine administration can also 
result in hypothyroidism; this is, in effect, a failure to escape from the 
Wolff–Chaikoff effect and usually occurs in the context of prior insult to 
the thyroid by, for example, autoimmune disease, thyroiditis, lithium, anti-
thyroid drugs or surgery.
Amiodarone
The anti-arrhythmic agent amiodarone has a structure that is analogous 
to that of T4 (Fig. 20.10) and contains huge amounts of iodine; a 200 mg 
dose contains 75 mg iodine. Amiodarone also has a cytotoxic effect on 
thyroid follicular cells and inhibits conversion of T4 to T3 (increasing the 
ratio of T4: T3). Most patients receiving amiodarone have normal thyroid 
function but up to 20% develop hypothyroidism or thyrotoxicosis, and 
so thyroid function should be monitored regularly. TSH provides the best 
indicator of thyroid function.
The thyrotoxicosis can be classied as either:
 type I: iodine-induced excess thyroid hormone synthesis in patients 
with an underlying thyroid disorder, such as nodular goitre or latent 
Graves’ disease (an example of the Jod–Basedow effect), or
 type II: thyroiditis due to a direct cytotoxic effect of amiodarone 
administration.
These patterns can overlap and may be difcult to distinguish clin-
ically, as iodine uptake is low in both. There is no widely accepted 
management algorithm, although the iodine excess renders the gland 
resistant to 131I. Antithyroid drugs may be effective in patients with the 
type I form but are ineffective in type II thyrotoxicosis. Prednisolone is 
benecial in the type II form. A pragmatic approach is to commence 
combination therapy with an antithyroid drug and glucocorticoid in 
patients with signicant thyrotoxicosis. A rapid response (within 1–2 
weeks) usually indicates a type II picture and permits withdrawal of 
the antithyroid therapy; a slower response suggests a type I picture, 
in which case antithyroid drugs may be continued and prednisolone 
withdrawn. If the cardiac state allows, amiodarone should be dis-
continued, but it has a long half-life (50–60 days) and so its effects 
are long-lasting. To minimise the risk of type I thyrotoxicosis, thyroid 
function should be measured in all patients prior to commencement 
of amiodarone therapy, and amiodarone should be avoided if TSH is 
suppressed.
Hypothyroidism should be treated with levothyroxine, which can be 
given while amiodarone is continued.
Simple and multinodular goitre
These terms describe diffuse or multinodular enlargement of the thyroid, 
which occurs sporadically and is of unknown aetiology.
Simple diffuse goitre
This form of goitre usually presents between the ages of 15 and 25 years, 
often during pregnancy, and tends to be noticed by friends and relatives 
rather than the patient. Occasionally, there is a tight sensation in the 
neck, particularly when swallowing. The goitre is soft and symmetrical, 
and the thyroid enlarged to two or three times normal. There is no ten-
derness, lymphadenopathy or overlying bruit. Concentrations of T3, T4
and TSH are normal and no thyroid autoantibodies are detected in the 
serum. No treatment is necessary and the goitre usually regresses. In 
some, however, the unknown stimulus to thyroid enlargement persists 
and, as a result of recurrent episodes of hyperplasia and involution during 
the following 10–20 years, the gland becomes multinodular with areas of 
autonomous function.
C4H9
O
I
C
CH2 CH2
N
O
C2H5
C2H5
I
O
Fig. 20.10 The structure of amiodarone. Note the similarities to thyroxine (T4) 
(see Fig. 20.3).
Age (in years)
Goitre
Tracheal
compression/
deviation
T3, T4
TSH
15–25
Diffuse
No
Normal
Normal
26–55
Nodular
Minimal
Normal
Normal or
undetectable
> 55
Nodular
Yes
Raised
Undetectable
Fig. 20.11 Natural history of simple goitre. (T3 = triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine; 
TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)

[[p716]]
The thyroid gland  665
20
Multinodular goitre
The natural history is shown in Figure 20.11. Patients with thyroid enlarge-
ment in the absence of thyroid dysfunction or positive autoantibodies (i.e. 
with ‘simple goitre’; see above) as young adults may progress to develop 
nodules. These nodules grow at varying rates and secrete thyroid hor-
mone ‘autonomously’, thereby suppressing TSH-dependent growth and 
function in the rest of the gland. Ultimately, complete suppression of TSH 
occurs in about 25% of cases, with T4 and T3 levels often within the ref-
erence range (subclinical thyrotoxicosis), but sometimes elevated (toxic 
multinodular goitre; see Fig. 20.5).
Clinical features and investigations
Multinodular goitre is usually diagnosed in patients presenting with thy-
rotoxicosis, a large goitre with or without tracheal compression, or sud-
den painful swelling caused by haemorrhage into a nodule or cyst. The 
goitre is nodular or lobulated on palpation and may extend retrosternally; 
however, not all multinodular goitres causing thyrotoxicosis are easily 
palpable. Very large goitres can cause mediastinal compression with stri-
dor (Fig. 20.12), dysphagia and obstruction of the superior vena cava. 
Hoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy can occur but is far 
more suggestive of thyroid carcinoma.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasonography and/or thy-
roid scintigraphy (see Fig. 20.5). In patients with large goitres, a 
flow-volume loop is a good screening test for significant tracheal 
compression (see Fig. 17.7). If intervention is contemplated, a CT or 
MRI of the thoracic inlet should be performed to quantify the degree 
of tracheal displacement or compression and the extent of retros-
ternal extension. Nodules should be evaluated for the possibility of 
thyroid neoplasia.
Management
If the goitre is small, no treatment is necessary but annual thyroid func-
tion testing should be arranged, as the natural history is progression to 
a toxic multinodular goitre. Thyroid surgery is indicated for large goitres 
that cause mediastinal compression or that are cosmetically unattractive. 
131I can result in a signicant reduction in thyroid size and may be of value 
in older patients. Levothyroxine therapy is of no benet in shrinking mul-
tinodular goitres in iodine-sufcient countries and may simply aggravate 
any associated thyrotoxicosis.
In toxic multinodular goitre, treatment is usually with 131I. The iodine 
uptake is lower than in Graves’ disease, so a higher dose may be admin-
istered (up to 800 Mbq (approximately 20 mCi)) and hypothyroidism is 
less common. In thyrotoxic patients with a large goitre, thyroid surgery 
may be indicated. Long-term treatment with antithyroid drugs is not usu-
ally employed, as relapse is invariable after drug withdrawal; drug therapy 
is normally reserved for frail older patients in whom surgery or 131I is not 
an appropriate option.
Asymptomatic patients with subclinical thyrotoxicosis are increasingly 
being treated with 131I on the grounds that a suppressed TSH is a risk 
factor for atrial brillation and, particularly in post-menopausal women, 
osteoporosis.
Thyroid neoplasia
Patients with thyroid tumours usually present with a solitary nodule. Most 
are benign and a few of these, called ‘toxic adenomas’, secrete excess 
thyroid hormones. Primary thyroid malignancy is rare, accounting for less 
than 1% of all carcinomas, and has an incidence of 25 per million per 
annum. As shown in Box 20.17, it can be classied according to the cell 
type of origin. With the exception of medullary carcinoma, thyroid cancer 
is more common in females.
Toxic adenoma
A solitary toxic nodule is the cause of less than 5% of all cases of thy-
rotoxicosis. The nodule is a follicular adenoma, which autonomously 
secretes excess thyroid hormones and inhibits endogenous TSH secre-
tion, with subsequent atrophy of the rest of the thyroid gland. The ade-
noma is usually greater than 3 cm in diameter.
Most patients are female and over 40 years of age. Although many 
nodules are palpable, the diagnosis can be made with certainty only by 
thyroid scintigraphy (see Fig. 20.5). The thyrotoxicosis is usually mild and 
in almost 50% of patients the plasma T3 alone is elevated (T3 thyrotoxi-
cosis). 131I (400–800 MBq (10–20 mCi)) is highly effective and is an ideal 
treatment since the atrophic cells surrounding the nodule do not take up 
iodine and so receive little or no radiation. For this reason, permanent 
hypothyroidism is unusual. Hemithyroidectomy is an alternative manage-
ment option.
Differentiated carcinoma
The incidence of thyroid carcinoma has increased signicantly since 
the early 1990s although this has not been paralleled by any signicant 
increase in thyroid carcinoma deaths over the same period (Fig. 20.13). 
Increasing incidence of thyroid carcinoma is, at least in part, explained 
by an increased rate of incidental detection, which tracks greater use of 
neck imaging.
Papillary carcinoma
This is the most common of the malignant thyroid tumours and accounts 
for 90% of radiation-induced thyroid cancer. It may be multifocal and 
R
Fig. 20.12 Computed tomogram showing retrosternal multinodular goitre. 
The goitre (black arrow) is causing acute severe breathlessness and stridor due to 
tracheal compression (white arrow).
20.17  Malignant thyroid tumours
Type of tumour
Frequency  
(%)
Age at 
presentation 
(years)
10-year  
survival 
(%)
Follicular cells
Differentiated 
carcinoma:
 Papillary
75–85
20–40
98
 Follicular
10–20
40–60
94
Anaplastic
<5
>60
9
Parafollicular C cells
Medullary carcinoma
5–8
>40*
78
Lymphocytes
Lymphoma
<5
>60
45
*Patients with medullary carcinoma as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 2a 
and 2b (p. 700) may present in childhood.

[[p717]]
666  ENDOCRINOLOGY
spread is initially to regional lymph nodes. Some patients present with 
cervical lymphadenopathy and no apparent thyroid enlargement; in such 
instances, the primary lesion may be less than 10 mm in diameter.
Follicular carcinoma
This is usually a single encapsulated lesion. Spread to cervical lymph 
nodes is rare. Metastases are blood-borne and are most often found in 
bone, lungs and brain.
Management
The management of thyroid cancers should be individualised and 
planned in multidisciplinary team meetings that include all specialists 
involved in the service; this should include thyroid surgeons, endo-
crinologists, oncologists, pathologists, radiologists and nurse special-
ists. Large tumours, those with adverse histological features and/or 
tumours with metastatic disease at presentation are usually managed by 
total thyroidectomy followed by a large dose of 131I (1100 or 3700 MBq 
(approximately 30 or 100 mCi)) to ablate any remaining normal or malig-
nant thyroid tissue. Thereafter, long-term treatment with levothyroxine in 
a dose sufcient to suppress TSH (usually 150–200 µg daily) is given, as 
there is evidence that growth of differentiated thyroid carcinomas is TSH-
dependent. Smaller tumours with no adverse histological features may 
require only thyroid lobectomy.
Follow-up involves measurement of serum thyroglobulin, which 
should be undetectable in patients whose normal thyroid has been 
ablated and who are taking a suppressive dose of levothyroxine. 
Thyroglobulin antibodies may interfere with the assay and, depending 
on the method employed, may result in a falsely low or high result. 
Detectable thyroglobulin, in the absence of assay interference, is sug-
gestive of tumour recurrence or metastases, particularly if the thy-
roglobulin titre is rising across serial measurements. Local recurrence 
or metastatic disease may be localised by ultrasound, CT, MRI and/
or whole-body scanning with 131I, and may be treated with further 
surgery and/or 131I therapy. 131I treatment in thyroid cancer and iso-
tope scanning both require serum TSH concentrations to be elevated 
(>20 mIU/L). This may be achieved by levothyroxine withdrawal for 3–4 
weeks, inducing symptomatic hypothyroidism, or by administering 
intramuscular injections of recombinant human TSH. Patients usually 
nd the latter approach preferable but it is more expensive. Those with 
locally advanced or metastatic papillary and follicular carcinoma that is 
refractive to 131I may be considered for therapy with sorafenib, lenvati-
nib or vandetanib. These drugs are multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhib-
itors and have been shown in trials to prolong progression-free survival 
by between 5 and 14 months. They have multiple toxicities, however, 
including poor appetite, weight loss, fatigue, diarrhoea, mucositis, 
rashes, hypertension and blood dyscrasias. The potential benets of 
therapy therefore have to be carefully weighed against side-effects that 
can signicantly impair quality of life.
Prognosis
Most patients with papillary and follicular thyroid cancer will be cured with 
appropriate treatment. Adverse prognostic factors include older age at 
presentation, the presence of distant metastases, male sex and certain 
histological subtypes. However, 131I therapy can be effective in treating 
those with distant metastases, particularly small-volume disease in the 
lungs, and so prolonged survival is quite common.
Anaplastic carcinoma and lymphoma
These two conditions are difcult to distinguish clinically but are distinct 
cytologically and histologically. Patients are usually over 60 years of age 
and present with rapid thyroid enlargement over 2–3 months. The goi-
tre is hard and there may be stridor due to tracheal compression and 
hoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. There is no effective 
treatment for anaplastic carcinoma, although surgery and radiotherapy 
may be considered in some circumstances. In older patients, median 
survival is only 7 months.
The prognosis for lymphoma, which may arise from pre-existing 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, is better, with a median survival of 9 years. Some 
98% of tumours are non-Hodgkin lymphomas, usually the diffuse large 
B-cell subtype. Treatment is with combination chemotherapy and exter-
nal beam radiotherapy.
Medullary carcinoma
This tumour arises from the parafollicular C cells of the thyroid. In 
addition to calcitonin, the tumour may secrete 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT, serotonin), various peptides of the tachykinin family, adrenocor-
ticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and prostaglandins. As a consequence, 
carcinoid syndrome (see Box 20.49) and Cushing’s syndrome (see p. 
679) may occur.
Patients usually present in middle age with a rm thyroid mass. 
Cervical lymph node involvement is common but distant metastases are 
rare initially. Serum calcitonin levels are raised and are useful in monitor-
ing response to treatment. Despite the very high levels of calcitonin found 
in some patients, hypocalcaemia is extremely rare; however, hypercalci-
toninaemia can be associated with severe, watery diarrhoea.
Treatment is by total thyroidectomy with removal of regional cervical 
lymph nodes. Since the C cells do not concentrate iodine and are not 
responsive to TSH, there is no role for 131I therapy or TSH suppression 
with levothyroxine. External beam radiotherapy may be considered in 
some patients at high risk of local recurrence. Vandetanib and cabozan-
tinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors licensed for patients with progressive 
advanced medullary cancer. The prognosis is less good than for papillary 
and follicular carcinoma, but individuals can live for many decades with 
persistent disease that behaves in an indolent fashion.
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid occurs sporadically in 70%–90% 
cases; in 10%–30% there is a genetic predisposition that is inherited in 
an autosomal dominant fashion and due to an activating mutation in the 
RET gene. This inherited tendency normally forms part of one of the MEN 
syndromes (MEN 2a (formerly known as MEN 2) or MEN 2b (formerly 
known as MEN 3), p. 700) but, occasionally, susceptibility to medullary 
carcinoma is the only inherited trait (familial medullary thyroid cancer and 
this depends on the particular codon of the RET gene that is mutated).
Riedel’s thyroiditis
This is not a form of thyroid cancer but the presentation is similar and the 
differentiation can usually be made only by thyroid biopsy. It is an exception-
ally rare condition of unknown aetiology, in which there is extensive inltra-
tion of the thyroid and surrounding structures with brous tissue. There may 
be associated mediastinal and retroperitoneal brosis. Presentation is with 
a slow-growing goitre that is irregular and stony-hard. There is usually tra-
cheal and oesophageal compression necessitating partial thyroidectomy. 
Other recognised complications include recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, 
hypoparathyroidism and eventually hypothyroidism.
1992
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1996
Rate of new cases
Death rate
2000
Rate per 100,000 persons
2004
2008
2012
2018
Fig. 20.13 Incidence and death rates of thyroid cancer. Although the incidence 
has increased from 1990 because of higher rates of discovery due to the use of more 
imaging, the overall death rate remains very low with an overall 5-year survival of 
>98%. From National Cancer Institute https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/thyro.html.

[[p718]]
The reproductive system  667
20
Congenital thyroid disease
Early treatment with levothyroxine is essential to prevent irreversible 
brain damage in children (cretinism) with congenital hypothyroidism. 
Routine screening of TSH levels in heel-prick blood samples obtained 
5–7 days after birth (as part of the Guthrie test) has revealed an incidence 
of approximately 1 in 3000, resulting from thyroid agenesis, ectopic or 
hypoplastic glands, or dyshormonogenesis. Congenital hypothyroidism 
is thus six times more common than phenylketonuria. It is now possi-
ble to start levothyroxine replacement therapy within 2 weeks of birth. 
Developmental assessment of infants treated at this early stage has 
revealed no differences between cases and controls in most children.
Dyshormonogenesis
Several autosomal recessive defects in thyroid hormone synthesis have 
been described; the most common results from deciency of the intrathy-
roidal peroxidase enzyme. Homozygous individuals present with con-
genital hypothyroidism; heterozygotes present in the rst two decades 
of life with goitre, normal thyroid hormone levels and a raised TSH. The 
combination of dyshormonogenetic goitre and nerve deafness is known 
as Pendred syndrome. Most cases of Pendred syndrome are caused by 
mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, which encodes pendrin, the protein that 
transports iodide to the luminal surface of the follicular cell (see Fig. 20.3).
Thyroid hormone resistance
This is a rare disorder in which the pituitary and hypothalamus are resist-
ant to feedback suppression of TSH by T3, sometimes due to mutations 
in the thyroid hormone receptor β gene or because of defects in mono-
deiodinase activity. The result is high levels of TSH, T4 and T3, often with 
a moderate goitre that may not be noted until adulthood. Thyroid hor-
mone signalling is highly complex and involves different isozymes of both 
monodeiodinases and thyroid hormone receptors in different tissues. For 
that reason, other tissues may or may not share the resistance to thyroid 
hormone and there may be features of thyrotoxicosis (e.g. tachycardia). 
This condition can be difcult to distinguish from an equally rare TSH-
producing pituitary tumour (TSHoma; see Box 20.5); administration of 
TRH results in elevation of TSH in thyroid hormone resistance and not in 
TSHoma, but an MRI scan of the pituitary may be necessary to exclude 
a macroadenoma.
The reproductive system
Clinical practice in reproductive medicine is shared between several spe-
cialties, including gynaecology, urology, paediatric endocrinologists, psy-
chiatry and endocrinology. The following section is focused on disorders 
managed by adult endocrinologists.
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations
The physiology of male and female reproductive function is illustrated 
in Figures 20.14 and 20.15, respectively. Pathways for synthesis of sex 
steroids are shown in Figure 20.20
The male
In the male, the testis serves two principal functions: synthesis of testoster-
one by the interstitial Leydig cells under the control of luteinising hormone 
(LH), and spermatogenesis by Sertoli cells under the control of follicle-stim-
ulating hormone (FSH) (but also requiring adequate testosterone). Negative 
feedback suppression of LH is mediated principally by testosterone, while 
secretion of another hormone produced by the testis, inhibin, suppresses 
FSH. The axis can be assessed easily by a random blood sample for tes-
tosterone, LH and FSH. Testosterone levels are higher in the morning and 
therefore, if testosterone is marginally low, sampling should be repeated 
with the patient fasted at 0900 hrs. Testosterone is largely bound in plasma 
to sex hormone-binding globulin and this can also be measured to calcu-
late the ‘free androgen index’ or the ‘bioavail able’ testosterone. Testicular 
function can also be tested by semen analysis.
There is no equivalent of the menopause in men, although testoster-
one concentrations decline slowly from the fourth decade onwards.
The female
In the female, physiology varies during the normal menstrual cycle. FSH 
stimulates growth and development of ovarian follicles during the rst 
14 days after the menses. This leads to a gradual increase in oestradiol 
production from granulosa cells, which initially suppresses FSH secre-
tion (negative feedback) but then, above a certain level, stimulates an 
increase in both the frequency and amplitude of gonadotrophin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH) pulses, resulting in a marked increase in LH secretion 
(positive feedback). The mid-cycle ‘surge’ of LH induces ovulation. After 
release of the ovum, the follicle differentiates into a corpus luteum, which 
secretes progesterone. Unless pregnancy occurs during the cycle, the 
corpus luteum regresses and the fall in progesterone levels results in 
menstrual bleeding. Circulating levels of oestrogen and progesterone in 
pre-menopausal women are, therefore, critically dependent on the time 
of the cycle. The most useful ‘test’ of ovarian function is a careful men-
strual history: if menses are regular, measurement of gonadotrophins and 
oestrogen is not necessary. In addition, ovulation can be conrmed by 
measuring plasma progesterone levels during the luteal phase (‘day 21 
progesterone’).
Cessation of menstruation (the menopause) occurs at an average 
age of approximately 50 years in high-income countries. In the 5 years 
before, there is a gradual increase in the number of anovulatory cycles 
and this is referred to as the climacteric. Oestrogen and inhibin secretion 
falls and negative feedback results in increased pituitary secretion of LH 
and FSH (both typically to levels above 30 IU/L (3.3 µg/L)).
Negative
feedback
LH
FSH
Interstitial
(Leydig)
cells
Sertoli cells
in seminiferous
tubules
Inhibin
Spermatogenesis
Testosterone
 Facial, axillary and body hair growth
 Scalp balding
 Skin sebum production
 Penis and scrotal development
 Prostate development and function
 Laryngeal enlargement
 Muscle power
 Bone metabolism/epiphyseal closure
 Libido
 Aggression
Testis
Fig. 20.14 Male reproductive physiology. (FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; 
LH = luteinising hormone)

[[p719]]
668  ENDOCRINOLOGY
The pathophysiology of male and female reproductive dysfunction is 
summarised in Box 20.18
Presenting problems in reproductive disease
Delayed puberty
Normal pubertal development is discussed in Chapter 33. Puberty is 
considered to be delayed if the onset of the physical features of sexual 
maturation has not occurred by a chronological age that is 2.5 standard 
deviations (SD) above the national average. In the UK, this is by the age 
of 14 in boys and 13 in girls. Genetic factors have a major inuence 
in determining the timing of the onset of puberty, such that the age of 
menarche (the onset of menstruation) is often comparable within sibling 
and mother–daughter pairs and within ethnic groups. However, because 
there is also a threshold for body weight that acts as a trigger for normal 
puberty, the onset of puberty can be inuenced by other factors, includ-
ing nutritional status and chronic illness.
Clinical assessment
The differential diagnosis is shown in Box 20.19. The key issue is to 
determine whether the delay in puberty is simply because the ‘clock is 
running slow’ (constitutional delay of puberty) or because there is pathol-
ogy in the hypothalamus/pituitary (hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism) 
or the gonads (hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism). A general history 
and physical examination should be performed with particular reference 
to previous or current medical disorders, social circumstances and family 
history. Body proportions, sense of smell and pubertal stage should be 
carefully documented and, in boys, the presence or absence of testes 
in the scrotum noted. Current weight and height may be plotted on cen-
tile charts, along with parental heights. Previous growth measurements 
in childhood, which can usually be obtained from health records, are 
extremely useful. Healthy growth usually follows a centile. Usually, chil-
dren with constitutional delay have always been small but have main-
tained a normal growth velocity that is appropriate for bone age. Poor 
linear growth, with ‘crossing of the height centiles’, is more likely to be 
20.18  Classication of diseases of the reproductive system
Primary
Secondary
Hormone 
excess
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Granulosa cell tumour
Leydig cell tumour
Teratoma
Pituitary 
gonadotrophinoma
Hormone 
deciency
Hypogonadism (see  
Box 20.19)
Turner syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Hypopituitarism
Kallmann syndrome 
(isolated GnRH 
deciency)
Severe systemic illness, 
including anorexia 
nervosa
Hormone 
hypersensitivity
Idiopathic hirsutism
Hormone 
resistance
Androgen resistance 
syndromes
Complete (‘testicular 
feminisation’)
Partial (Reifenstein 
syndrome)
5α-reductase type 2 
deciency
Non-functioning 
tumours
Ovarian cysts
Carcinoma
Teratoma
Seminoma
(GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone)
Feedback
LH
FSH
Inhibin
Oestradiol
 Endometrial
   proliferation
 Genital
   development
   and lubrication
 Breast
   proliferation
 Bone epiphyseal
   closure and
   mineral content
 Brain
 Body fat
   distribution
 Skin sebum
Progesterone
 Endometrial
   secretory change
 Decreased
   myometrial
   contractility
 Thermogenesis
 Breast swelling
Days after start of last menstrual period
FSH
LH
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Ovulation
Luteal phase
Follicular phase
Primary
Dominant
vesicular
Mature
Haemorrhagic
Mature Regressing
Oestradiol
Oestradiol
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Oestradiol
Progesterone
Corpus luteum
Ovary
Menses
Follicle
0
7
14
21
28
Fig. 20.15 Female reproductive physiology and the normal menstrual cycle. (FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; LH = luteinising hormone)

[[p720]]
The reproductive system  669
20
associated with acquired disease. Issues that are commonly encoun-
tered in the management of adolescents with delayed puberty are sum-
marised in Box 20.20
Constitutional delay of puberty
This is the most common cause of delayed puberty, but is a much more 
frequent explanation for lack of pubertal development in boys than in 
girls. Affected children are healthy and have usually been more than 2 SD 
below the mean height for their age throughout childhood. There is often 
a history of delayed puberty in siblings or parents. Since sex steroids are 
essential for fusion of the epiphyses, ‘bone age’ can be estimated by 
X-rays of epiphyses, usually in the wrist and hand; in constitutional delay, 
bone age is lower than chronological age. Constitutional delay of puberty 
should be considered as a normal variant, as puberty will commence 
spontaneously. However, affected children can experience signicant 
psychological distress because of their lack of physical development, 
particularly when compared with their peers.
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
This may be due to structural, inammatory or inltrative disorders of the 
pituitary and/or hypothalamus (see Box 20.53). In such circumstances, 
other pituitary hormones, such as growth hormone, are also likely to be 
decient.
‘Functional’ gonadotrophin deciency is caused by a variety of factors, 
including low body weight, chronic systemic illness (as a consequence 
of the disease itself or secondary malnutrition), endocrine disorders and 
profound psychosocial stress.
Isolated gonadotrophin deciency is usually due to a genetic abnor-
mality that affects the synthesis of either GnRH or gonadotrophins. The 
most common form is Kallmann syndrome, in which there is primary 
GnRH deciency and, in most affected individuals, agenesis or hypo-
plasia of the olfactory bulbs, resulting in anosmia or hyposmia. If isolated 
gonadotrophin deciency is left untreated, the epiphyses fail to fuse, 
resulting in tall stature with disproportionately long arms and legs relative 
to trunk height (eunuchoid habitus).
Cryptorchidism (undescended testes) and gynaecomastia are com-
monly observed in all forms of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism associated with delayed puberty is 
usually due to Klinefelter syndrome in boys and Turner syndrome in girls. 
Other causes of primary gonadal failure are shown in Box 20.19
Investigations
Key measurements are LH and FSH, testosterone (in boys) and oestra-
diol (in girls). Chromosome analysis should be performed if gonadotro-
phin concentrations are elevated. If gonadotrophin concentrations are 
low, then the differential diagnosis lies between constitutional delay and 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. A plain X-ray of the wrist and hand 
may be compared with a set of standard lms to obtain a bone age. Full 
blood count, renal function, liver function, thyroid function and coeliac 
disease autoantibodies (see p. 819) should be measured, but further 
tests may be unnecessary if the blood tests are normal and the child 
has all the clinical features of constitutional delay. If hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism is suspected, neuroimaging and further investigations are 
required (see Box 20.51).
Management
Puberty can be induced using low doses of oral oestrogen in girls (e.g. 
ethinylestradiol 2 µg daily) or testosterone in boys (testosterone gel or 
depot testosterone esters). Higher doses carry a risk of early fusion of 
epiphyses. This therapy should be given in a specialist clinic where the 
progress of puberty and growth can be carefully monitored. In children 
with constitutional delay, this ‘priming’ therapy can be discontinued 
when endogenous puberty is established, usually in less than a year. In 
children with hypogonadism, the underlying cause should be treated and 
reversed if possible. If hypogonadism is permanent, sex hormone doses 
are gradually increased during puberty and full adult replacement doses 
given when development is complete.
Amenorrhoea
Primary amenorrhoea may be diagnosed in a female who has never 
menstruated; this usually occurs as a manifestation of delayed puberty 
but may also be a consequence of anatomical defects of the female 
reproductive system, such as endometrial hypoplasia or vaginal agene-
sis. Secondary amenorrhoea describes the cessation of menstruation in 
a female who has previously had periods. The causes of this common 
presentation are shown in Box 20.21. In non-pregnant women, second-
ary amenorrhoea is almost invariably a consequence of either ovarian or 
hypothalamic/pituitary dysfunction. Premature ovarian failure (premature 
menopause) is dened, arbitrarily, as occurring before 40 years of age. 
Rarely, endometrial adhesions (Asherman syndrome) can form after uter-
ine curettage, surgery or infection with tuberculosis or schistosomiasis, 
preventing endometrial proliferation and shedding.
Clinical assessment
The underlying cause can often be suspected from associated clinical 
features and the patient’s age. Hypothalamic/pituitary disease and pre-
mature ovarian failure result in oestrogen deciency, which causes a vari-
ety of symptoms usually associated with the menopause (Box 20.22). 
A history of galactorrhoea should be sought. Signicant weight loss of 
20.19  Causes of delayed puberty and hypogonadism
Constitutional delay
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
 Structural hypothalamic/pituitary disease (see Box 20.53)
 Functional gonadotrophin deciency:
Chronic systemic illness (e.g. asthma, malabsorption, coeliac disease, cystic 
brosis, renal failure)
Psychological stress
Anorexia nervosa
Excessive physical exercise
Hyperprolactinaemia
Other endocrine disease (e.g. Cushing’s syndrome, primary hypothyroidism)
 Isolated gonadotrophin deciency (Kallmann syndrome)
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism
 Acquired gonadal damage:
Chemotherapy/radiotherapy to gonads
Trauma/surgery to gonads
Autoimmune gonadal failure
Mumps orchitis
Tuberculosis
Haemochromatosis
 Developmental/congenital gonadal disorders:
Steroid biosynthetic defects
Anorchidism/cryptorchidism in males
Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY, male phenotype)
Turner syndrome (45,X, female phenotype)
20.20  Delayed puberty
 Aetiology: in boys the most common cause is constitutional delay, whereas 
in girls there is inevitably a structural hypothalamic/pituitary abnormality or a 
factor that affects their function.
 Psychological effects: whatever the underlying cause, delayed puberty is often 
associated with substantial psychological distress.
 Investigations: a karyotype should be performed in all adolescents with 
hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism, to exclude Turner and Klinefelter 
syndromes, unless there is an obvious precipitating cause.
 Medical induction of puberty: if this is being considered, it needs to be 
managed carefully and carried out in a controlled fashion, to avoid premature 
fusion of the epiphyses.

[[p721]]
670  ENDOCRINOLOGY
any cause can cause amenorrhoea by suppression of gonadotrophins. 
Weight gain may suggest hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome (if other 
discriminatory features are present), or very rarely, a hypothalamic lesion. 
Hirsutism, obesity and long-standing irregular periods suggest polycys-
tic ovary syndrome (PCOS). The presence of other autoimmune disease 
raises the possibility of autoimmune premature ovarian failure.
Investigations
Pregnancy should be excluded in women of reproductive age by meas-
uring urine or serum hCG. Serum LH, FSH, oestradiol, prolactin, tes-
tosterone, T4 and TSH should be measured and, in the absence of a 
menstrual cycle, can be taken at any time. Investigation of hyperprol-
actinaemia is described on page 697. High concentrations of LH and 
FSH with low or low-normal oestradiol suggest primary ovarian failure. 
Ovarian autoantibodies may be positive when there is an underlying 
autoimmune aetiology, and a karyotype should be performed in younger 
women to exclude mosaic Turner syndrome. Elevated LH, prolactin and 
testosterone levels with normal oestradiol are common in PCOS. Low 
levels of LH, FSH and oestradiol suggest hypothalamic or pituitary dis-
ease and a pituitary MRI is indicated.
There is some overlap in gonadotrophin and oestrogen concentrations 
between women with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and PCOS. If 
there is doubt as to the underlying cause of secondary amenorrhoea, 
then the response to 5 days of treatment with an oral progestogen (e.g. 
medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg twice daily) can be assessed. In 
women with PCOS, the progestogen will cause maturation of the endo-
metrium and menstruation will occur a few days after the progestogen 
is stopped. In women with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, men-
struation does not occur following progestogen withdrawal because the 
endometrium is atrophic as a result of oestrogen deciency. If doubt per-
sists in distinguishing oestrogen deciency from a uterine abnormality, 
the capacity for menstruation can be tested with 1 month of treatment 
with cyclical oestrogen and progestogen (usually administered as a com-
bined oral contraceptive pill).
Assessment of bone mineral density by dual X-ray absorptiometry 
(DXA, see Ch. 26) may be appropriate in patients with low androgen and 
oestrogen levels.
Management
Where possible, the underlying cause should be treated. For example, 
women with functional amenorrhoea due to excessive exercise and low 
weight should be encouraged to reduce their exercise and regain some 
weight. The management of structural pituitary and hypothalamic dis-
ease is described on page 693 and that of PCOS on page 673.
In oestrogen-decient women, replacement therapy may be neces-
sary to treat symptoms and/or to prevent osteoporosis. Women who 
have had a hysterectomy can be treated with oestrogen alone but those 
with a uterus should be treated with combined oestrogen/progestogen 
therapy, since unopposed oestrogen increases the risk of endometrial 
cancer. Cyclical hormone replacement therapy (HRT) regimens typically 
involve giving oestrogen on days 1–21 and progestogen on days 14–21 
of the cycle, and this can be conveniently administered as the oral con-
traceptive pill. If oestrogenic side-effects (uid retention, weight gain, 
hypertension and thrombosis) are a concern, then lower-dose oral or 
transdermal HRT may be more appropriate.
The timing of the discontinuation of oestrogen replacement therapy 
is still a matter of debate. In post-menopausal women, HRT has been 
shown to relieve menopausal symptoms and to prevent osteoporotic 
fractures but is associated with adverse effects, which are related to the 
duration of therapy and to the patient’s age. In patients with premature 
menopause, HRT should be continued up to the age of around 50 years, 
but continued beyond this age only if there are continued symptoms of 
oestrogen deciency on discontinuation.
Management of infertility in oestrogen-decient women is described 
below.
Male hypogonadism
The clinical features of both hypo- and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism 
include loss of libido, lethargy with muscle weakness and decreased fre-
quency of shaving. Patients may also present with gynaecomastia, infer-
tility, delayed puberty, osteoporosis or anaemia of chronic disease. The 
causes of hypogonadism are listed in Box 20.19. Mild hypogonadism 
may also occur in older men, particularly in the context of central adiposity 
and the metabolic syndrome. Postulated mechanisms are complex and 
include reduction in sex hormone-binding globulin by insulin resistance 
and reduction in GnRH and gonadotrophin secretion by cytokines or oes-
trogen released by adipose tissue. Testosterone levels also fall gradually 
with age in men (see Box 20.24) and this is associated with gonadotrophin 
levels that are low or inappropriately within the ‘normal’ range. There is an 
increasing trend to measure testosterone in older men, typically as part of 
an assessment of erectile dysfunction and lack of libido.
Investigations
Male hypogonadism is conrmed by demonstrating a low fasting 0900-hr 
serum testosterone level. The distinction between hypo- and hypergon-
adotrophic hypogonadism is by measurement of random LH and FSH. 
Patients with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism should be investigated 
as described for pituitary disease on page 692. Patients with hypergon-
adotrophic hypogonadism should have the testes examined for cryp-
torchidism or atrophy, and a karyotype should be performed (to identify 
Klinefelter syndrome).
Management
Testosterone replacement is clearly indicated in younger men with sig-
nicant hypogonadism to prevent osteoporosis and to restore muscle 
power and libido. Debate exists as to whether replacement therapy is of 
benet in mild hypogonadism associated with ageing and central adipos-
ity, particularly in the absence of structural pituitary/hypothalamic disease 
or other pituitary hormone deciency. In such instances, a therapeutic 
trial of testosterone therapy may be considered if symptoms are present 
(e.g. low libido and erectile dysfunction) and the serum testosterone is 
consistently low, but the benets of therapy must be carefully weighed 
against the potential for harm.
Routes of testosterone administration are shown in Box 20.23. 
First-pass hepatic metabolism of testosterone is highly efcient, so 
bioavailability of ingested preparations is poor. Doses of systemic tes-
tosterone can be titrated against symptoms; circulating testosterone 
20.21 Causes of secondary amenorrhoea
Physiological
 Pregnancy
 Menopause
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
Ovarian dysfunction
 Hypergonadotrophic 
hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
 Polycystic ovary syndrome
 Androgen-secreting tumours
Uterine dysfunction
 Asherman syndrome
20.22  Symptoms of oestrogen deciency
Vasomotor effects
 Hot ushes
 Sweating
Psychological
 Anxiety
 Irritability
 Emotional lability
Genitourinary
 Dyspareunia
 Urgency of micturition
 Vaginal infections

[[p722]]
The reproductive system  671
20
levels may provide only a rough guide to dosage because they may be 
highly variable (Box 20.23). Testosterone therapy can aggravate pros-
tatic carcinoma; prostate-specic antigen (PSA) should be measured 
before commencing testosterone therapy in men older than 50 years 
and monitored annually thereafter. Haemoglobin concentration should 
also be monitored, as androgen replacement can cause polycythae-
mia. Testosterone replacement inhibits spermatogenesis; treatment for 
fertility is described below.
Some important aspects of gonadal function in older women and men 
are summarized in Box 20.24
Infertility
Infertility affects around 1 in 7 couples of reproductive age, often caus-
ing psychological distress. The main causes are listed in Box 20.25. 
In women, it may result from anovulation or abnormalities of the 
reproductive tract that prevent fertilisation or embryonic implantation, 
often damaged Fallopian tubes from previous infection. In men, infer-
tility may result from impaired sperm quality (e.g. reduced motility) or 
reduced sperm number. Azoospermia or oligospermia is usually idio-
pathic but may be a consequence of hypogonadism (see Box 20.19). 
Microdeletions of the Y chromosome are increasingly recognised as a 
cause of severely abnormal spermatogenesis. In many couples more 
than one factor causing subfertility is present, and in a large proportion 
no cause can be identied.
Clinical assessment
A history of previous pregnancies, relevant infections and surgery is 
important in both men and women. A sexual history must be explored 
sensitively, as some couples have intercourse infrequently or only when 
they consider the woman to be ovulating, and psychosexual difculties 
are common. Irregular and/or infrequent menstrual periods are an indi-
cator of anovulatory cycles in the woman, in which case causes such 
as PCOS should be considered. In men, the testes should be examined 
to conrm that both are in the scrotum and to identify any structural 
abnormality, such as small size, absent vas deferens or the presence of 
a varicocele.
20.23  Options for androgen replacement therapy
Route of  
administration
Preparation
Dose
Frequency
Comments
Intramuscular
Testosterone undecanoate
1000 mg
Every 3 months
Smoother prole than testosterone enantate, with less frequent 
injections
Testosterone enanthate
50–250 mg
Every 3–4 weeks
Produces peaks and troughs of testosterone levels that are outside 
the physiological range and may be symptomatic
Transdermal
Testosterone gel
50–100 mg
Daily
Stable testosterone levels; transfer of gel can occur following skin-
to-skin contact with another person
20.24  Gonadal function in old age
 Post-menopausal osteoporosis: a major public health issue due to the high 
incidence of associated fragility fractures, especially of hip.
 Hormone replacement therapy: should be prescribed only above the age of 
50 for the short-term relief of symptoms of oestrogen deciency.
 Sexual activity: many older people are sexually active.
 ‘Male menopause’: does not occur, although testosterone concentrations do 
fall with age. Testosterone therapy in mildly hypogonadal men may be of benet 
for body composition, muscle and bone. Large randomised trials are required to 
determine whether benets outweigh potentially harmful effects on the prostate 
and cardiovascular system.
 Androgens in older women: hirsutism and balding occur. In those rare 
patients with elevated androgen levels, this may be pathological, e.g. from an 
ovarian tumour.
20.25 Causes of infertility
Female factors (35%–40%)
 Ovulatory dysfunction:
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
 Tubular dysfunction:
Pelvic inammatory disease (chlamydia, gonorrhoea)
Endometriosis
Previous sterilisation
Previous pelvic or abdominal surgery
 Cervical and/or uterine dysfunction:
Congenital abnormalities
Fibroids
Treatment for cervical carcinoma
Asherman syndrome
Male factors (35%–40%)
 Reduced sperm quality or production:
Y chromosome microdeletions
Varicocele
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
 Tubular dysfunction:
Varicocele
Congenital abnormality of vas deferens/epididymis
Previous sexually transmitted infection (chlamydia, gonorrhoea)
Previous vasectomy
Unexplained or mixed factors (20%–35%)
Investigations
Investigations should generally be performed after a couple has failed to 
conceive despite unprotected intercourse for 12 months, unless there 
is an obvious abnormality like amenorrhoea. Both partners need to be 
investigated. The male partner needs a semen analysis to assess sperm 
count and quality. Home testing for ovulation (by commercial urine dipstick 
kits, temperature measurement, or assessment of cervical mucus) is not 
recommended, as the information is often counterbalanced by increased 
anxiety if interpretation is inconclusive. In women with regular periods, ovu-
lation can be conrmed by an elevated serum progesterone concentration 
on day 21 of the menstrual cycle. Transvaginal ultrasound can be used to 
assess uterine and ovarian anatomy. Tubal patency may be examined at 
laparoscopy or by hysterosalpingography (HSG; a radio-opaque medium 
is injected into the uterus and should normally outline the Fallopian tubes). 
In vitro assessments of sperm survival in cervical mucus may be done in 
cases of unexplained infertility but are rarely helpful.
Management
Couples should be advised to have regular sexual intercourse, ideally 
every 2–3 days throughout the menstrual cycle. It is not uncommon for 
‘spontaneous’ pregnancies to occur in couples undergoing investiga-
tions for infertility or with identied causes of male or female subfertility.

[[p723]]
672  ENDOCRINOLOGY
In women with anovulatory cycles secondary to PCOS, clomifene, 
which has partial anti-oestrogen action, blocks negative feedback 
of oestrogen on the hypothalamus/pituitary, causing gonadotrophin 
secretion and thus ovulation. In women with gonadotrophin deciency 
or in whom anti-oestrogen therapy is unsuccessful, ovulation may be 
induced by direct stimulation of the ovary by daily injection of FSH and 
an injection of hCG to induce follicular rupture at the appropriate time. In 
hypothalamic disease, pulsatile GnRH therapy with a portable infusion 
pump can be used to stimulate pituitary gonadotrophin secretion (note 
that non-pulsatile administration of GnRH or its analogues paradoxi-
cally suppresses LH and FSH secretion). Whatever method of ovulation 
induction is employed, monitoring of response is essential to avoid mul-
tiple ovulation. For clomifene, ultrasound monitoring is recommended 
for at least the rst cycle. During gonadotrophin therapy, closer mon-
itoring of follicular growth by transvaginal ultrasonography and blood 
oestradiol levels is mandatory. ‘Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome’ is 
characterised by grossly enlarged ovaries and capillary leak with circu-
latory shock, pleural effusions and ascites. Anovulatory women who fail 
to respond to ovulation induction or who have primary ovarian failure 
may wish to consider using donated eggs or embryos, surrogacy and 
adoption.
Surgery to restore Fallopian tube patency can be effective but in vitro 
fertilisation (IVF) is normally recommended. IVF is widely used for many 
causes of infertility and in unexplained cases of prolonged (>3 years) 
infertility. The success of IVF depends on age, with low success rates in 
women over 40 years.
Men with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism who wish fertility are 
usually given injections of hCG several times a week (recombinant FSH 
may also be required in men with hypogonadism of pre-pubertal origin); 
it may take up to 2 years to achieve satisfactory sperm counts. Surgery is 
rarely an option in primary testicular disease but removal of a varicocele 
can improve semen quality. Extraction of sperm from the epididymis for 
IVF, and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI, when single spermato-
zoa are injected into each oöcyte) are being used increasingly in men 
with oligospermia or poor sperm quality who have primary testicular dis-
ease. Azoospermic men may opt to use donated sperm but this may be 
in short supply.
Gynaecomastia
Gynaecomastia is the presence of glandular breast tissue in males. 
Normal breast development in women is oestrogen-dependent, while 
androgens oppose this effect. Gynaecomastia results from an imbalance 
between androgen and oestrogen activity, which may reect androgen 
deciency or oestrogen excess. Causes are listed in Box 20.26. The 
most common are physiological: for example, in the newborn baby (due 
to maternal and placental oestrogens), in pubertal boys (in whom oestra-
diol concentrations reach adult levels before testosterone) and in older 
men (due to decreasing testosterone concentrations). Prolactin excess 
alone does not cause gynaecomastia.
Clinical assessment
A drug history is important. Gynaecomastia is often asymmetrical and 
palpation may allow breast tissue to be distinguished from the prominent 
adipose tissue (lipomastia) around the nipple that is often observed in 
obesity. Features of hypogonadism should be sought (see above) and 
the testes examined for evidence of cryptorchidism, atrophy or a tumour.
Investigations
If a clinical distinction between gynaecomastia and adipose tissue cannot 
be made, then ultrasonography or mammography is required. A random 
blood sample should be taken for testosterone, LH, FSH, oestradiol, pro-
lactin and hCG. Elevated oestrogen concentrations are found in testicu-
lar tumours and hCG-producing neoplasms.
Management
An adolescent with gynaecomastia who is progressing normally through 
puberty may be reassured that the gynaecomastia will usually resolve 
once development is complete. If puberty does not proceed normally, 
then there may be an underlying abnormality that requires investigation. 
Gynaecomastia may cause signicant psychological distress, especially 
in adolescent boys, and surgical excision may be justied for cosmetic 
reasons. Androgen replacement will usually improve gynaecomastia in 
hypogonadal males and any other identiable underlying cause should 
be addressed if possible. The anti-oestrogen tamoxifen may also be 
effective in reducing the size of the breast tissue.
Hirsutism
Hirsutism refers to the excessive growth of terminal hair (the thick, pig-
mented hair usually associated with the adult male chest) in an andro-
gen-dependent distribution in women (upper lip, chin, chest, back, lower 
abdomen, thigh, forearm) and is one of the most common presentations 
of endocrine disease. It should be distinguished from hypertrichosis, 
which is generalised excessive growth of vellus hair (the thin, non-pig-
mented hair that is typically found all over the body from childhood 
onwards). The aetiology of androgen excess is shown in Box 20.27
Clinical assessment
The severity of hirsutism is subjective. Some women suffer profound 
embarrassment from a degree of hair growth that others would not con-
sider remarkable. Important observations are a drug and menstrual his-
tory, calculation of body mass index, measurement of blood pressure 
and examination for virilisation (clitoromegaly, deep voice, male-pattern 
balding, breast atrophy) and associated features, including acne vulgaris 
or Cushing’s syndrome. Hirsutism of recent onset associated with viri-
lisation is suggestive of an androgen-secreting tumour but this is rare.
Investigations
A random blood sample should be taken for testosterone, prolactin, LH 
and FSH. If there are clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome, further 
investigations should be performed as detailed on page 679.
If testosterone levels are more than twice the upper limit of normal 
for females, idiopathic hirsutism and PCOS are less likely, especially if 
LH and FSH levels are low. Under these circumstances, other causes 
of androgen excess should be sought. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
due to 21-hydroxylase deciency is diagnosed by a short ACTH stimula-
tion test with measurement of 17-OH-progesterone. In post-menopau-
sal women with signicant hyperandrogenism, administration of GnRH 
analogue can be helpful in differentiating between an ovarian (>50% 
suppression of testosterone) or adrenal source (≤50% suppression) of 
androgen excess. The tumour should then be sought by CT or MRI of the 
adrenals and ovaries, as indicated by biochemical testing.
20.26  Causes of gynaecomastia
Idiopathic
Physiological
Drug-induced
 Cimetidine
 Digoxin
 Anti-androgens (cyproterone acetate, spironolactone)
 Some exogenous anabolic steroids (diethylstilbestrol)
 Cannabis
Hypogonadism (see Box 20.19)
Androgen resistance syndromes
Oestrogen excess
 Liver failure (impaired steroid metabolism)
 Oestrogen-secreting tumour (e.g. of testis)
 Human chorionic gonadotrophin-secreting tumour (e.g. of testis or lung)

[[p724]]
The reproductive system  673
20
Management
This depends on the cause (Box 20.27). Options for the treatment of 
PCOS and idiopathic hirsutism are similar and are described below.
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects up to 10% of women of repro-
ductive age. It is a heterogeneous disorder (Box 20.28), often associated 
with obesity, for which the primary cause remains uncertain. Genetic fac-
tors probably play a role, since PCOS often affects several family mem-
bers. The severity and clinical features of PCOS vary markedly between 
individual patients but diagnosis is usually made during the investigation 
of hirsutism or amenorrhoea/oligomenorrhoea. Infertility may also be 
present. There is no universally accepted denition but it has been rec-
ommended that a diagnosis of PCOS requires the presence of two of the 
following three features:
 menstrual irregularity
 clinical or biochemical androgen excess
 multiple cysts in the ovaries (most readily detected by transvaginal 
ultrasound; Fig. 20.16).
Women with PCOS are at increased risk of glucose intolerance and 
some authorities recommend screening for type 2 diabetes and other 
cardiovascular risk factors associated with the metabolic syndrome.
Management
This should be directed at the presenting complaint but all women with 
PCOS who are overweight should be encouraged to lose weight, as 
this can improve several symptoms, including menstrual irregularity, and 
reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes.
Menstrual irregularity and infertility
Most women with PCOS have oligomenorrhoea, with irregular, heavy 
menstrual periods. This may not require treatment unless fertility is 
desired. Metformin may restore regular ovulatory cycles in overweight 
women by reducing insulin resistance, although it is less effective than 
clomifene at restoring fertility as measured by successful pregnancy.
In women who have very few periods each year or are amenor-
rhoeic, the high oestrogen concentrations associated with PCOS can 
cause endometrial hyperplasia. Progestogens can be administered on 
a cyclical basis to induce regular shedding of the endometrium and a 
withdrawal bleed, or a progestogen-impregnated intrauterine coil can 
be tted.
Hirsutism
For hirsutism, most patients will have used cosmetic measures, such as 
shaving, bleaching and waxing, before consulting a doctor. Electrolysis 
and laser treatment are effective for small areas like the upper lip and for 
20.27 Causes of hirsutism
Cause
Clinical features
Investigation ndings
Treatment
Idiopathic
Often familial
Mediterranean or Asian background
Normal
Cosmetic measures
Anti-androgens
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Obesity
Oligomenorrhoea or secondary 
amenorrhoea
Infertility
LH:FSH ratio >2.5:1
Minor elevation of androgens*
Mild hyperprolactinaemia
Weight loss
Cosmetic measures
Anti-androgens
(Metformin, glitazones may be useful)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(95% 21-hydroxylase deciency)
Pigmentation
History of salt-wasting in childhood, 
ambiguous genitalia, or adrenal crisis 
when stressed
Elevated androgens* that suppress 
with dexamethasone
Abnormal rise in 17-OH-progesterone 
with ACTH
Glucocorticoid replacement 
administered in reverse rhythm to 
suppress early morning ACTH
Exogenous androgen 
administration
Athletes
Virilisation
Low LH and FSH
Analysis of urinary androgens may 
detect drug of misuse
Stop steroid misuse
Androgen-secreting tumour of 
ovary or adrenal cortex
Rapid onset
Virilisation: clitoromegaly, deep voice, 
balding, breast atrophy
High androgens* that do not suppress 
with GnRH analogues
Low LH and FSH
CT or MRI usually demonstrates a 
tumour
Surgical excision
Cushing s syndrome
Clinical features of Cushing’s 
syndrome
Normal or mild elevation of adrenal 
androgens*
See investigations (p. 679)
Treat the cause
*e.g. Serum testosterone levels in women: <2 nmol/L (<58 ng/dL) is normal; 2–5 nmol/L (58–144 ng/dL) is minor elevation; >5 nmol/L (>144 ng/dL) is high and requires further investigation.
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; CT = computed tomography; FH = follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin releasing hormone; LH = luteinising hormone; MRI = magnetic 
resonance imaging)
20.28  Features of polycystic ovary syndrome
Mechanisms*
Manifestations
Pituitary dysfunction
High serum LH
High serum prolactin
Anovulatory menstrual cycles
Oligomenorrhoea
Secondary amenorrhoea
Cystic ovaries
Infertility
Androgen excess
Hirsutism
Acne
Obesity
Hyperglycaemia
Elevated oestrogens
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidaemia
Hypertension
*These mechanisms are interrelated; it is not known which, if any, is primary. PCOS probably 
represents the common endpoint of several different pathologies.
(LH = luteinising hormone)

[[p725]]
674  ENDOCRINOLOGY
chest hair but are expensive. Eornithine cream inhibits ornithine decar-
boxylase in hair follicles and may reduce hair growth when applied daily 
to affected areas of the face.
If conservative measures are unsuccessful, anti-androgen therapy is 
given (Box 20.29). The life cycle of a hair follicle is at least 3 months and 
no improvement is likely before this time, when follicles have shed their 
hair and replacement hair growth has been suppressed. Metformin and 
thiazolidinediones are less effective at treating hirsutism than at restoring 
menstrual regularity. Unless weight is lost, hirsutism will return if therapy 
is discontinued. The patient should know that prolonged exposure to 
some agents may not be desirable and they should be stopped before 
pregnancy.
Turner syndrome
Turner syndrome affects around 1 in 2500 females. It is classically asso-
ciated with a 45,X karyotype but other cytogenetic abnormalities may be 
responsible, including mosaic forms (e.g. 45,X/46,XX or 45,X/46,XY) and 
partial deletions of an X chromosome.
Clinical features
These are shown in Figure 20.17
Individuals with Turner syndrome invariably have short stature from an 
early age and this is often the initial presenting symptom. It is probably 
Fig. 20.16 Polycystic ovary. A transvaginal ultrasound scan showing multiple 
cysts (some indicated by black arrows) in the ovary (highlighted by white arrows) of a 
woman with polycystic ovary syndrome.
20.29  Anti-androgen therapy
Mechanism of action
Drug
Dose
Hazards
Androgen receptor antagonism
Cyproterone acetate
2, 50 or 100 mg on days 1–11 of 28-day cycle 
with ethinylestradiol 30 µg on days 1–21
Hepatic dysfunction
Feminisation of male fetus
Progesterone receptor agonist
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
Spironolactone
100–200 mg daily
Electrolyte disturbance
Flutamide
Not recommended
Hepatic dysfunction
5α-reductase inhibition
(prevent conversion of testosterone to 
active dihydrotestosterone)
Finasteride
5 mg daily
Limited clinical experience; possibly less  
efcacious than other treatments
Suppression of ovarian steroid 
production and elevation of sex 
hormone-binding globulin
Oestrogen
See combination with cyproterone acetate above
or
Conventional oestrogen-containing contraceptive
Venous thromboembolism
Hypertension
Weight gain
Dyslipidaemia
Increased breast and endometrial carcinoma
due to haploinsufciency of the SHOX gene, one copy of which is found 
on both the X and Y chromosomes, which encodes a protein that is 
predominantly found in bone broblasts.
The genital tract and external genitalia in Turner syndrome are female 
in character, since this is the default developmental outcome in the 
absence of testes. Ovarian tissue develops normally until the third month 
of gestation, but thereafter there is gonadal dysgenesis with accelerated 
degeneration of oöcytes and increased ovarian stromal brosis, result-
ing in ‘streak ovaries’. The inability of ovarian tissue to produce oestro-
gen results in loss of negative feedback and elevation of FSH and LH 
concentrations.
There is a wide variation in the spectrum of associated somatic abnor-
malities. The severity of the phenotype is, in part, related to the underly-
ing cytogenetic abnormality. Mosaic individuals may have only mild short 
stature and may enter puberty spontaneously before developing gonadal 
failure.
Diagnosis and management
The diagnosis of Turner syndrome can be conrmed by karyotype 
analysis. Short stature, although not directly due to growth hormone 
deciency, responds to high doses of growth hormone. Prophylactic 
gonadectomy is recommended for individuals with 45,X/46,XY mosa-
icism because there is an increased risk of gonadoblastoma. Pubertal 
development can be induced with oestrogen therapy but causes fusion 
of the epiphyses and cessation of growth. The timing of pubertal induc-
tion therefore needs to be carefully planned. Adults with Turner syndrome 
require long-term oestrogen replacement therapy and should be moni-
tored periodically for the development of aortic root dilatation, hearing 
loss and other somatic complications.
Klinefelter syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome affects approximately 1 in 1000 males and is usually 
associated with a 47,XXY karyotype. However, other cytogenetic vari-
ants may be responsible, especially 46,XY/47,XXY mosaicism. The prin-
cipal pathological abnormality is dysgenesis of the seminiferous tubules. 
This is evident from infancy (and possibly even in utero) and progresses 
with age. By adolescence, hyalinisation and brosis are present within 
the seminiferous tubules and Leydig cell function is impaired, resulting 
in hypogonadism.
Clinical features
The diagnosis is typically made in adolescents who have presented 
with gynaecomastia and failure to progress normally through puberty. 
Affected individuals usually have small, rm testes. Tall stature is apparent 
from early childhood, reecting characteristically long leg length associ-
ated with 47,XXY, and may be exacerbated by androgen deciency with 

[[p726]]
The parathyroid glands  675
20
lack of epiphyseal closure in puberty. Other clinical features may include 
learning difculties and behavioural disorders, as well as an increased 
risk of breast cancer and type 2 diabetes in later life. The spectrum 
of clinical features is wide and some individuals, especially those with 
46,XY/47,XXY mosaicism, may pass through puberty normally and be 
identied only during investigation for infertility.
Diagnosis and management
Klinefelter syndrome is suggested by the typical phenotype in a patient 
with hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism and can be conrmed by kar-
yotype analysis. Individuals with clinical and biochemical evidence of 
androgen deciency require androgen replacement (see Box 20.23). 
There are reports of successful pregnancy occurring following ICSI ther-
apy where spermatocytes have been retrieved from the gonads of men 
with Klinefelter syndrome.
The parathyroid glands
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) plays a key role in the regulation of calcium 
and phosphate homeostasis and vitamin D metabolism, as shown in 
Fig. 26.62. The consequences of altered function of this axis in gut and 
renal disease are covered in Chapters 23 and 18, respectively. Other 
metabolic bone diseases are explored in Chapter 26. Here, the investi-
gation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia and disorders of the para-
thyroid glands are discussed.
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations
The four parathyroid glands lie behind the lobes of the thyroid and 
are approximately the size of a grain of rice. The parathyroid chief 
cells respond directly to changes in calcium concentrations via a 
G protein-coupled cell surface receptor (the calcium-sensing receptor) 
located on the cell surface (see Fig. 26.62). When serum ionised cal-
cium levels fall, PTH secretion rises. PTH is a single-chain polypeptide of 
84 amino acids. It acts on the renal tubules to promote reabsorption of 
calcium and reduce reabsorption of phosphate, and on the skeleton to 
increase osteoclastic bone resorption and bone formation. PTH also pro-
motes the conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to the active metabolite, 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D; the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, in turn, enhances 
calcium absorption from the gut.
More than 99% of total body calcium is in bone. Prolonged expo-
sure of bone to high levels of PTH is associated with increased osteo-
clastic activity and new bone formation, but the net effect is to cause 
bone loss with mobilisation of calcium into the extracellular uid. In 
contrast, pulsatile release of PTH causes net bone gain. This effect 
is exploited therapeutically in the treatment of osteoporosis, as 
discussed in Chapter 26.
The differential diagnosis of disorders of calcium metabolism requires 
measurement of calcium phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, renal func-
tion, PTH and 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Although the parathyroid glands 
detect and respond to ionised calcium levels, most clinical laboratories 
measure only total serum calcium levels. About 50% of total calcium is 
bound to organic ions, such as citrate or phosphate, and to proteins, 
especially albumin. Accordingly, if the serum albumin level is reduced, 
total calcium concentrations should be ‘corrected’ by adjusting the value 
for calcium upwards by 0.02 mmol/L (0.08 mg/dL) for each 1 g/L reduc-
tion in albumin below 40 g/L. If albumin concentrations are signicantly 
low, as in severe acute illness and other chronic illness such as liver 
cirrhosis, this correction is less accurate and measurement of ionised 
calcium is needed.
Calcitonin is secreted from the parafollicular C cells of the thyroid 
gland. Although it is a useful tumour marker in medullary carcinoma of 
thyroid, its release from the thyroid is of no clinical relevance to calcium 
homeostasis in humans.
Psychological problems
Impaired visuospatial processing
Reduced IQ (ring chromosome X)
Low-set ears
Sensorineural/conduction
hearing loss
Webbing of neck (25–40%)
Widely spaced nipples
Shield chest
Type 2 diabetes/IGT (10–30%)
Wide carrying angle of elbows
Lymphoedema of hands
and feet ( 30%)
Reduced bone mineral density
Inflammatory bowel
disease (0.2–0.3%)
Horseshoe kidneys and other
renal and collecting system
abnormalities
Bicuspid aortic valve
Aortic root dilatation
Coronary artery disease
Autoimmune thyroid disease (20%)
Streak gonads
Gonadoblastoma (XY mosaic)
Abnormal LFTs (30 – 80%)
Short stature
High-arched palate
Coarctation of aorta
Hypertension
Fig. 20.17 Clinical features of Turner syndrome (45,X). (IGT = impaired glucose tolerance; LFTs = liver function tests).

[[p727]]
676  ENDOCRINOLOGY
common. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH) is a rare but 
important cause that needs differentiation from primary hyperparathy-
roidism (HPT). Lithium may cause hyperparathyroidism by reducing the 
sensitivity of the calcium-sensing receptor.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms and signs of hypercalcaemia include polyuria and polydipsia, 
renal colic, lethargy, anorexia, nausea, dyspepsia and peptic ulceration, 
constipation, depression, drowsiness and impaired cognition. Patients 
with malignant hypercalcaemia can have a rapid onset of symptoms and 
may have clinical features that help to localise the tumour.
The classic symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are described 
by the adage ‘bones, stones and abdominal groans’, but few patients 
present in this way nowadays and the disorder is most often picked up 
as an incidental nding on biochemical testing. About 50% of patients 
with primary hyperparathyroidism are asymptomatic while others have 
non-specic symptoms such as polyuria, thirst, fatigue, depression and 
generalised aches and pains. Some present with renal calculi and it has 
been estimated that 5% of rst stone formers and 15% of recurrent stone 
formers have primary hyperparathyroidism. Hypertension is a common 
feature of hyperparathyroidism. Parathyroid tumours are almost never 
palpable.
A family history of hypercalcaemia raises the possibility of FHH or 
MEN.
Investigations
The most discriminatory investigation is measurement of PTH. If PTH 
levels are detectable or elevated in the presence of hypercalcaemia, then 
primary hyperparathyroidism is the most likely diagnosis. High plasma 
phosphate and alkaline phosphatase accompanied by renal impair-
ment suggest tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalcaemia may cause 
nephrocalcinosis and renal tubular impairment, resulting in hyperuricae-
mia and hyperchloraemia.
Patients with FHH can present with a similar biochemical picture to pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism but typically have low urinary calcium excre-
tion (a ratio of urinary calcium clearance to creatinine clearance of <0.01). 
The diagnosis of FHH can be conrmed by screening family members 
for hypercalcaemia and/or identifying an inactivating mutation in the gene 
encoding the calcium-sensing receptor. It is important, when considering 
the differential diagnosis of hypercalcaemia, to recognise that FHH is at 
least 100 times less common than primary hyperparathyroidism.
If PTH is low and no other cause is apparent, then malignancy with 
or without bony metastases is likely. PTH-related peptide, which is often 
20.30  Classication of diseases of the parathyroid glands
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid adenoma
Parathyroid carcinoma¹
Parathyroid hyperplasia2
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Following prolonged secondary hyperparathyroidism
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Chronic kidney disease
Malabsorption
Vitamin D deciency
Hormone deciency
Hypoparathyroidism
Post-surgical
Autoimmune
Inherited
Hormone hypersensitivity
Autosomal dominant hypercalciuric hypocalcaemic 
(CASR-activating mutation)
Hormone resistance
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
Non-functioning tumours
Parathyroid carcinoma1
1Parathyroid carcinomas may or may not produce parathyroid hormone. 2ln multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes (p. 700).
(CASR = calcium-sensing receptor)
20.31  The parathyroid glands in old age
 Osteoporosis: always exclude osteomalacia and hyperparathyroidism by 
checking vitamin D and calcium concentrations.
 Primary hyperparathyroidism: more common with ageing. Older people can 
often be observed without surgical intervention.
 Hypercalcaemia: may cause delirium.
 Vitamin D deciency: common because of limited exposure to the sun and 
reduced ability of older skin to synthesise cholecalciferol.
20.32  Causes of hypercalcaemia
With normal or elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels
 Primary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism
 Lithium-induced hyperparathyroidism
 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
With low PTH levels
 Malignancy (lung, breast, myeloma, renal, lymphoma, thyroid)
 Elevated 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (vitamin D intoxication, sarcoidosis, human 
immunodeciency virus, other granulomatous disease)
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Paget’s disease with immobilisation
 Milk-alkali syndrome
 Thiazide diuretics
 Glucocorticoid deciency
Disorders of the parathyroid glands are summarised in Box 20.30. 
Some specic features of parathyroid disease in older people are sum-
marised in Box 20.31.
Presenting problems in parathyroid disease
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia is one of the most common biochemical abnormalities 
and is often detected during routine biochemical analysis in asymp-
tomatic patients. However, it can present with chronic symptoms, as 
described below, and occasionally as an acute emergency with severe 
hypercalcaemia and dehydration.
Causes of hypercalcaemia are listed in Box 20.32. Of these, primary 
hyperparathyroidism and malignant hypercalcaemia are by far the most 

[[p728]]
The parathyroid glands  677
20
responsible for the hypercalcaemia associated with malignancy, is not 
detected by PTH assays, but can be measured by a specic assay 
(although this is not usually necessary). Unless the source is obvious, the 
patient should be screened for malignancy with a chest X-ray, myeloma 
screen (see p. 975) and CT as appropriate.
Management
Treatment of severe hypercalcaemia and primary hyperparathyroidism 
is described below and on p. 142. FHH does not require any specic 
intervention.
Hypocalcaemia
Aetiology
Hypocalcaemia is much less common than hypercalcaemia. The differ-
ential diagnosis is shown in Box 20.33. The most common cause of 
hypocalcaemia is a low serum albumin with normal ionised calcium con-
centration. Conversely, ionised calcium may be low in the face of normal 
total serum calcium in patients with alkalosis: for example, as a result of 
hyperventilation.
Hypocalcaemia may also develop as a result of magnesium deple-
tion and should be considered in patients with malabsorption, those on 
diuretic or proton pump inhibitor therapy, and/or those with a history of 
alcohol excess. Magnesium deciency causes hypocalcaemia by impair-
ing the ability of the parathyroid glands to secrete PTH (resulting in PTH 
concentrations that are low or inappropriately in the reference range) and 
may also impair the actions of PTH on bone and kidney.
Clinical assessment
Mild hypocalcaemia is often asymptomatic but, with more profound 
reductions in serum calcium, tetany can occur. This is characterised by 
muscle spasms due to increased excitability of peripheral nerves.
Children are more liable to develop tetany than adults and present 
with a characteristic triad of carpopedal spasm, stridor and convulsions, 
although one or more of these may be found independently of the oth-
ers. In carpopedal spasm, the hands adopt a characteristic position with 
exion of the metacarpophalangeal joints of the ngers and adduction 
of the thumb (‘main d’accoucheur’). Pedal spasm can also occur but is 
less frequent. Stridor is caused by spasm of the glottis. Adults can also 
develop carpopedal spasm in association with tingling of the hands and 
feet and around the mouth, but stridor and ts are rare.
Latent tetany may be detected by eliciting Trousseau’s sign: ination 
of a sphygmomanometer cuff on the upper arm to more than the sys-
tolic blood pressure is followed by carpal spasm within 3 minutes. Less 
specic is Chvostek’s sign, in which tapping over the branches of the 
facial nerve as they emerge from the parotid gland produces twitching 
of the facial muscles.
Hypocalcaemia can cause papilloedema and prolongation of the ECG 
QT interval, which may predispose to ventricular arrhythmias. Prolonged 
hypocalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia (as in hypoparathyroidism) 
may cause calcication of the basal ganglia, grand mal epilepsy, psycho-
sis and cataracts. Hypocalcaemia associated with hypophosphataemia, 
as in vitamin D deciency, causes rickets in children and osteomalacia 
in adults.
Management
Emergency management of hypocalcaemia associated with tetany is 
given in Box 20.34. Treatment of chronic hypocalcaemia is described 
on p. 1053.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by autonomous secretion of PTH, 
usually by a single parathyroid adenoma, which can vary in diameter from 
a few millimetres to several centimetres. It should be distinguished from 
secondary hyperparathyroidism, in which there is a physiological increase 
in PTH secretion to compensate for prolonged hypocalcaemia (such as 
in vitamin D deciency); and from tertiary hyperparathyroidism, in which 
continuous stimulation of the parathyroids over a prolonged period of 
time results in adenoma formation and autonomous PTH secretion (Box 
20.35). This is most commonly seen in individuals with advanced chronic 
kidney disease.
20.33  Differential diagnosis of hypocalcaemia
Total serum 
calcium
Ionised serum 
calcium
Serum 
phosphate
Serum PTH
Comments
Hypoalbuminaemia
↓
↔
↔
↔
Adjust calcium upwards by 0.02 mmol/L (0.1 mg/dL) for 
every 1 g/L reduction in albumin below 40 g/L
Alkalosis
↔
↓
↔
↔ or ↑
p. 632
Vitamin D deciency
↓
↓
↓
↑
p. 1053
Chronic renal failure
↓
↓
↑
↑
Due to impaired vitamin D hydroxylation
Serum creatinine ↑
Hypoparathyroidism
↓
↓
↑
↓
See text
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
↓
↓
↑
↑
Characteristic phenotype (see text)
Acute pancreatitis
↓
↓
↔ or ↓
↑
Usually clinically obvious
Serum amylase ↑
Hypomagnesaemia
↓
↓
Variable
↓ or ↔
Treatment of hypomagnesaemia may correct 
hypocalcaemia
(↑ = levels increased; ↓ = levels reduced; ↔ = levels normal)
20.34  Management of severe hypocalcaemia
Immediate management
 10–20 mL 10% calcium gluconate IV over 10–20 mins
 Continuous IV infusion may be required for several hours (equivalent of 10 mL 
10% calcium gluconate/hr)
 Cardiac monitoring is recommended
If associated with hypomagnesaemia
 50 mmol (1.23 g) magnesium chloride IV over 24 hrs
 Most parenteral magnesium will be excreted in the urine, so further doses may 
be required to replenish body stores
(IV = intravenous)

[[p729]]
678  ENDOCRINOLOGY
The prevalence of primary hyperparathyroidism is about 1 in 500 and 
it is 2–3 times more common in women than men; 90% of patients are 
over 50 years of age. It also occurs in the familial MEN syndromes, in 
which case hyperplasia or multiple adenomas of all four parathyroid 
glands are more likely than a solitary adenoma.
Clinical and radiological features
The clinical presentation of primary hyperparathyroidism is described on 
page 676. Parathyroid bone disease is now extremely rare due to earlier 
diagnosis and treatment and plain X-ray assessment is not routinely rec-
ommended. Osteitis brosa results from increased bone resorption by 
osteoclasts with brous replacement in the lacunae. This may present 
as bone pain and tenderness, fracture and deformity. Chondrocalcinosis 
can occur due to deposition of calcium pyrophosphate crystals within 
articular cartilage. It typically affects the menisci at the knees and can 
result in secondary degenerative arthritis or predispose to attacks of 
acute pseudogout. Skeletal X-rays are usually normal in mild primary 
hyperparathyroidism but DXA should be obtained as a matter of rou-
tine in people with primary hyperparathyroidism to exclude osteoporosis 
(a potential indication for surgical intervention). Renal imaging (typically 
ultrasound) is recommended to screen for asymptomatic nephrocalcin-
osis or nephrolithiasis.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be conrmed by nding a raised (or inappropriately 
normal) PTH level in the presence of hypercalcaemia, provided that FHH 
is excluded. Parathyroid scanning by ultrasound examination is often 
sufcient to localise an adenoma prior to surgery, although it is highly 
dependent on an experienced operator. Where ultrasound is equiv-
ocal, or does not identify an adenoma, a range of additional imaging 
modalities are available. These include 99mTc-sestamibi scintigraphy (MIBI; 
Fig.20.18), 99mTc-SPECT/CT and, most recently, 18F-uorocholine PET/
CT. Negative imaging does not exclude the diagnosis, however, and four-
gland exploration may be needed. Genetic testing should be considered 
when primary hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed before the age of 40, as 
the likelihood of underlying MEN syndromes is greater in this situation.
Management
The treatment of choice for primary hyperparathyroidism is surgery, 
with excision of a solitary parathyroid adenoma or hyperplastic glands. 
Experienced surgeons will identify solitary tumours in more than 90% of 
cases. Patients with parathyroid bone disease run a signicant risk of 
developing hypocalcaemia post-operatively but the risk of this can be 
reduced by correcting vitamin D deciency pre-operatively.
Surgery is usually indicated for individuals with clear-cut symptoms or 
documented complications (such as renal stones, renal impairment or 
osteoporosis), and (in asymptomatic patients) signicant hypercalcaemia 
(corrected serum calcium >2.85 mmol/L (>11.4 mg/dL)). Patients who 
are treated conservatively without surgery should have calcium biochem-
istry and renal function checked annually and bone density monitored 
periodically. They should be encouraged to maintain a high oral uid 
intake to avoid renal stones.
Occasionally, primary hyperparathyroidism presents with severe 
life-threatening hypercalcaemia. This is often due to dehydration and 
should be managed medically with intravenous uids and bisphospho-
nates, as described on page 142. If this is not effective, then urgent 
para thyroidectomy should be considered.
Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic that enhances the sensitivity of the calci-
um-sensing receptor, so reducing PTH levels, and is licensed for tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism (page 592) and as a treatment for patients with pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism who are unwilling to have surgery or are medi-
cally unt.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
This autosomal dominant disorder is caused by an inactivating muta-
tion in one of the alleles of the calcium-sensing receptor gene, which 
reduces the ability of the parathyroid gland to ‘sense’ ionised calcium 
concentrations. As a result, higher than normal calcium levels are 
required to suppress PTH secretion. The typical presentation is with 
mild hypercalcaemia with PTH concentrations that are ‘inappropriately’ 
at the upper end of the reference range or are slightly elevated. Calcium-
sensing receptors in the renal tubules are also affected and this leads 
to increased renal tubular reabsorption of calcium and hypocalciuria 
(as measured in the vitamin D-replete individual by a fractional calcium 
excretion or 24-hour calcium excretion). The hypercalcaemia of FHH 
is always asymptomatic and complications do not occur. The main 
risk of FHH is that of the patient being subjected to an unnecessary 
(and ineffective) parathyroidectomy if misdiagnosed as having primary 
hyperparathyroidism. Testing of family members for hypercalcaemia is 
helpful in conrming the diagnosis and it is also possible to perform 
genetic testing. No treatment is necessary.
Hypoparathyroidism
The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is damage to the par-
athyroid glands (or their blood supply) during thyroid surgery. Rarely, 
hypoparathyroidism can occur as a result of inltration of the glands with 
iron in haemochromatosis or copper in Wilson’s disease.
A
B
Fig. 20.18 99mTc-sestamibi scan of a patient with primary 
hyperparathyroidism secondary to a parathyroid adenoma
After 1 hour, there is uptake in the thyroid gland (thick arrow) and 
3 hours, uptake is evident only in the parathyroid (thin arrow).
20.35  Hyperparathyroidism
Type
Serum calcium
PTH
Primary
Single adenoma (90%)
Multiple adenomas (4%)
Nodular hyperplasia (5%)
Carcinoma (1%)
Raised
Not suppressed
Secondary
Chronic renal failure
Malabsorption
Osteomalacia and rickets
Low
Raised
Tertiary
Raised
Not suppressed

[[p730]]
The adrenal glands  679
20
There are a number of rare congenital or inherited forms of hypopara-
thyroidism. One form is associated with autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndrome type 1 and another with DiGeorge syndrome. Autosomal 
dominant hypoparathyroidism is the mirror image of FHH (see above), in 
that an activating mutation in the calcium-sensing receptor reduces PTH 
levels, resulting in hypocalcaemia and hypercalciuria.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
In this disorder, the individual is functionally hypoparathyroid but, instead 
of PTH deciency, there is tissue resistance to the effects of PTH, such 
that PTH concentrations are markedly elevated. The PTH receptor itself 
is normal but the downstream signalling pathways are defective due to 
mutations that affect GNAS1, which encodes the Gsα protein, a mol-
ecule involved in signal transduction downstream of the PTH receptor 
and other G protein-coupled receptors. There are several subtypes but 
the most common (pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a) is characterised 
by hypocalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia, in association with short 
stature, short fourth metacarpals and metatarsals, rounded face, obesity 
and subcutaneous calcication; these features are collectively referred 
to as Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). Type 1a pseudohypo-
parathyroidism occurs only when the GNAS1 mutation is inherited on the 
maternal chromosome.
The term pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism is used to describe 
patients who have clinical features of AHO but normal serum calcium 
and PTH concentrations; it occurs when the GNAS1 mutation is inher-
ited on the paternal chromosome. The inheritance of these disorders is 
an example of genetic imprinting (see Ch. 3). The difference in clinical 
features occurs as a result of the fact that renal cells exclusively express 
the maternal GNAS1 allele, whereas both maternal and paternal alleles 
are expressed in other cell types; this explains why maternal inheritance 
is associated with hypocalcaemia and resistance to PTH (which regu-
lates serum calcium and phosphate levels largely by an effect on the 
renal tubule), and why paternal inheritance is associated with skeletal 
and other abnormalities in the absence of hypocalcaemia and raised 
PTH values.
Management of hypoparathyroidism
Persistent hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism are 
treated with oral calcium salts and vitamin D analogues, either 1α-hy-
droxycholecalciferol 
(alfacalcidol) 
or 
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol 
(calcitriol). This therapy needs careful monitoring because of the risks 
of iatrogenic hypercalcaemia, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. 
Recombinant PTH is available as a subcutaneous injection and has been 
used in hypoparathyroidism (but not in pseudohypoparathyroidism). It 
is much more expensive than calcium and vitamin D analogues and 
remains a second-line therapy but has the advantage that it is less likely 
to cause hypercalciuria. There is no specic treatment for AHO other 
than to try to maintain calcium levels within the reference range using 
active vitamin D metabolites.
The adrenal glands
The adrenals comprise several separate endocrine glands within a single 
anatomical structure. The adrenal medulla is an extension of the sym-
pathetic nervous system that secretes catecholamines into capillaries 
rather than synapses. Most of the adrenal cortex is made up of cells that 
secrete cortisol and adrenal androgens, and form part of the hypothal-
amic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. The small outer glomerulosa of the 
cortex secretes aldosterone under the control of the renin–angiotensin 
system. These functions are important in the integrated control of cardio-
vascular, metabolic and immune responses to stress.
There is increasing evidence that subtle alterations in adrenal function 
contribute to the pathogenesis of common diseases such as hyperten-
sion, obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. However, classical syndromes 
of adrenal hormone deciency and excess are relatively rare.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Adrenal anatomy and function are shown in Figure 20.19. Histologically, 
the cortex is divided into three zones, but these function as two units 
(zona glomerulosa and zonae fasciculata/reticularis) that produce corti-
costeroids in response to humoral stimuli. Pathways for the biosynthe-
sis of corticosteroids are shown in Figure 20.20. Investigation of adrenal 
function is described under specic diseases below. The different types 
of adrenal disease are shown in Box 20.36.
Glucocorticoids
Cortisol is the major glucocorticoid in humans. Levels are highest in the 
morning on waking and lowest in the middle of the night. Cortisol rises 
dramatically during stress, including any illness. This elevation protects 
key metabolic functions (such as the maintenance of cerebral glucose 
supply during starvation) and inhibits potentially damaging inammatory 
responses to infection and injury. The clinical importance of cortisol de-
ciency is, therefore, most obvious at times of stress.
More than 95% of circulating cortisol is bound to protein, principally 
cortisol-binding globulin, which is increased by oestrogens. It is the free 
fraction that is biologically active. Cortisol regulates cell function by bind-
ing to glucocorticoid receptors that regulate the transcription of many 
genes. Cortisol can also activate mineralocorticoid receptors, but it does 
not normally do so because most cells containing mineralocorticoid 
receptors also express an enzyme called 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
genase type 2 (11β-HSD2), which inactivates cortisol by converting it to 
cortisone. Inhibitors of 11β-HSD2 (such as some liquorice) or mutations 
in the gene that encodes 11β-HSD2 cause cortisol to act as a mineralo-
corticoid, resulting in sodium retention and hypertension (see Box 20.45).
Mineralocorticoids
Aldosterone is the most important mineralocorticoid. It binds to miner-
alocorticoid receptors in the kidney and causes sodium retention and 
increased excretion of potassium and protons (see Fig. 19.2). The prin-
cipal stimulus to aldosterone secretion is angiotensin II, a peptide pro-
duced by activation of the renin–angiotensin system (see Fig. 20.19). 
Renin activity in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidney is stimulated 
by low perfusion pressure in the afferent arteriole, low sodium ltration 
leading to low sodium concentrations at the macula densa, or increased 
sympathetic nerve activity. As a result, renin activity is increased in hypo-
volaemia and renal artery stenosis, and is approximately doubled when 
standing up from a recumbent position.
Catecholamines
In humans, only a small proportion of circulating noradrenaline (norep-
inephrine) is derived from the adrenal medulla; much more is released 
from sympathetic nerve endings. Conversion of noradrenaline to adrena-
line (epinephrine) is catalysed by catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), 
which is induced by glucocorticoids. Blood ow in the adrenal is centri-
petal, so that the medulla is bathed in high concentrations of cortisol 
and is the major source of circulating adrenaline. However, after surgical 
removal of the adrenal medullae, there appear to be no clinical conse-
quences attributable to deciency of circulating catecholamines.
Adrenal androgens
Adrenal androgens are secreted in response to ACTH and are the most 
abundant steroids in the blood stream. They are probably important in the 
initiation of puberty (adrenarche). The adrenals are also the major source 
of androgens in adult females and may be important in female libido.
Presenting problems in adrenal disease
Cushing’s syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome is caused by excessive activation of glucocorticoid 
receptors. It is most commonly iatrogenic, due to prolonged administration 

[[p731]]
680  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17-OH-
pregnenolone
DHEAS
Progesterone
17-OH-
progesterone
Androstenedione
Oestrone
11-deoxy-
corticosterone
11-deoxy-
cortisol
Testosterone
Oestradiol
Corticosterone
Cortisol
Dihydro-
testosterone
Aldosterone
3-HSD
17-hydroxylase
17,20-lyase
21-hydroxylase
17-HSD
Aromatase
11-hydroxylase
Aldo synthase
5-reductase
Enzymes outside
the adrenal
Enzymes in
the adrenal
Glucocorticoids
Key
Mineralocorticoids
Androgens
Oestrogens
Progesterone
Fig. 20.20 The major pathways of synthesis of steroid hormones. (DHEAS = dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate; HSD = hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase)
Sympathetic nervous
system
Medulla
Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Noradrenaline
(norepinephrine)
-adrenoceptor
-adrenoceptor
Vasodilatation
Tachycardia
Insulin resistance
Vasoconstriction
Sympathetic nervous system
Adrenal medulla
ACTH
Cortex
Zonae fasciculata
and reticularis
Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
Adrenal cortex
Zonae fasciculata
and reticularis
Androgens
Cortisol
Androgen
receptor
Glucocorticoid
receptor
Pubic and
axillary hair
Libido, especially
females
Protein catabolism
Insulin resistance
Immune response
Hypertension
Increased appetite
Memory
Na retention
K wasting
Metabolic
alkalosis
Low renal perfusion
Low filtered Na
Sympathetic
activation
Angiotensin II
Cortex
Zona
glomerulosa
Aldosterone
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis
Adrenal cortex
Zona glomerulosa
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
Renin
ACE
MR
JGA
Adrenal
gland
Negative feedback
Fig. 20.19 Structure and function of the adrenal glands. (ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; JGA = juxtaglomerular 
apparatus; MR = mineralocorticoid receptor)

[[p732]]
The adrenal glands  681
20
depression (Box 20.37). Features that favour Cushing’s syndrome in an 
obese patient are those of protein-wasting, including bruising, proximal 
myopathy and thin skin. Any clinical suspicion of cortisol excess is best 
resolved by further investigation.
It is vital to exclude iatrogenic causes in all patients with Cushing’s 
syndrome since even inhaled or topical glucocorticoids can induce the 
syndrome in susceptible individuals. A careful drug history must there-
forebe taken before embarking on complex investigations. An 0800–
0900 hrs serum cortisol of <100 nmol/L (3.6 µg/dL) in a patient with a 
normal sleep–wake pattern and Cushingoid appearance is consistent 
with exogenous synthetic glucocorticoid use (common) or cyclical secre-
tion of cortisol from endogenous Cushing’s (uncommon).
Some clinical features are more common in ectopic ACTH syn-
drome. While ACTH-secreting pituitary tumours retain some nega-
tive feedback sensitivity to cortisol, this is absent in tumours that 
produce ectopic ACTH, typically resulting in higher levels of both 
ACTH and cortisol than are observed in pituitary-driven disease. The 
high ACTH levels are associated with marked pigmentation because 
of binding to melanocortin 1 receptors on melanocytes in the skin. 
The high cortisol levels also overcome the capacity of 11β-HSD2 
to inactivate cortisol in the kidney, causing hypokalaemic alkalosis 
that aggravates myopathy and hyperglycaemia (by inhibiting insulin 
secretion). When the tumour that is secreting ACTH is malignant, 
then the onset is usually rapid and may be associated with cachexia. 
For these reasons, the classical features of Cushing’s syndrome 
are less common in ectopic ACTH syndrome; if present, they sug-
gest that a less aggressive tumour, such as a bronchial carcinoid, is 
responsible.
In Cushing’s disease, the pituitary tumour is usually a microadenoma 
(<10 mm in diameter); hence other features of a pituitary macroade-
noma (visual failure or disconnection hyperprolactinaemia, p. 696) are 
rare, but there may be secondary hypogonadism due to the inhibitory 
effects of excess glucocorticoids on gonadotropin secretion. If a diag-
nosis of Cushing’s is suspected, early discussion/referral to a specialist 
is recommended.
Investigations
The large number of tests available for Cushing’s syndrome reects 
the fact that each one has limited specicity and sensitivity in isolation. 
Accordingly, several tests are usually combined to establish the diag-
nosis. Testing for Cushing’s syndrome should be avoided under condi-
tions of stress, such as an acute illness, because this activates the HPA 
axis, causing potentially spurious results. The diagnosis of Cushing’s is a 
two-step process:
20.36  Classication of diseases of the adrenal glands
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Non-ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Phaeochromocytoma
ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome
Secondary hyperaldosteronism
Hormone deciency
Addison’s disease
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Hypopituitarism
Hormone hypersensitivity
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 deciency
Liddle syndrome
Hormone resistance
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
Glucocorticoid resistance syndrome
Non-functioning tumours
Adenoma
Carcinoma (usually functioning)
Metastatic tumours
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone)
20.37  Classication of endogenous Cushing’s syndrome
ACTH-dependent – 80%
 Pituitary adenoma secreting ACTH (Cushing’s disease) – 70%
 Ectopic ACTH syndrome (bronchial carcinoid, small-cell lung carcinoma, other 
neuro-endocrine tumour) – 10%
Non-ACTH-dependent – 20%
 Adrenal adenoma – 15%
 Adrenal carcinoma – 5%
 ACTH-independent macronodular hyperplasia; primary pigmented nodular 
adrenal disease; McCune–Albright syndrome (together < 1%)
Hypercortisolism due to other causes (also referred to as pseudo-Cushing’s 
syndrome)
 Alcohol excess (biochemical and clinical features)
 Major depressive illness (biochemical features only, some clinical overlap)
 Primary obesity (mild biochemical features, some clinical overlap)
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone)
of synthetic glucocorticoids such as prednisolone. Endogenous Cushing’s 
syndrome is uncommon but is caused by chronic over-production of cor-
tisol by the adrenal glands, either as the result of an adrenal tumour or 
because of excessive production of ACTH by a pituitary tumour or ectopic 
ACTH production by other tumours.
Aetiology
The causes are shown in Box 20.37. Amongst endogenous causes, 
pituitary-dependent cortisol excess (by convention, called Cushing’s dis-
ease) accounts for approximately 80% of cases. Both Cushing’s disease 
and cortisol-secreting adrenal tumours are four times more common in 
women than men. In contrast, ectopic ACTH syndrome (often due to a 
small-cell carcinoma of the bronchus) is more common in men.
Clinical assessment
The diverse manifestations of glucocorticoid excess are shown in Figure 
20.21. Many of these are not specic to Cushing’s syndrome and, 
because spontaneous Cushing’s syndrome is rare, the positive pre-
dictive value of any single clinical feature alone is low. Moreover, some 
common disorders can be confused with Cushing’s syndrome because 
they are associated with alterations in cortisol secretion, e.g. obesity and 

[[p733]]
682  ENDOCRINOLOGY
 1. to establish whether the patient has Cushing’s syndrome (Fig. 
20.22), and
 2. to dene its cause (Fig. 20.23).
Some additional tests are useful in all cases of Cushing’s syndrome, 
including plasma electrolytes, glucose, glycosylated haemoglobin and 
bone mineral density measurement.
Establishing the presence of Cushing’s syndrome
In patients where there is appropriate clinical suspicion, Cushing’s 
syndrome is conrmed by using two of three main tests:
 1. Failure to suppress serum cortisol with low doses of oral 
dexamethasone
 2. Loss of the normal circadian rhythm of cortisol, with inappropriately 
elevated late-night serum or salivary cortisol
 3. Increased 24-hour urine free cortisol (lower sensitivity than the 
above tests) (see Fig. 20.22).
Dexamethasone is used for suppression testing because it does not 
cross-react in immunoassays for cortisol. An overnight dexametha-
sone suppression test (ONDST) involves administration of 1 mg dex-
amethasone at 2300 hrs and measurement of serum cortisol at 0900 
hrs the following day. In a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test 
(LDDST), serum cortisol is measured following administration of 0.5 mg 
dexamethasone 4 times daily for 48 hours. For either test, a normal 
response is a serum cortisol of <50 nmol/L (1.8 µg/dL). It is important 
for any oestrogens to be stopped for 6 weeks prior to investigation to 
allow corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) levels to return to normal 
and to avoid false-positive responses, as most cortisol assays meas-
ure total cortisol, including that bound to CBG. Cyclicity of cortisol 
Psychosis
Cataracts
Mild exophthalmos
Hair thinning
Hirsutism
Acne
Plethora
Moon face
Peptic ulcer
Hyperglycaemia
Menstrual
disturbance
May have
exuberant
callus with
fractures
Osteoporosis
Tendency to
infections
with poor wound
healing and little
inflammatory
response
Hypertension
Centripetal obesity
Striae
Wasting and weakness 
of proximal thigh 
muscles
Bruising
Loss of height
and back pain
from compression
fracture
Decreased skin
thickness
A
B
C
Fig. 20.21 Cushing’s syndrome
successful removal of an ACTH-secreting pituitary microadenoma by trans-sphenoidal surgery.
secretion is a feature of all types of Cushing’s syndrome and, if very 
variable, can confuse diagnosis. Use of multiple salivary cortisol sam-
ples over weeks or months can be helpful in diagnosis but an elevated 
salivary cortisol alone should not be taken as proof of diagnosis. In iat-
rogenic Cushing’s syndrome, cortisol levels are low unless the patient 
is taking a glucocorticoid (such as prednisolone) that cross-reacts in 
immunoassays with cortisol.
Determining the underlying cause
Once the presence of Cushing’s syndrome is conrmed, measurement 
of plasma ACTH is the key to establishing the differential diagnosis; it 
is best measured in the morning around 0900 hrs. In the presence of 
excess cortisol secretion, an undetectable ACTH (<1.1 pmol/L (5 ng/L)) 
indicates an adrenal cause, while ACTH levels of >3.3 pmol/L (15 ng/L) 
suggest a pituitary cause or ectopic ACTH. ACTH levels between these 
values represent a ‘grey area’ and further evaluation by a specialist is 
required. Tests to discriminate pituitary from ectopic sources of ACTH 
rely on the fact that pituitary tumours, but not ectopic tumours, retain 
some features of normal regulation of ACTH secretion. Thus, in pitu-
itary-dependent Cushing’s disease, ACTH secretion is suppressed by 
high-dose dexamethasone and ACTH is stimulated by corticotrophin-
releasing hormone (CRH). In a high-dose dexamethasone suppression 
test (HDDST), serum cortisol is measured before and after administration 
of 2 mg of dexamethasone 4 times daily for 48 hours.
Techniques for localisation of tumours secreting ACTH or cortisol are 
listed in Figure 20.23. MRI detects around 60% of pituitary microadeno-
mas secreting ACTH. If available, bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling 
(BIPSS) with measurement of plasma ACTH near the pituitary and com-
paring this to peripheral levels is the best means of conrming Cushing’s 
disease (increased gradient), unless MRI shows a tumour bigger than 
6 mm, in which case it may not be needed. CT or MRI detects most 

[[p734]]
The adrenal glands  683
20
Cushing’s syndrome suspected
Exclude exogenous
glucocorticoid exposure
Perform one of the following tests
Any abnormal result
Suggest additional evaluation,
repeat testing at interval
or seek further opinion
Normal result
Cushing’s syndrome
unlikely
Perform 1 or 2 other studies shown above
and consider repeating abnormal study
At least two concordant
abnormal tests
Discrepant test results
Cushing’s syndrome
Normal result
Cushing’s syndrome
unlikely
24-UFC ( 2 tests)
– Elevated if above
reference range for assay
Late-night salivary cortisol
– Abnormal if above local
reference range  
ONDST or LDDST
– Abnormal if serum cortisol > 50 nmol/L
Fig. 20.22 Sequence of investigations in suspected spontaneous Cushing’s syndrome. A serum cortisol of 50 nmol/L is equivalent to 1.8 µg/dL. (LDDST = low-dose 
dexamethasone suppression test; ONDST = overnight dexamethasone suppression test; UFC = urinary free cortisol)
 BIPSS: ACTH central to
peripheral gradient > 2:1 at
baseline or > 3:1 at 5–10 mins
after 100 mg CRH IV
Cushing’s syndrome confirmed
Measure plasma ACTH
> 3.3 pmol/L
ACTH-independent
Cushing’s syndrome
Adrenal imaging
with CT
Adrenal
lesion
No adrenal
lesion
Adenoma
Carcinoma
AIMAH
PPNAD
Exogenous
glucocorticoid
Cushing’s disease
ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome
Pituitary MRI: adenoma > 6 mm
Positive CRH test: after 100 mg hCRH IV
(> 20% rise of cortisol; or 50% rise ACTH)
HDDST: > 50% suppression
in serum cortisol from baseline 
CT/MRI thorax
and abdomen ±
somatostatin
scintigraphy
< 1.1 pmol/L on more
than two occasions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Fig. 20.23 Determining the cause of conrmed Cushing’s syndrome. To convert pmol/L to ng/L, multiply by 4.541. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; AIMAH = 
ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia; BIPSS = bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling; hCRH = human corticotrophin-releasing hormone; HDDST = high-dose 
dexamethasone suppression test; IV = intravenous; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PPNAD = primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease)

[[p735]]
684  ENDOCRINOLOGY
adrenal tumours; adrenal carcinomas are usually large (>5 cm) and have 
other features of malignancy.
Management
Untreated severe Cushing’s syndrome has a 50% 5-year mortality. Most 
patients are treated surgically, but medical therapy may be given in 
severe cases for a few weeks prior to operation to improve the clinical 
state, or where there is recurrent or incurable disease. Drugs that inhibit 
glucocorticoid biosynthesis form the mainstay or management, with the 
most widely available and established being metyrapone and ketocona-
zole, with osilodrostat becoming available more recently. The dose of 
these agents is best titrated against serum cortisol levels or 24-hour 
urine free cortisol.
Cushing’s disease
Trans-sphenoidal surgery carried out by an experienced surgeon with 
selective removal of the adenoma is the treatment of choice, with 
approximately 70% of patients going into immediate remission. Around 
20% of patients suffer a recurrence, often years later, emphasising the 
need for life-long follow-up.
Laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy performed by an expert surgeon 
effectively cures any type of ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome, but 
in patients with Cushing’s disease (pituitary) this can result in Nelson syn-
drome – an invasive pituitary macroadenoma (which causes local mass 
effects) and very high ACTH levels (which cause pigmentation). The risk 
of Nelson syndrome is reported as being reduced by pituitary irradiation 
in some series, but not all.
The somatostatin analogue pasireotide is also licensed for the treat-
ment of Cushing’s disease and works by suppressing ACTH secretion 
by the tumour.
Adrenal tumours
Laparoscopic adrenal surgery is the treatment of choice for adrenal ade-
nomas. Surgery offers the only prospect of cure for adrenocortical car-
cinomas but, in general, prognosis is poor with high rates of recurrence, 
even in patients with localised disease at presentation. Radiotherapy 
to the tumour bed reduces the risk of local recurrence; systemic ther-
apy consists of the adrenolytic drug mitotane and chemotherapy, but 
responses are often poor.
Ectopic ACTH syndrome
Localised tumours, such as bronchial carcinoids, should be removed 
surgically. In patients with incurable malignancy, it is important to reduce 
the severity of the Cushing’s syndrome using medical therapy (see 
above) or, if appropriate, bilateral adrenalectomy.
Therapeutic use of glucocorticoids
The remarkable anti-inammatory properties of glucocorticoids have led 
to their use in a wide variety of clinical conditions but the hazards are sig-
nicant. Equivalent doses of commonly used glucocorticoids are listed in 
Box 20.38. Topical preparations (dermal, rectal and inhaled) can also be 
absorbed into the systemic circulation, and although this rarely occurs to 
a sufcient degree to produce clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome, it 
can result in signicant suppression of endogenous ACTH and cortisol 
secretion. Severe Cushing’s syndrome can result if there is concomitant 
administration of inhaled glucocorticoids and strong inhibitors of the liver 
enzyme CYP450 3A4, such as the antiretroviral drug ritonavir.
Adverse effects of glucocorticoids
The clinical features of glucocorticoid excess are illustrated in Figure 
20.21. Adverse effects are related to dose, duration of therapy, and 
pre-existing conditions that might be worsened by glucocorticoid 
therapy, such as diabetes mellitus or osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a 
particularly important problem because, for a given bone mineral den-
sity, the fracture risk is greater in glucocorticoid-treated patients than 
in post-menopausal osteoporosis. Therefore, when systemic glucocor-
ticoids are prescribed and the anticipated duration of steroid therapy 
is more than 3 months, bone-protective therapy should be considered. 
Rapid changes in glucocorticoid levels can also lead to marked mood 
disturbances, including depression, mania and insomnia. Glucocorticoid 
use also increases the white blood cell count (predominantly neutrophils), 
which must be taken into account when assessing patients with possible 
infection.
The anti-inammatory effect of glucocorticoids may mask signs of 
disease. For example, perforation of a viscus may be masked and the 
patient may show no febrile response to an infection. Although there is 
debate about whether or not glucocorticoids increase the risk of peptic 
ulcer when used alone, they act synergistically with NSAIDs, including 
aspirin, to increase the risk of serious gastrointestinal adverse effects. 
Latent tuberculosis may be reactivated and patients on glucocorticoids 
are at risk of severe varicella zoster virus infection, so should avoid con-
tact with chickenpox or shingles if they are non-immune.
Management of glucocorticoid withdrawal
All glucocorticoid therapy, even if inhaled or applied topically, can sup-
press the HPA axis. In practice, this is likely to result in a crisis due to 
adrenal insufciency on withdrawal of treatment only if glucocorticoids 
have been administered orally or systemically for longer than 3 weeks, 
if repeated courses have been prescribed within the previous year, or if 
the dose is higher than the equivalent of 7.5 mg prednisolone per day. 
In these circumstances, the drug, when it is no longer required for the 
underlying condition, must be withdrawn slowly at a rate dictated by the 
duration of treatment. If glucocorticoid therapy has been prolonged, then 
it may take many months for the HPA axis to recover. All patients must be 
advised to avoid sudden drug withdrawal. They should be issued with a 
steroid card and/or wear an engraved bracelet (Box 20.39).
Recovery of the HPA axis is aided if there is no exogenous gluco-
corticoid present during the nocturnal surge in ACTH secretion. This 
can be achieved by giving glucocorticoid in the morning. Giving ACTH 
20.39  Advice to patients on glucocorticoid replacement 
therapy
Intercurrent stress
 Febrile illness: double dose of hydrocortisone
Surgery
 Minor operation: hydrocortisone 100 mg IM with pre-medication
 Major operation: hydrocortisone 100 mg 4 times daily for 24 hrs, then 50 mg IM 
4 times daily until ready to take tablets
Vomiting
 Patients must have parenteral hydrocortisone if unable to take it by mouth
Steroid card
 Patient should carry this at all times; it should give information regarding 
diagnosis, steroid, dose and doctor
Bracelet and emergency pack
 Patients should be encouraged to buy a bracelet and have it engraved with the 
diagnosis, current treatment and a reference number for a central database
 Patients should be given a hydrocortisone emergency pack and trained in the 
self-administration of hydrocortisone 100 mg IM; they should be advised to take 
the pack on holidays/trips abroad
(IM = intramuscular)
20.38  Approximate equivalent doses of glucocorticoids
 Hydrocortisone: 20 mg
 Cortisone acetate: 25 mg
 Prednisolone: 5 mg
 Dexamethasone: 0.5 mg

[[p736]]
The adrenal glands  685
20
to stimulate adrenal recovery is of no value, as the pituitary remains 
suppressed.
In patients who have received glucocorticoids for longer than a few 
weeks, especially if the period is months to years, it is often valuable to 
conrm that the HPA axis is recovering during glucocorticoid withdrawal. 
Withdrawal has to be very slow, usually by a dose reduction equivalent of 
prednisolone 1 mg per month or slower. Once the dose of glucocorticoid 
is reduced to a minimum (e.g. 5 mg prednisolone), then serum cortisol 
can be measured at 0900 hrs before the next dose. If this is <100 nmol/L 
(3.6 µg/dL), slow reduction should be continued with a repeat 0900 hrs 
serum cortisol when the dose of prednisolone is 3 mg per day. Once 
0900 hrs serum cortisol is >150–200 nmol/L, then an ACTH stimulation 
test should be performed (see Box 20.42) to conrm if glucocorticoids 
can be withdrawn completely. Even when glucocorticoids have been 
successfully withdrawn, short-term replacement therapy is often advised 
during signicant intercurrent illness occurring in subsequent months, as 
the HPA axis may not be able to respond fully to severe stress.
Adrenal insufciency
Adrenal insufciency results from inadequate secretion of cortisol and/
or aldosterone. It is potentially fatal and notoriously variable in its pres-
entation. A high index of suspicion is therefore required in patients with 
unexplained fatigue, hyponatraemia or hypotension. Causes are shown in 
Box20.40. The most common is ACTH deciency (secondary adrenocor-
tical failure), usually because of inappropriate withdrawal of chronic gluco-
corticoid therapy or a pituitary tumour. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia and 
Addison’s disease (primary adrenocortical failure) are rare causes.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of adrenal insufciency are shown in Box 20.41. In 
Addison’s disease, either glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid deciency 
may come rst, but eventually all patients fail to secrete both classes of 
corticosteroid.
Patients may present with chronic features and/or in acute circulatory 
shock. With a chronic presentation, initial symptoms are often misdiag-
nosed as chronic fatigue syndrome or depression. In primary adrenal 
insufciency, weight loss is a uniform presenting feature. Adrenocortical 
insufciency should also be considered in patients with hyponatraemia, 
even in the absence of symptoms.
Features of an acute adrenal crisis include circulatory shock with 
severe hypotension, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and, in some 
instances, hypoglycaemia and hypercalcaemia. Muscle cramps, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea and unexplained fever may be present. The crisis is 
often precipitated by intercurrent disease, surgery or infection.
Vitiligo occurs in 10%–20% of patients with autoimmune Addison’s 
disease.
Investigations
Treatment should not be delayed to wait for results in patients with 
suspected acute adrenal crisis. Here, a random blood sample should 
be stored for subsequent measurement of serum cortisol and, if pos-
sible, plasma ACTH; if the patient’s clinical condition permits, it may be 
appropriate to spend 30 minutes performing a short ACTH stimulation 
test (Box 20.42) before administering hydrocortisone, but delays must 
be avoided if there is circulatory compromise. Investigations should be 
20.41  Clinical and biochemical features of adrenal insufciency
Glucocorticoid insufciency
Mineralocorticoid 
insufciency
ACTH excess
Adrenal androgen 
insufciency
Withdrawal of exogenous 
glucocorticoid
+
–
–
+
Hypopituitarism
+
–
–
+
Addison s disease
+
+
+
+
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
(21-hydroxylase deciency)
+
+
+
Clinical features
Weight loss, anorexia
Malaise, weakness
Nausea, vomiting
Diarrhoea or constipation
Postural hypotension
Shock
Hypoglycaemia
Hyponatraemia (dilutional)
Hypercalcaemia
Hypotension
Shock
Hyponatraemia (depletional)
Hyperkalaemia
Pigmentation of:
Sun-exposed areas
Pressure areas (e.g. elbows, 
knees)
Palmar creases, knuckles
Mucous membranes
Conjunctivae
Recent scars
Decreased body hair and loss 
of libido, especially in females
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone)
20.40  Causes of adrenocortical insufciency
Secondary (↓ACTH)
 Withdrawal of suppressive glucocorticoid therapy
 Hypothalamic or pituitary disease
Primary (↑ACTH)
Addison’s disease
Common causes
 Autoimmune:
Sporadic
 Polyendocrine syndromes (APS 
types 1 and 2) 
 Tuberculosis
 HIV/AIDS
 Metastatic carcinoma
 Bilateral adrenalectomy
Rare causes
 Lymphoma
 Intra-adrenal haemorrhage 
(Waterhouse–Friderichsen syndrome 
following meningococcal sepsis)
 Amyloidosis
 Haemochromatosis
Corticosteroid biosynthetic enzyme defects
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasias
 Drugs: metyrapone, ketoconazole, etomidate
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; APS = autoendocrine polyendocrine syndromes;  
HIV/AIDS = human immunodeciency virus/acquired immune deciency syndrome)

[[p737]]
686  ENDOCRINOLOGY
performed before treatment is given in patients who present with features 
suggestive of chronic adrenal insufciency.
Assessment of glucocorticoids
Random plasma cortisol is usually low in patients with adrenal insuf-
ciency but it may be within the reference range, yet inappropriately 
low, for a seriously ill patient. Random measurement of normal levels of 
plasma cortisol cannot therefore be used to conrm or refute the diagno-
sis, unless the value is above 430 nmol/L (>15.6 µg/dL), which effectively 
excludes adrenal insufciency.
More useful is the short ACTH stimulation test (also called the tetracos-
actrin or short Synacthen test) described in Box 20.42. Cortisol levels fail to 
increase in response to exogenous ACTH in patients with primary or sec-
ondary adrenal insufciency. These can be distinguished by measurement 
of ACTH (which is low in ACTH deciency and high in Addison’s disease).
Assessment of mineralocorticoids
Mineralocorticoid secretion in patients with suspected Addison’s dis-
ease cannot be adequately assessed by electrolyte measurements since 
hyponatraemia occurs in both aldosterone and cortisol deciency (see 
Box 20.41 and page 629). Hyperkalaemia is common, but not universal, 
in aldosterone deciency. Plasma renin and aldosterone should be meas-
ured in the supine position. In mineralocorticoid deciency, plasma renin 
activity is high, with plasma aldosterone being either low or in the lower 
part of the reference range.
Assessment of adrenal androgens
This is not necessary in men because testosterone from the testes is 
the principal androgen. In women, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate 
(DHEAS) and androstenedione may be measured in a random specimen 
of blood, though levels are highest in the morning.
Other tests to establish the cause
Patients with unexplained secondary adrenocortical insufciency should 
be investigated as described in Box 20.51. In patients with elevated 
ACTH, further tests are required to establish the cause of Addison’s dis-
ease. Adrenal autoantibodies to 21-hydroxylase are frequently positive in 
autoimmune adrenal failure. If antibody tests are negative, imaging of the 
adrenal glands with CT or MRI is indicated. Tuberculosis causes adrenal 
calcication, visible on plain X-ray or ultrasound scan. A human immu-
nodeciency virus (HIV) test should be performed if relevant risk factors 
are present. Adrenal metastases are a rare cause of adrenal insufciency. 
Patients with evidence of autoimmune adrenal failure should be screened 
for other organ-specic autoimmune diseases, such as thyroid disease, 
pernicious anaemia and type 1 diabetes.
Management
Patients with adrenocortical insufciency always need glucocorticoid 
replacement therapy and usually, but not always, mineralocorticoid 
therapy. There is some evidence that adrenal androgen replacement 
may also be benecial in some women. Other treatments depend on 
the underlying cause. The emergency management of adrenal crisis is 
described in Box 20.43
Glucocorticoid replacement
Adrenal replacement therapy consists of oral hydrocortisone (cortisol) 
15–20 mg daily in divided doses, typically 10 mg on waking and 5 mg at 
around 1500 hrs. These are physiological replacement doses that should 
not cause Cushingoid side-effects. The dose may need to be adjusted for 
the individual patient but this is subjective. Excess weight gain usually indi-
cates over-replacement, while persistent lethargy or hyperpigmentation 
may be due to an inadequate dose or lack of absorption. Measurement of 
serum cortisol levels is not usually helpful. Advice to patients dependent 
on glucocorticoid replacement is given in Box 20.39 and considerations in 
respect of glucocorticoids in old age are given in Box 20.44
Mineralocorticoid replacement
Fludrocortisone (9α-uoro-hydrocortisone) is administered at the usual 
dose of 0.05–0.15 mg daily, and adequacy of replacement may be 
assessed by measurement of blood pressure, plasma electrolytes and 
20.42  How and when to do an ACTH stimulation test
Use
 Diagnosis of primary or secondary adrenal insufciency
 Assessment of HPA axis in patients taking suppressive glucocorticoid therapy
 Relies on ACTH-dependent adrenal atrophy in secondary adrenal insufciency, 
so may not detect acute ACTH deciency1 (e.g. in pituitary apoplexy)
Dose
 250 µg ACTH1–24 (Synacthen) by IM injection at any time of day
Blood samples
 0 and 30 mins for plasma cortisol
 0 mins also for ACTH (on ice) if Addison’s disease is being considered (patient 
not known to have pituitary disease or to be taking exogenous glucocorticoids)
Results
 Normal subjects: plasma cortisol >430 nmol/L (approximately 15.6 µg/dL)2
either at baseline or at 30 mins
 Incremental change in cortisol is not a criterion
1In acute secondary adrenal insufciency the adrenal cortex will still respond normally on the 
SST making the test unreliable in that setting. It usually takes around 6 weeks of ACTH-
deciency for the adrenal cortex to atrophy sufciently for the response on and SST to be 
inadequate.2The exact cortisol concentration depends on the cortisol assay being used.(ACTH
= adrenocorticotrophic hormone; HPA = hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal;  
IM = intramuscular)
20.43  Management of adrenal crisis
Correct volume depletion
 IV saline as required to normalise blood pressure and pulse
 In severe hyponatraemia (<125 mmol/L) avoid increases of plasma Na 
>10 mmol/L/day to prevent pontine demyelination
 Fludrocortisone is not required during the acute phase of treatment
Replace glucocorticoids
 IV hydrocortisone succinate 100 mg stat, and 100 mg 4 times daily for rst 
12–24 hrs
 Continue parenteral hydrocortisone (50–100 mg IM 4 times daily) until patient is 
well enough for reliable oral therapy
Correct other metabolic abnormalities
 Acute hypoglycaemia: IV 10% glucose
 Hyperkalaemia: should respond to volume replacement but occasionally 
requires specic therapy (see Box 19.17)
Identify and treat underlying cause
 Consider acute precipitant, such as infection
 Consider adrenal or pituitary pathology (see Box 20.40)
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)
20.44  Glucocorticoids in old age
 Adrenocortical insufciency: often insidious and may present with tiredness, 
drowsiness, delirium, falls, immobility and orthostatic hypotension.
 Glucocorticoid therapy: especially hazardous in older people, who are already 
relatively immunocompromised and susceptible to osteoporosis, diabetes, 
hypertension and other complications.
 ‘Physiological’ glucocorticoid replacement therapy: increased risk of 
adrenal crisis because adherence may be poor and there is a greater incidence 
of intercurrent illness. Patient and carer education, with regular reinforcement of 
the principles described in Box 20.39, is crucial.

[[p738]]
The adrenal glands  687
20
plasma renin. It is indicated for virtually every patient with primary adrenal 
insufciency but is not needed in secondary adrenal insufciency.
Androgen replacement
Androgen replacement with DHEAS (50 mg/day) is occasionally given 
to women with primary adrenal insufciency who have symptoms of 
reduced libido and fatigue, but the evidence in support of this is not 
robust and treatment may be associated with side-effects such as acne 
and hirsutism.
Incidental adrenal mass
Enlarged or hyperplastic adrenal glands are commonly found on CT or 
MRI scans of the abdomen that have been performed for other indica-
tions. Such lesions are known as adrenal ‘incidentalomas’. The preva-
lence increases with age and they are present in up to 10% of adults 
aged 70 years and older.
Sixty per cent of adrenal incidentalomas are non-functioning adrenal 
adenomas. The remainder includes functional tumours of the adrenal 
cortex (secreting cortisol, aldosterone or androgens), phaeochromocy-
tomas, primary and secondary carcinomas, hamartomas and other rare 
disorders, including granulomatous inltrations.
Clinical assessment and investigations
There are two key questions to be resolved: is the lesion secreting hor-
mones, and is it benign or malignant? These are best assessed by a 
dedicated adrenal multidisciplinary team (MDT).
Patients with an adrenal incidentaloma are usually asymptomatic. 
However, clinical signs and symptoms of excess glucocorticoids, min-
eralocorticoids, catecholamines and, in women, androgens should be 
sought, as discussed elsewhere in this chapter. Investigations should 
include a dexamethasone suppression test, urine or plasma meta-
nephrines and, in virilised women, measurement of serum testosterone, 
DHEAS and androstenedione. Patients with hypertension should be 
investigated for mineralocorticoid excess, as described below. In bilat-
eral masses consistent with adrenocortical lesions, 17-OH-progesterone 
should also be measured.
CT and MRI are equally effective in assessing the malignant potential 
of an adrenal mass, using the following parameters:
 Size. The larger the lesion, the greater the malignant potential. 
Around 90% of adrenocortical carcinomas are over 4 cm in diameter, 
but specicity is poor since only approximately 25% of such lesions 
are malignant.
 Conguration. Homogeneous and smooth lesions are more likely to 
be benign. The presence of metastatic lesions elsewhere increases 
the risk of malignancy, but as many as two-thirds of adrenal inciden-
talomas in patients with cancer are benign.
 Presence of lipid. Adenomas are usually lipid-rich, resulting in an 
attenuation of below 10 Hounseld units (HU) on an unenhanced 
CT, and in signal dropout on chemical shift MRI.
 Enhancement. Benign lesions demonstrate rapid washout of con-
trast, whereas malignant lesions tend to retain contrast.
Histology in a sample obtained by CT-guided biopsy is rarely indi-
cated, and is not useful in distinguishing an adrenal adenoma from an 
adrenocortical carcinoma. Biopsy is occasionally helpful in conrming 
adrenal metastases from other cancers, but should be avoided if either 
phaeochromocytoma or primary adrenal cancer is suspected in order 
to avoid precipitation of a hypertensive crisis or seeding of tumour cells, 
respectively. An endocrine opinion must be sought before any biopsy.
Management
In patients with radiologically benign, non-functioning lesions of less than 
4 cm in diameter, surgery is not usually indicated. Functional lesions and 
tumours of more than 4 cm in diameter with indeterminate or concerning 
features, should be considered for surgery, and many centres will not 
operate on tumours >4 cm if all other characteristics suggest benign dis-
ease. Optimal management of patients with low-grade cortisol secretion, 
as demonstrated by the dexamethasone suppression test, remains to 
be established.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Estimates of the prevalence of primary hyperaldosteronism vary accord-
ing to the screening tests employed, but it may occur in as many as 10% 
of people with hypertension. Indications to test for mineralocorticoid 
excess in hypertensive patients include hypokalaemia (including hypo-
kalaemia induced by thiazide diuretics), poor control of blood pressure 
with conventional therapy, a family history of early-onset hypertension, or 
presentation at a young age.
Causes of excessive activation of mineralocorticoid receptors are 
shown in Box 20.45. It is important to differentiate primary hyperaldos-
teronism, caused by an intrinsic abnormality of the adrenal glands result-
ing in aldosterone excess, from secondary hyperaldosteronism, which 
is usually a consequence of enhanced activity of renin in response to 
inadequate renal perfusion and hypotension. Most individuals with pri-
mary hyperaldosteronism have bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (idiopathic 
hyperaldosteronism), while only a minority have an aldosterone-pro-
ducing adenoma (APA; Conn syndrome). Glucocorticoid-suppressible 
hyperaldosteronism is a rare autosomal dominant condition in which 
aldosterone is secreted ‘ectopically’ from the adrenal zonae fasciculata/
reticularis in response to ACTH. Rarely, the mineralocorticoid receptor 
pathway in the distal nephron is activated, even though aldosterone con-
centrations are low.
Clinical features
Individuals with primary hyperaldosteronism are usually asymptomatic 
but may have features of sodium retention or potassium loss. Sodium 
retention may cause oedema, while hypokalaemia may cause muscle 
weakness (or even paralysis, especially in South-east Asian populations), 
polyuria (secondary to renal tubular damage, which produces nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus) and occasionally tetany (because of associated 
metabolic alkalosis and low ionised calcium). Blood pressure is elevated 
but accelerated phase hypertension is rare.
Investigations
Biochemical
Routine blood tests may show a hypokalaemic alkalosis. Sodium is usually 
at the upper end of the reference range in primary hyperaldosteronism, 
but is characteristically low in secondary hyperaldosteronism (because low 
20.45  Causes of mineralocorticoid excess
With renin high and aldosterone high (secondary hyperaldosteronism)
 Inadequate renal perfusion (diuretic therapy, cardiac failure, liver failure, 
nephrotic syndrome, renal artery stenosis)
 Renin-secreting renal tumour (very rare)
With renin low and aldosterone high (primary hyperaldosteronism)
 Adrenal adenoma secreting aldosterone (Conn syndrome)
 Idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
 Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism (rare)
With renin low and aldosterone low (non-aldosterone-dependent activation 
of mineralocorticoid pathway)
 Ectopic ACTH syndrome
 Liquorice misuse (inhibition of 11β-HSD2)
 Liddle syndrome
 11-deoxycorticosterone-secreting adrenal tumour
 Rare forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and 11β-HSD2 deciency
(11β-HSD2 = 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone)

[[p739]]
688  ENDOCRINOLOGY
plasma volume stimulates vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) release 
and high angiotensin II levels stimulate thirst). The key measurements are 
plasma renin and aldosterone (Box 20.45), and in many centres the aldos-
terone:renin ratio (ARR) is employed as a screening test for primary hyper-
aldosteronism in hypertensive patients. Almost all antihypertensive drugs 
interfere with this ratio (β-blockers inhibit while diuretics stimulate renin 
secretion). Thus, individuals with an elevated ARR require further testing 
after stopping many antihypertensive drugs for at least 4 weeks (although 
if the ratio is still high despite a patient taking ACE inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor-blocking drugs then this need not be done as these agents would 
normally cause a lowering of the ratio). If necessary, antihypertensive agents 
that have minimal effects on the renin–angiotensin system, such as calcium 
antagonists and α-blockers, may be substituted. Oral potassium supple-
mentation may also be required, as hypokalaemia itself suppresses renin 
activity. If, on repeat testing, plasma renin is low and aldosterone concen-
trations are elevated, then further investigation under specialist supervision 
may include saline or udrocortisone suppression tests.
Imaging and localisation
Imaging with CT or MRI will identify most APAs (Fig. 20.24A) but it is 
important to recognise the risk of false positives (non-functioning adre-
nal adenomas are common) and false negatives (imaging may have 
insufcient resolution to identify adenomas with a diameter of less than 
0.5 cm). If the imaging is inconclusive and there is an intention to proceed 
with surgery on the basis of strong biochemical evidence of an APA, then 
adrenal vein catheterisation with measurement of aldosterone (and cor-
tisol to conrm positioning of the catheters) is usually required. In some 
centres, this is performed even in the presence of a unilateral ‘adenoma’, 
to avoid inadvertent removal of an incidental non-functioning adenoma 
contralateral to a radiologically inapparent cause of aldosterone excess.
Management
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone and eplerenone) 
are valuable in treating both hypokalaemia and hypertension in all forms 
of mineralocorticoid excess. Up to 20% of males develop gynaecomastia 
on spironolactone. Amiloride (10–40 mg/day), which blocks the epithelial 
sodium channel regulated by aldosterone, is an alternative.
In patients with an APA, medical therapy is usually given for a few 
weeks to normalise whole-body electrolyte balance before unilateral 
adrenalectomy. Laparoscopic surgery cures the biochemical abnormality 
but, depending on the pre-operative duration, hypertension remains in as 
many as 70% of cases, probably because of irreversible damage to the 
systemic microcirculation.
Phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma
These are rare neuro-endocrine tumours that may secrete catecholamines 
(adrenaline/epinephrine, noradrenaline/norepinephrine). Approximately 80% 
of these tumours occur in the adrenal medulla (phaeochromocytomas), while 
20% arise elsewhere in the body in sympathetic ganglia (paragangliomas). 
Most are benign but approximately 15% show malignant features. Around 
40% are associated with inherited disorders, including neuro bromatosis, 
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome, MEN 2a and MEN 2b. Paragangliomas are 
particularly associated with mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase A, B, 
C and D genes. Other genetic causes include mutations in SDHA, SDHAF2, 
TMEN127 and MAX
Clinical features
These depend on the pattern of catecholamine secretion and are listed 
in Box 20.46
Some patients present with hypertension, although it has been esti-
mated that phaeochromocytoma accounts for less than 0.1% of cases 
of hypertension. The presentation may be with a complication of hyper-
tension, such as stroke, myocardial infarction, left ventricular failure, 
hypertensive retinopathy or accelerated phase hypertension. The appar-
ent paradox of postural hypotension between episodes is explained by 
‘pressure natriuresis’ during hypertensive episodes so that intravascu-
lar volume is reduced. There may also be features of the familial syn-
dromes associated with phaeochromocytoma. Paragangliomas are 
often non-functioning.
Investigations
Excessive secretion of catecholamines can be conrmed by measuring 
metabolites in plasma and/or urine (metanephrine and normetaneph-
rine). There is a high ‘false-positive’ rate, as misleading metanephrine 
concentrations may be seen in stressed patients (during acute illness, 
following vigorous exercise or severe pain) and following ingestion 
of some drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants. For this reason, a 
repeat sample should usually be requested if elevated levels are found, 
although, as a rule, the higher the concentration of metanephrines, the 
more likely the diagnosis of phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma. Serum 
chromo granin A is often elevated and may be a useful tumour marker in 
patients with non-secretory tumours and/or metastatic disease. Genetic 
testing should be considered in individuals with other features of a 
A
B
Fig. 20.24 Aldosterone-producing adenoma causing Conn syndrome.
intracellular lipid accumulation.
20.46 Clinical features of phaeochromocytoma
 Hypertension (usually paroxysmal; 
often postural drop of blood 
pressure)
 Paroxysms of:
Pallor (occasionally ushing)
Palpitations, sweating
Headache
Anxiety (angor animi)
 Abdominal pain, vomiting
 Constipation
 Weight loss
 Glucose intolerance

[[p740]]
The endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal tract  689
20
genetic syndrome, in those with a family history of phaeochromocytoma/
paraganglioma, and in those presenting under the age of 50 years.
Localisation
Phaeochromocytomas are usually identied by abdominal CT or MRI (Fig. 
20.25). Localisation of paragangliomas may be more difcult. Scintigraphy 
using meta-iodobenzyl guanidine (MIBG) can be useful, particularly if com-
bined with CT, for adrenal phaeochromocytoma but is often negative in 
paraganglioma. 18F-deoxyglucose PET or 68Ga-DOTANOC or DOTATATE-
PET CT are especially useful for detection of malignant disease and for 
conrming an imaging abnormality as a paraganglioma in an individual with 
underlying risk due to genetic mutation.
Management
In functioning tumours, medical therapy is required to prepare the patient 
for surgery, preferably for a minimum of 6 weeks, to allow restoration of 
normal plasma volume. The most useful drug in the face of very high cir-
culating catecholamines is the α-blocker phenoxybenzamine (10–20 mg 
orally 3–4 times daily) because it is a non-competitive antagonist, unlike 
prazosin or doxazosin. If α-blockade produces a marked tachycardia, then 
a β-blocker such as propranolol can be added. On no account should a 
β-blocker be given before an α-blocker, as this may cause a paradoxical 
rise in blood pressure due to unopposed α-mediated vasoconstriction.
During surgery, sodium nitroprusside and the short-acting α-antago-
nist phentolamine are useful in controlling hypertensive episodes, which 
may result from anaesthetic induction or tumour mobilisation. Post-
operative hypotension may occur and require volume expansion and, 
very occasionally, noradrenaline (norepinephrine) infusion, but is uncom-
mon if the patient has been prepared with phenoxybenzamine.
Metastatic tumours may behave in an aggressive or a very indolent 
fashion. Management options include debulking surgery, radionuclide 
therapy with 131I-MIBG or 177Lutetium DOTATATE, chemotherapy and 
(chemo)embolisation of hepatic metastases; some may respond to 
tyrosine kinase and angiogenesis inhibitors.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Pathophysiology and clinical features
Inherited defects in enzymes of the cortisol biosynthetic pathway (see 
Fig. 20.20) result in insufciency of hormones downstream of the block, 
with impaired negative feedback and increased ACTH secretion. ACTH 
then stimulates the production of steroids upstream of the enzyme block. 
This produces adrenal hyperplasia and a combination of clinical features 
that depend on the severity and site of the defect in biosynthesis. All of 
these enzyme abnormalities are inherited as autosomal recessive traits.
The most common enzyme defect is 21-hydroxylase deciency. This 
results in impaired synthesis of cortisol and aldosterone, and accumu-
lation of 17-OH-progesterone, which is then diverted to form adrenal 
androgens. In about one-third of cases, this defect is severe and pre-
sents in infancy with features of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
deciency (see Box 20.41) and androgen excess, such as ambiguous 
genitalia in girls. In the other two-thirds, mineralocorticoid secretion is 
adequate but there may be features of cortisol insufciency and/or ACTH 
and androgen excess, including precocious pseudo-puberty, which is 
distinguished from ‘true’ precocious puberty by low gonadotrophins. 
Sometimes the mildest enzyme defects are not apparent until adult life, 
when females may present with amenorrhoea and/or hirsutism. This is 
called ‘non-classical’ or ‘late-onset’ congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Defects of all the other enzymes in Figure 20.20 are rare. Both 
17-hydroxylase and 11β-hydroxylase deciency may produce hyper-
tension due to excess production of 11-deoxycorticosterone, which has 
mineralocorticoid activity.
Investigations
Circulating 17-OH-progesterone levels are raised in 21-hydroxylase de-
ciency but this may be demonstrated only after ACTH administration 
in late-onset cases. To avoid salt-wasting crises in infancy, 
17-OH-progesterone can be routinely measured in heelprick blood spot 
samples taken from all infants in the rst week of life. Assessment is 
otherwise as described earlier for adrenal insufciency.
In siblings of affected children, antenatal genetic diagnosis can be 
made by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. This allows preven-
tion of virilisation of affected female fetuses by administration of dexa-
methasone to the mother to suppress ACTH levels.
Management
The aim is to replace decient corticosteroids and to suppress ACTH-
driven adrenal androgen production. A careful balance is required 
between adequate suppression of adrenal androgen excess and exces-
sive glucocorticoid replacement resulting in features of Cushing’s syn-
drome. In children, growth velocity is an important measurement, since 
either under- or over-replacement with glucocorticoids suppresses 
growth. In adults, there is no uniformly agreed adrenal replacement regi-
men, and clinical features (menstrual cycle, hirsutism, weight gain, blood 
pressure) and biochemical proles (plasma renin, 17-OH-progesterone 
and testosterone levels) provide a guide.
Women with late-onset 21-hydroxylase deciency may not require 
corticosteroid replacement. If hirsutism is the main problem, anti-andro-
gen therapy may be just as effective.
The endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal 
tract
A series of hormones are secreted from cells distributed throughout the 
gastrointestinal tract and pancreas. Functional anatomy and physiology 
are described in Chapter 23 and 24. Diseases associated with abnormal-
ities of these hormones are listed in Box 20.47. Most are rare, with the 
exception of diabetes mellitus (Ch. 21).
Presenting problems in endocrine pancreas 
disease
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia most commonly occurs as a side-effect of treatment with 
insulin or sulphonylurea drugs in people with diabetes mellitus. In non-dia-
betic individuals, symptomatic hypoglycaemia is rare, but it is not uncom-
mon to detect venous blood glucose concentrations below 3.0 mmol/L 
Fig. 20.25 CT scan of abdomen showing large left adrenal 
phaeochromocytoma. The normal right adrenal (white arrow) contrasts with the 
large heterogeneous phaeochromocytoma arising from the left adrenal gland (black 
arrow).

[[p741]]
690  ENDOCRINOLOGY
(54 mg/dL) in asymptomatic patients. For this reason, and because the 
symptoms of hypoglycaemia are non-specic, a hypoglycaemic disorder 
should be diagnosed only if all three conditions of Whipple’s triad are met 
(Fig. 20.26). There is no specic blood glucose concentration at which spon-
taneous hypoglycaemia can be said to occur, although the lower the blood 
glucose concentration, the more likely it is to have pathological signicance. 
Investigations are unlikely to be needed unless glucose concentrations 
below 3.0 mmol/L are observed, many patients with true hypoglycaemia 
demonstrating  glucose levels below 2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL).
With the increasing use of bariatric surgery, and more specically 
gastric bypass surgery, more patients are presenting with post-prandial 
hypoglycaemia due to excess stimulated insulin secretion due to the 
rapid carbohydrate loads being delivered directly to the small intestine. 
Careful history-taking is needed to distinguish between post-prandial 
and spontaneous hypoglycaemia, and oral glucose tolerance or mixed 
meal testing may invoke observed hypoglycaemia in the former.
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of hypoglycaemia are described in the section 
on insulin-induced hypoglycaemia in Chapter 21. Individuals with 
chronic spontaneous hypoglycaemia often have attenuated autonomic 
responses and ‘hypoglycaemia unawareness’, and may present with 
a wide variety of features of neuroglycopenia, including odd behaviour 
and convulsions. The symptoms are usually episodic and relieved by 
consumption of carbohydrate. Symptoms occurring while fasting (such 
as before breakfast) or following exercise are much more likely to be 
representative of pathological hypoglycaemia than those that develop 
after food (post-prandial or ‘reactive’ symptoms). Hypoglycaemia should 
be considered in all comatose patients, even if there is an apparently 
obvious cause, such as hemiplegic stroke or alcohol intoxication.
Investigations
Does the patient have a hypoglycaemic disorder?
Patients who present acutely with delirium, coma, convulsions or stroke 
should be tested for hypoglycaemia at the bedside with a capillary blood 
sample and an automated meter. While this is sufcient to exclude hypo-
glycaemia, blood glucose meters are relatively inaccurate in the hypo-
glycaemic range and the diagnosis should always be conrmed by a 
laboratory-based glucose measurement. At the same time, a sample 
should be taken for later measurement of alcohol, insulin, C-peptide, 
cortisol and sulphonylurea levels, if hypoglycaemia is conrmed. Taking 
these samples during an acute presentation prevents subsequent 
unnecessary dynamic tests and is of medico-legal importance in cases 
where poisoning is suspected.
Patients who attend the outpatient clinic with episodic symptoms 
suggestive of hypoglycaemia present a more challenging problem. 
The main diagnostic test is the prolonged (72-hour) fast. If symptoms 
of hypoglycaemia develop during the fast, then blood samples should 
be taken to conrm hypoglycaemia and for later measurement of insulin 
and C-peptide. Hypoglycaemia is then corrected with oral or intravenous 
glucose and Whipple’s triad completed by conrmation of the resolution 
of symptoms. The absence of clinical and biochemical evidence of hypo-
glycaemia during a prolonged fast effectively excludes the diagnosis of a 
hypoglycaemic disorder.
What is the cause of the hypoglycaemia?
In the acute setting, the underlying diagnosis is often obvious. In non-
dia betic individuals, alcohol excess is the most common cause of hypo-
glycaemia in the UK, but other drugs – e.g. salicylates, quinine and 
pentamidine – may also be implicated. Hypoglycaemia is one of many 
metabolic derangements that occur in patients with hepatic failure, renal 
failure, adrenal insufciency, sepsis or malaria.
Hypoglycaemia in the absence of insulin, or any insulin-like factor, in the 
blood indicates impaired gluconeogenesis and/or availability of glucose from 
glycogen in the liver. Hypoglycaemia associated with high insulin and low 
C-peptide concentrations is indicative of administration of exogenous insulin, 
either factitiously or feloniously. Adults with high insulin and C-peptide con-
centrations during an episode of hypoglycaemia are most likely to have an 
insulinoma but sulphonylurea ingestion should also be considered (particu-
larly in individuals with access to such medication, such as health-care pro-
fessionals or family members of someone with type 2 diabetes). Suppressed 
plasma β-hydroxybutyrate helps conrm inappropriate insulin secretion dur-
ing fasting. Usually, insulinomas in the pancreas are small (<5 mm diameter) 
but can be identied by CT, MRI or ultrasound (endoscopic or laparoscopic). 
Imaging should include the liver since around 10% of insulinomas are malig-
nant and may metastasise to the liver. Rarely, large non-pancreatic tumours, 
such as sarcomas, may cause recurrent hypoglycaemia because of their 
ability to produce excess pro-insulin-like growth factor-2 (pro-IGF-2), which 
has considerable structural homology to insulin.
Management
Treatment of acute hypoglycaemia should be initiated as soon as labo-
ratory blood samples have been taken and should not be deferred until 
20.47  Classication of endocrine diseases of the pancreas and 
gastrointestinal tract
Primary
Secondary
Hormone excess
Insulinoma
Gastrinoma (Zollinger–
Ellison syndrome)
Carcinoid syndrome 
(secretion of 5-HT)
Glucagonoma
VIPoma
Somatostatinoma
Hypergastrinaemia of 
achlorhydria
Hyperinsulinaemia after 
bariatric surgery
Hormone deciency
Diabetes mellitus
Hormone resistance
Insulin resistance 
syndromes (e.g. type 
2 diabetes mellitus, 
lipodystrophy, Donohue 
syndrome)
Non-functioning 
tumours
Pancreatic carcinoma
Pancreatic neuro-
endocrine tumour
(5-HT = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin)
Whipple’s triad confirmed
Patient had symptoms of hypoglycaemia
Low blood glucose measured at the time of symptoms
Symptoms resolved on correction of hypoglycaemia
 Insulin
 C-peptide
 Insulin
 C-peptide
 Insulin
 C-peptide
Alcohol
Drugs
Critical illnesses
Hypopituitarism (rare)
Primary adrenocortical
failure (rare in adults)
Non-islet cell tumour
(e.g. sarcoma)
Inborn errors of
metabolism
Exogenous
insulin
Insulinoma
Sulphonylureas
Other drugs
Hyperinsulinism
of infancy
Fig. 20.26 Differential diagnosis of spontaneous hypoglycaemia. Measurement 
of insulin and C-peptide concentrations during an episode is helpful in determining 
the underlying cause.

[[p742]]
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland  691
20
formal laboratory conrmation has been obtained. Intravenous dextrose 
(5% or 10%) is effective in the short term in the obtunded patient and 
should be followed on recovery with oral unrened carbohydrate (starch). 
Continuous dextrose infusion may be necessary, especially in sulphon-
ylurea poisoning. Intramuscular glucagon (1 mg) stimulates hepatic 
glucose release but is ineffective in patients with depleted glycogen 
reserves, such as in alcohol excess or liver disease.
Chronic recurrent hypoglycaemia in insulin-secreting tumours can 
be treated by regular consumption of oral carbohydrate combined with 
agents that inhibit insulin secretion (diazoxide or somatostatin ana-
logues). Insulinomas are resected when benign, providing the individual 
is t enough to undergo surgery. Metastatic malignant insulinomas may 
be incurable and are managed along the same lines as other metastatic 
neuro-endocrine tumours (see below).
Gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours
Neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs) are a heterogeneous group derived 
from neuro-endocrine cells in many organs, including the gastrointest-
inal tract, lung, adrenals (phaeochromocytoma) and thyroid (medullary 
carcinoma). Most NETs occur sporadically but a proportion are asso-
ciated with genetic cancer syndromes, such as MEN 1, 2a and 2b, 
and neurobromatosis type 1. NETs may secrete hormones into the 
circulation.
Gastroenteropancreatic NETs arise in organs that are derived embryo-
logically from the gastrointestinal tract. Most commonly, they occur in the 
small bowel but they can also arise elsewhere in the bowel, pancreas, 
thymus and bronchi. The term ‘carcinoid’ is often used when referring 
to non-pancreatic gastroenteropancreatic NETs because, when initially 
described, they were thought to behave in an indolent fashion compared 
with conventional cancers. It is now recognised that there is a wide spec-
trum of malignant potential for all NETs; some are more usually benign 
(most insulinomas and appendiceal carcinoid tumours), while others 
have an aggressive clinical course with widespread metastases (small-
cell carcinoma of the lung). The majority of gastroenteropancreatic NETs 
behave in an intermediate manner, with relatively slow growth but a pro-
pensity to invade and metastasise to remote organs, especially the liver.
Clinical features
Patients with gastroenteropancreatic NETs often have a history of 
abdominal pain over many years prior to diagnosis and usually present 
with local mass effects, such as small-bowel obstruction, appendicitis 
and pain from hepatic metastases. Thymic and bronchial carcinoids 
occasionally present with ectopic ACTH syndrome. Pancreatic NETs can 
also cause hormone excess (Box 20.48) but most are non-functional. 
The classic ‘carcinoid syndrome’ (Box 20.49) occurs when vasoactive 
hormones reach the systemic circulation. In the case of gastrointestinal 
carcinoids, this invariably means that the tumour has metastasised to 
the liver or there are peritoneal deposits, which allow secreted hormones 
to gain access to the systemic circulation; hormones secreted by the 
primary tumour into the portal vein are metabolised and inactivated in 
the liver. The features of Zollinger–Ellison syndrome are described on 
page 816.
Investigations
A combination of imaging with ultrasound, CT, MRI and/or radio-labelled 
somatostatin analogue (Fig. 20.27) will usually identify the primary tumour 
and allow staging, which is crucial for determining prognosis. Biopsy of 
the primary tumour or a metastatic deposit is required to conrm the his-
tological type. NETs demonstrate immunohistochemical staining for the 
proteins chromogranin A and synaptophysin, and the histological grade 
provides important prognostic information: the higher the Ki67 prolifera-
tion index, the worse the prognosis.
Carcinoid syndrome is conrmed by measuring elevated concentra-
tions of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), a metabolite of serotonin, 
in a 24-hour urine collection. False positives can occur, particularly if the 
individual has been eating serotonin-rich foods, such as avocado and 
pine apple. Plasma chromogranin A can be measured in a fasting blood 
sample, along with the hormones listed in Box 20.48. All of these can be 
useful as tumour markers.
Management
Treatment of solitary tumours is by surgical resection. If metastatic or 
multifocal primary disease is present, then surgery is usually not indi-
cated, unless there is a complication such as gastrointestinal obstruc-
tion, but debulking surgery may be performed. Diazoxide can reduce 
insulin secretion in insulinomas, and high doses of proton pump inhib-
itors suppress acid production in gastrinomas. Somatostatin ana-
logues are effective in reducing the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome 
and of excess glucagon and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) pro-
duction. The slow-growing nature of NETs means that conventional 
cancer therapies, such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy, have lim-
ited efcacy, but use of somatostatin analogues is associated with 
improved progression-free survival, and 177Lutetium DOTATATE is 
indicated for many patients with further disease progression. Other 
treatments, such as interferon, targeted radionuclide therapy with 
131I-MIBG and resection/embolisation/ablation of hepatic metastases, 
may have a role in the palliation of symptoms but debate exists as to 
whether this prolongs life. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib and 
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor everolimus have 
shown signicant improvements in progression-free survival in patients 
with advanced and progressive pancreatic and lung NETS that are not 
poorly differentiated.
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland
Diseases of the hypothalamus and pituitary have an annual incidence of 
approximately 3:100 000 and a prevalence of 30–70 per 100 000. The 
pituitary plays a central role in several major endocrine axes, so that 
investigation and treatment invariably involve several other endocrine 
glands.
20.48  Pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours
Tumour
Hormone
Effects
Gastrinoma
Gastrin
Peptic ulcer and 
steatorrhoea 
(Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome)
Insulinoma
Insulin
Recurrent 
hypoglycaemia (see 
above)
VIPoma
Vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP)
Watery diarrhoea and 
hypokalaemia
Glucagonoma
Glucagon
Diabetes mellitus, 
necrolytic migratory 
erythema
Somatostatinoma
Somatostatin
Diabetes mellitus and 
steatorrhoea
20.49  Clinical features of the carcinoid syndrome
 Episodic ushing, wheezing and diarrhoea
 Facial telangiectasia
 Cardiac involvement (tricuspid regurgitation, pulmonary stenosis, right 
ventricular endocardial plaques) leading to heart failure

[[p743]]
692  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Functional anatomy, physiology and investigations
The anatomical relationships of the pituitary are shown in Figure 20.28
and its numerous functions are shown in Figure 20.2. The pituitary gland 
is enclosed in the sella turcica and bridged over by a fold of dura mater 
called the diaphragma sellae, with the sphenoidal air sinuses below and 
the optic chiasm above. The cavernous sinuses are lateral to the pituitary 
fossa and contain the 3rd, 4th and 6th cranial nerves and the internal 
carotid arteries. The gland is composed of two lobes, anterior and post-
erior, and is connected to the hypothalamus by the infundibular stalk, 
which has portal vessels carrying blood from the median eminence of the 
hypothalamus to the anterior lobe and nerve bres to the posterior lobe.
Diseases of the hypothalamus and pituitary are classied in Box 20.50. 
By far the most common disorder is an adenoma of the anterior pituitary 
gland.
Investigation of patients with pituitary disease
Although pituitary disease presents with diverse clinical manifesta-
tions (see below), the approach to investigation is similar in all cases 
(Box20.51).
The approach to testing for hormone deciency is outlined in 
Box 20.51. Details are given in the sections on individual glands elsewhere 
in this chapter. Tests for hormone excess vary according to the hormone 
in question. For example, prolactin is not secreted in pulsatile fashion, 
although it rises with signicant psychological stress. Assuming that the 
patient was not distressed by venepuncture, a random measurement of 
B
C
A
Fig. 20.27 Octreotide scintigraphy in a metastatic neuro-endocrine tumour.
scans are superimposed, it shows that the areas of increased uptake are in hepatic metastases and in the tissue mass, which may be lymph nodes or a primary tumour.
SS
PP
H
TV
OC
AP
A
B
OC
IC
TV
PS
CS
AP
Fig. 20.28 Anatomical relationships of the normal pituitary gland and 
hypothalamus. See also Fig. 20.2.  
 = anterior 
pituitary; CS = cavernous sinus; H = hypothalamus; IC = internal carotid artery; 
OC = optic chiasm; PP = posterior pituitary; PS = pituitary stalk; SS = sphenoid 
sinus; TV = third ventricle)
20.50  Classication of diseases of the pituitary and 
hypothalamus
Primary
Secondary
Non-functioning 
tumours
Pituitary adenoma
Craniopharyngioma
Metastatic tumours
Hormone excess
Anterior pituitary
Hypothalamus and 
posterior pituitary
Prolactinoma
Acromegaly
Cushing’s disease
Rare TSH-, LH- and 
FSH-secreting 
adenomas
Syndrome of 
inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH, p. 624)
Disconnection 
hyperprolactinaemia
Hormone deciency
Anterior pituitary
Hypothalamus and 
posterior pituitary
Hypopituitarism
Cranial diabetes 
insipidus
GnRH deciency
(Kallmann syndrome)
Hormone resistance
Growth hormone 
resistance (Laron 
dwarsm)
Nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus
(FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone;  
LH = luteinising hormone; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)

[[p744]]
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland  693
20
serum prolactin is sufcient to diagnose hyperprolactinaemia. In contrast, 
growth hormone is secreted in a pulsatile fashion. A high random level 
does not conrm acromegaly; the diagnosis is conrmed only by failure 
of growth hormone to be suppressed during an oral glucose tolerance 
test, and a high serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). Similarly, in 
suspected ACTH-dependent Cushing’s disease, random measurement 
of plasma cortisol is unreliable and the diagnosis is usually made by a 
dexamethasone suppression, and other tests.
The most common local complication of a large pituitary tumour is 
compression of the optic pathway. The resulting visual eld defect can 
be documented using a Goldmann perimetry chart or with an automated 
perimetry method (see p. 1222).
MRI reveals ‘abnormalities’ of the pituitary gland in as many as 10% 
of ‘healthy’ middle-aged people. It should therefore be performed only 
if there is a clear biochemical abnormality or if a patient presents with 
clinical features of pituitary tumour (see below). A pituitary tumour may be 
classied as either a macroadenoma (>10 mm diameter) or a microade-
noma (<10 mm diameter).
Surgical biopsy is usually only performed as part of a therapeutic 
operation. Conventional histology identies tumours as chromophobe 
(usually non-functioning), acidophil (typically prolactin- or growth hor-
mone-secreting) or basophil (typically ACTH-secreting); immunohisto-
chemistry may conrm their secretory capacity but is poorly predictive of 
growth potential of the tumour.
Presenting problems in hypothalamic and pituitary 
disease
The clinical features of pituitary disease are shown in Figure 20.29. 
Younger women with pituitary disease most commonly present with 
secondary amenorrhoea or galactorrhoea (in hyperprolactinaemia). 
Post-menopausal women and men of any age are less likely to report 
symptoms of hypogonadism and so are more likely to present late with 
larger tumours causing visual eld defects. The presentation and man-
agement of pituitary and hypothalamic disease may be affected by old 
age (Box 20.52). Nowadays, many patients present with the incidental 
nding of a pituitary tumour on a CT or MRI scan.
20.51  How to investigate patients with suspected pituitary 
hypothalamic disease
Identify pituitary hormone deciency
ACTH deciency
 Short ACTH stimulation test (see Box 20.42)
 Insulin tolerance test (see Box 20.55): only if there is uncertainty in 
interpretation of short ACTH stimulation test (e.g. acute presentation)
LH/FSH deciency
 In the male, measure random serum testosterone, LH and FSH
 In the pre-menopausal female, ask if the menses are regular
 In the post-menopausal female, measure random serum LH and FSH (FSH 
normally >30 IU/L and LH >20 IU/L)
TSH deciency
 Measure random serum T4
 Note that TSH is often detectable in secondary hypothyroidism
Growth hormone deciency
Only investigate if growth hormone replacement therapy is being contemplated
 Measure immediately after exercise
 Consider other stimulatory tests (see Box 20.54)
Cranial diabetes insipidus
Only investigate if patient complains of polyuria/polydipsia, which may be masked 
by ACTH or TSH deciency
 Exclude other causes of polyuria with blood glucose, potassium and calcium 
measurements
 Water deprivation test (see Box 20.60) or 5% saline infusion test
Identify hormone excess
 Measure random serum prolactin
 Investigate for acromegaly (glucose tolerance test) or Cushing’s syndrome if 
there are clinical features
Establish the anatomy and diagnosis
 Consider visual eld testing
 Image the pituitary and hypothalamus by MRI or CT
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; CT = computed tomography; FSH = follicle-
stimulating hormone; LH = luteinising hormone; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging;  
TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)
Macroadenoma (arrows)
> 10 mm diameter
Local complications
 Headache
 Visual field defect
 Disconnection hyperprolactinaemia
 Diplopia (cavernous sinus involvement)
 Acute infarction/expansion (pituitary apoplexy)
Hormone excess
Hyperprolactinaemia
 Galactorrhoea
 Amenorrhoea
 Hypogonadism
Acromegaly
 Headache
 Sweating
 Change in shoe
  and ring size
Cushing’s disease
 Weight gain
 Bruising
 Myopathy
 Hypertension
 Striae
 Depression
Hypopituitarism
Growth hormone
 Lethargy
Gonadotrophins
 Lethargy
 Loss of libido
 Hair loss
 Amenorrhoea
ACTH
 Lethargy
 Postural hypotension
 Pallor
 Hair loss
TSH
  Lethargy
Vasopressin
(usually post-surgical)
 Thirst and polyuria
Microadenoma (arrow)
< 10 mm diameter
Fig. 20.29 Common symptoms and signs to consider in a patient with suspected pituitary disease. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; TSH = thyroid-stimulating 
hormone)

[[p745]]
694  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism describes combined deciency of any of the anterior 
pituitary hormones. The clinical presentation is variable and depends on 
the underlying lesion and the pattern of resulting hormone deciency. 
The most common cause is a pituitary macroadenoma but other causes 
are listed in Box 20.53
Clinical assessment
The presentation is highly variable. For example, following radiotherapy 
to the pituitary region, there is a characteristic sequence of loss of pitu-
itary hormone secretion. Growth hormone secretion is often the earli-
est to be lost. In adults, this produces lethargy, muscle weakness and 
increased fat mass but these features are not obvious in isolation. Next, 
gonadotrophin (LH and FSH) secretion becomes impaired with loss of 
libido in the male and oligomenorrhoea or amenorrhoea in the female. 
Later, in the male there may be gynaecomastia and decreased frequency 
of shaving. In both sexes, axillary and pubic hair eventually become 
sparse or even absent and the skin becomes characteristically ner and 
wrinkled. Chronic anaemia may also occur. The next hormone to be lost 
is usually ACTH, resulting in symptoms of cortisol insufciency (includ-
ing postural hypotension and a dilutional hyponatraemia). In contrast to 
primary adrenal insufciency, angiotensin II-dependent zona glomerulosa 
function is not lost and hence aldosterone secretion maintains normal 
plasma potassium. In contrast to the pigmentation of Addison’s disease 
due to high levels of circulating ACTH acting on the skin melanocytes, 
a striking degree of pallor is usually present. Finally, TSH secretion is 
lost with consequent secondary hypothyroidism. This contributes further 
to apathy and cold intolerance. In contrast to primary hypothyroidism, 
frank myxoedema is rare, presumably because the thyroid retains some 
autonomous function. The onset of all of the above symptoms is noto-
riously insidious. However, patients sometimes present acutely unwell 
with glucocorticoid deciency. This may be precipitated by a mild infec-
tion or injury, or may occur secondary to pituitary apoplexy.
Other features of pituitary disease may be present (Fig. 20.29).
Investigations
The strategy for investigation of pituitary disease is described in Box 
20.51. In acutely unwell patients, the priority is to diagnose and treat corti-
sol deciency. Other tests can be undertaken later. Specic dynamic tests 
for diagnosing hormone deciency are described in Box 20.42 and Box 
20.54. More specialised biochemical tests, such as insulin tolerance tests 
(Box 20.55), GnRH and TRH tests, are rarely required. All patients with bio-
chemical evidence of pituitary hormone deciency should have an MRI or 
CT scan to identify pituitary or hypothalamic tumours. If a tumour is not 
identied, then further investigations are indicated to exclude infectious or 
inltrative causes.
20.52  The pituitary and hypothalamus in old age
 Late presentation: often with large tumours causing visual disturbance, 
because early symptoms such as amenorrhoea and sexual dysfunction do not 
occur or are not recognised.
 Coincidentally discovered pituitary tumours: may not require surgical 
intervention if the visual apparatus is not involved, because of slow growth.
 Hyperprolactinaemia: less impact in post-menopausal women who are already 
‘physiologically’ hypogonadal. Macroprolactinomas, however, require treatment 
because of their potential to cause mass effects.
20.53  Causes of anterior pituitary hormone deciency
Structural
 Primary pituitary tumour
 Adenoma*
 Carcinoma (exceptionally rare)
 Craniopharyngioma*
 Meningioma*
 Secondary tumour (including 
leukaemia and lymphoma)
 Chordoma
 Germinoma (pinealoma)
 Arachnoid cyst
 Rathke’s cleft cyst
 Haemorrhage (apoplexy)
Inammatory/inltrative
 Sarcoidosis
 Infections, e.g. pituitary abscess, 
tuberculosis, syphilis, encephalitis
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis
 Haemochromatosis
 Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Congenital deciencies
 GnRH (Kallmann syndrome)*
 GHRH*
 TRH
 CRH
Functional*
 Chronic systemic illness
 Anorexia nervosa
 Excessive exercise
Other
 Head injury*
 (Para)sellar surgery*
 (Para)sellar radiotherapy*
 Post-partum necrosis (Sheehan 
syndrome)
 Opiate analgesia
*The most common causes of pituitary hormone deciency.
(CRH = corticotrophin-releasing hormone; GHRH = growth hormone-releasing hormone;  
GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; TRH = thyrotrophin-releasing hormone)
20.54  Tests of growth hormone secretion
GH levels are commonly undetectable, so a choice from the range of ‘stimulation’ 
tests is required:
 Insulin-induced hypoglycaemia
 Arginine (may be combined with GHRH)
 Glucagon
 Clonidine (in children)
(GH = growth hormone; GHRH = growth hormone-releasing hormone)
20.55  How and when to do an insulin tolerance test
Use
 Assessment of the HPA axis
 Assessment of GH deciency
 Indicated when there is doubt after the other tests in Box 20.51
 Usually performed in specialist centres, especially in children
 IV glucose and hydrocortisone must be available for resuscitation
Contraindications
 Ischaemic heart disease
 Epilepsy
 Severe hypopituitarism (0800 hrs plasma cortisol <180 nmol/L (6.6 µg/dL))
Dose
 0.15 U/kg body weight soluble insulin IV
Aim
 To produce adequate hypoglycaemia (tachycardia and sweating with blood 
glucose <2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL))
Blood samples
 0, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120 mins for blood glucose, plasma cortisol and growth 
hormone
Results
 Normal subjects: GH >6.7 µg/L (20 mIU/L)*
 Normal subjects: cortisol >500 nmol/L (approximately 20.2 µg/dL)*
*The precise cut-off gure for a satisfactory cortisol and GH response depends on 
the assay used and so varies between centres.  
(GH = growth hormone; HPA = hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal; IV = intravenous)

[[p746]]
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland  695
20
Management
Treatment of acutely ill patients is similar to that described for adren-
ocortical insufciency, except that sodium depletion is less likely to be 
present as there is still mineralocorticoid activity due to the renin–angio-
tensin–aldosterone system (which is lost in primary adrenal insufciency). 
Chronic hormone replacement therapies are described below. Once the 
cause of hypopituitarism is established, specic treatment – of a pituitary 
macroadenoma, for example (see below) – may be required.
Cortisol replacement
Hydrocortisone should be given if there is ACTH deciency. Suitable 
doses are described in the section on adrenal disease on page 679. 
Mineralocorticoid replacement is not required.
Thyroid hormone replacement
Levothyroxine 50–150 µg once daily should be given as described on 
page 657. Unlike in primary hypothyroidism, measuring TSH is not help-
ful in adjusting the replacement dose because patients with hypopituitar-
ism often secrete glycoproteins that are measured in the TSH assays but 
are not bioactive. The aim is to maintain serum T4 in the upper part of the 
reference range. It is dangerous to give thyroid replacement in adrenal 
insufciency without rst giving glucocorticoid therapy, since this may 
precipitate adrenal crisis.
Sex hormone replacement
This is indicated if there is gonadotrophin deciency in women under the 
age of 50 and in men to restore normal sexual function and to prevent 
osteoporosis.
Growth hormone replacement
Growth hormone (GH) is administered by daily subcutaneous self-injec-
tion to children and adolescents with GH deciency and, until recently, 
was discontinued once the epiphyses had fused. However, although 
hypopituitary adults receiving ‘full’ replacement with hydrocortisone, lev-
othyroxine and sex steroids are usually much improved by these ther-
apies, some individuals remain lethargic and unwell compared with a 
healthy population. Some of these patients feel better, and have objec-
tive improvements in their fat:muscle mass ratio and other metabolic 
parameters, if they are also given GH replacement. Treatment with GH 
may also help young adults to achieve a higher peak bone mineral den-
sity. The principal side-effect is sodium retention, manifest as peripheral 
oedema or carpal tunnel syndrome if given in excess. For this reason, 
GH replacement should be started at a low dose, with monitoring of the 
response by measurement of serum IGF-1.
Pituitary tumour
Pituitary tumours produce a variety of mass effects, depending on their 
size and location, but also present as incidental ndings on CT or MRI, or 
with hypopituitarism, as described above. A wide variety of disorders can 
present as mass lesions in or around the pituitary gland (see Box 20.53). 
Most intrasellar tumours are pituitary macroadenomas (most commonly 
non-functioning adenomas; see Fig. 20.29), whereas suprasellar masses 
may be craniopharyngiomas (see Fig. 20.32). The most common cause 
of a parasellar mass is a meningioma.
Clinical assessment
Clinical features are shown in Figure 20.29. A common but non-spe-
cic presentation is with headache, which may be the consequence of 
stretching of the diaphragma sellae. Although the classical abnormal-
ities associated with compression of the optic chiasm are bitemporal 
hemianopia (see Fig. 20.30) or upper quadrantanopia, any type of visual 
eld defect can result from suprasellar extension of a tumour because 
it may compress the optic nerve (unilateral loss of acuity or scotoma) 
or the optic tract (homonymous hemianopia). Optic atrophy may be 
apparent on ophthalmoscopy. Lateral extension of a sellar mass into the 
cavernous sinus with subsequent compression of the 3rd, 4th or 6th 
cranial nerve may cause diplopia and strabismus, but in anterior pituitary 
tumours this is an unusual presentation.
Occasionally, pituitary tumours infarct or there is bleeding into cystic 
lesions. This is termed ‘pituitary apoplexy’ and may result in sudden 
expansion with local compression symptoms and acute-onset hypo-
pituitarism. Non-haemorrhagic infarction can also occur in a normal 
pituitary gland; predisposing factors include catastrophic obstetric 
haemorrhage (Sheehan syndrome), diabetes mellitus and raised intrac-
ranial pressure.
Investigations
Patients suspected of having a pituitary tumour should undergo MRI. 
If MRI is not available CT may be used but is inferior for assessment of 
pituitary disease and will not show the majority of small pituitary tumours. 
For patients intolerant of MRI this investigation may be performed under 
general anaesthaesia if needed, or imaging performed by CT. While 
some lesions have distinctive neuro-radiological features, the denitive 
diagnosis is made on histology after surgery. All patients with (para)sellar 
space-occupying lesions should have pituitary function assessed as 
described in Box 20.51
Management
Modalities of treatment of common pituitary and hypothalamic tumours 
are shown in Box 20.56. Associated hypopituitarism should be treated 
as described above.
Urgent treatment is required if there is evidence of pressure on visual 
pathways. The chances of recovery of a visual eld defect are proportional 
to the duration of symptoms, with full recovery unlikely if the defect has 
been present for longer than 4 months. In the presence of a sellar mass 
lesion, it is crucial that serum prolactin is measured before emergency 
surgery is performed. If the prolactin is over 5000 mIU/L (236 ng/mL),
 then the lesion is likely to be a macroprolactinoma and should respond to 
a dopamine agonist with shrinkage of the lesion, making surgery unnec-
essary (see Fig. 20.30).
A
B
T
C
T
C
Fig. 20.30 Shrinkage of a macroprolactinoma following treatment with 
a dopamine agonist.
treatment with a dopamine agonist. The macroadenoma, which was a prolactinoma, 
has decreased in size substantially and is no longer compressing the optic chiasm.

[[p747]]
696  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Most operations on the pituitary are performed using the trans-
sphenoidal approach via the nostrils, while transfrontal surgery via a 
craniotomy is occasionally needed for suprasellar tumours. It is uncom-
mon to be able to resect lateral extensions into the cavernous sinuses, 
although with modern endoscopic techniques this is more feasible. All 
operations on the pituitary carry a risk of damaging normal endocrine 
function; this risk increases with the size of the primary lesion.
Pituitary function (see Box 20.51) should be retested 4–6 weeks 
following surgery, primarily to detect the development of any new hor-
mone decits. Rarely, the surgical treatment of a sellar lesion can result in 
recovery of hormone secretion that was decient pre-operatively.
Following surgery, usually after 3–6 months, imaging should be 
repeated. If there is a signicant residual mass and the histology con-
rms an anterior pituitary tumour, external radiotherapy may be given 
to reduce the risk of recurrence but the risk:benet ratio needs careful 
individualised discussion. Radiotherapy is not useful in patients requiring 
urgent therapy because it takes many months or years to be effective 
and there is a risk of acute swelling of the mass. Fractionated radio-
therapy carries a life-long risk of hypopituitarism (50%–100% in the rst 
10years) and annual pituitary function tests are obligatory. There is also 
concern that radiotherapy might impair cognitive function, cause vas-
cular changes and even induce primary brain tumours, but these side-
effects have not been quantied reliably and are likely to be rare. 
Stereotactic radiosurgery allows specic targeting of residual disease in 
a more focused fashion.
Non-functioning tumours should be followed up by repeated imag-
ing at intervals that depend on the size of the lesion and on whether or 
not radiotherapy has been administered. For smaller lesions that are not 
causing mass effects, therapeutic surgery may not be indicated and the 
lesion may simply be monitored by serial neuroimaging without a clear-
cut diagnosis having been established.
Hyperprolactinaemia/galactorrhoea
Hyperprolactinaemia is a common abnormality that usually presents 
with hypogonadism and/or galactorrhoea (lactation in the absence 
of breastfeeding). Since prolactin stimulates milk secretion but not 
breast development, galactorrhoea rarely occurs in men and only 
does so if gynaecomastia has been induced by hypogonadism. The 
differential diagnosis of hyperprolactinaemia is shown in Box 20.57. 
Many drugs, especially dopamine antagonists, elevate prolactin con-
centrations. Pituitary tumours can cause hyperprolactinaemia by directly 
secreting prolactin (prolactinomas, see below), or by compressing 
the infundibular stalk and thus interrupting the tonic inhibitory effect 
of hypothalamic dopamine on prolactin secretion (‘disconnection’ 
hyperprolactinaemia).
Prolactin usually circulates as a free (monomeric) hormone in plasma 
but, in some individuals, prolactin becomes bound to an IgG antibody. 
This complex is known as macroprolactin and such patients have mac-
roprolactinaemia (not to be confused with macroprolactinoma, a prol-
actin-secreting pituitary tumour of more than 1 cm in diameter). Since 
macroprolactin cannot cross blood-vessel walls to reach prolactin 
receptors in target tissues, it is of no pathological signicance. Some 
20.56 Therapeutic modalities for functioning and non-functioning hypothalamic and pituitary tumours
Surgery
Radiotherapy
Medical
Comment
Non-functioning pituitary 
macroadenoma
1st line
2nd line
–
Prolactinoma
2nd line
2nd line
1st line
Dopamine agonists
Dopamine agonists usually cause 
macroadenomas to shrink
Acromegaly
1st line
2nd line
2nd line
Somatostatin analogues
Dopamine agonists
GH receptor antagonists
Medical therapy does not reliably cause 
macroadenomas to shrink
Radiotherapy and medical therapy are used in 
combination for inoperable tumours
Cushing s disease
1st line
2nd line
2nd line
Steroidogenesis inhibitors
Pasireotide
Radiotherapy may take many years to reduce 
ACTH excess and medical therapies may be 
used as a bridge. Bilateral adrenalectomy may 
also be considered if the pituitary tumour is not 
completely resectable
Craniopharyngioma
1st line
2nd line
–
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; GH = growth hormone)
20.57  Causes of hyperprolactinaemia
Physiological
 Stress (e.g. post-seizure)
 Pregnancy
 Lactation
 Nipple stimulation
 Sleep
 Coitus
 Exercise
 Baby crying
Drug-induced
Dopamine antagonists
 Antipsychotics (phenothiazines and 
butyrophenones)
 Antidepressants
 Antiemetics (e.g. metoclopramide, 
domperidone)
Dopamine-depleting drugs
 Reserpine
 Methyldopa
Oestrogens
 Oral contraceptive pill
Pathological
Common
 Disconnection hyperprolactinaemia 
(e.g. non-functioning pituitary 
macroadenoma)
 Prolactinoma (usually 
microadenoma)
 Primary hypothyroidism
 Polycystic ovary syndrome
Uncommon
 Pituitary tumour secreting prolactin 
and growth hormone
 Hypothalamic disease
 Renal failure
Rare
 Chest wall reex (e.g. post herpes zoster)

[[p748]]
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland  697
20
commercial prolactin assays do not distinguish prolactin from macro-
prolactin and so macroprolactinaemia is a cause of spurious hyper-
prolactinaemia. Identication of macroprolactin requires gel ltration 
chromatography or polyethylene glycol precipitation techniques, and one 
of these tests should be performed in all patients with hyperprolactinae-
mia if the prolactin assay is known to cross-react.
Clinical assessment
In women, in addition to galactorrhoea, hypogonadism associated with 
hyperprolactinaemia causes secondary amenorrhoea and anovulation 
with infertility. Important points in the history include drug use, recent 
pregnancy and menstrual history. The quantity of milk produced is var-
iable and it may be observed only by manual expression. In men there 
is decreased libido, reduced shaving frequency and lethargy. Unilateral 
galactorrhoea may be confused with nipple discharge, and breast exam-
ination to exclude malignancy or brocystic disease is important. Further 
assessment should address the features in Figure 20.29
Investigations
Pregnancy should rst be excluded before further investigations are per-
formed in women of child-bearing potential. The upper limit of normal 
for many assays of serum prolactin is approximately 500 mIU/L (24 ng/
mL). In non-pregnant and non-lactating patients, monomeric prolac-
tin concentrations of 500–1000 mIU/L (24–47 ng/mL) are likely to be 
induced by stress or drugs, and a repeat measurement is indicated. 
Levels between 1000 and 5000 mIU/L (47–236 ng/mL) are likely to be 
due to drugs, a microprolactinoma or ‘disconnection’ hyperprolactinae-
mia. Levels above 5000 mIU/L (236 ng/mL) are highly suggestive of a 
macroprolactinoma.
Patients with prolactin excess should have tests of gonadal func-
tion (p. 667), and T4 and TSH should be measured to exclude primary 
hypothyroidism causing TRH-induced prolactin excess. Unless the pro-
lactin falls after withdrawal of relevant drug therapy, a serum prolactin 
consistently above the reference range is an indication for MRI or CT 
scan of the hypothalamus and pituitary. Patients with a macroadenoma 
also need tests for hypopituitarism (see Box 20.51).
Management
If possible, the underlying cause should be corrected (e.g. cessation 
of offending drugs and giving levothyroxine replacement in primary 
hypothyroidism). If dopamine antagonists are the cause, then dopa-
mine agonist therapy is contraindicated; if gonadal dysfunction is the 
primary concern, sex steroid replacement therapy may be indicated. 
Troublesome physiological galactorrhoea can also be treated with 
dopamine agonists (see Box 20.58). Management of prolactinomas is 
described below.
Prolactinoma
Most prolactinomas in pre-menopausal women are microadenomas 
because the symptoms of prolactin excess usually result in early pres-
entation. Prolactin-secreting cells of the anterior pituitary share a com-
mon lineage with GH-secreting cells, so occasionally prolactinomas can 
secrete excess GH and cause acromegaly. In prolactinomas there is a 
relationship between prolactin concentration and tumour size: the higher 
the level, the bigger the tumour. Some macroprolactinomas can elevate 
prolactin concentrations above 100 000 mIU/L (4700 ng/mL). The inves-
tigation of prolactinomas is the same as for other pituitary tumours (see 
above).
Management
As shown in Box 20.56, several therapeutic modalities can be employed 
in the management of prolactinomas.
Medical
Dopamine agonist drugs are rst-line therapy for the majority of patients 
(Box 20.58). They usually reduce serum prolactin concentrations and 
cause signicant tumour shrinkage after several months of therapy (Fig. 
20.30), but visual eld defects, if present, may improve within days of 
rst administration. It is possible to withdraw dopamine agonist therapy 
without recurrence of hyperprolactinaemia after a few years of treatment 
in some patients with a microadenoma. Also, after the menopause, sup-
pression of prolactin is required in microadenomas only if galactorrhoea 
is troublesome, since hypogonadism is then physiological and tumour 
growth unlikely. In patients with macroadenomas, drugs can be withdrawn 
only after curative surgery or radiotherapy and under close supervision.
Ergot-derived dopamine agonists (bromocriptine and cabergoline) 
can bind to 5-HT2B receptors in the heart and elsewhere and have been 
associated with brotic reactions, particularly tricuspid valve regurgita-
tion, when used in high doses in patients with Parkinson’s disease. At 
the relatively low doses used in prolactinomas most data suggest that 
systematic screening for cardiac brosis is unnecessary, but if dopamine 
agonist therapy is prolonged, periodic screening by echocardiography 
or use of non-ergot agents (quinagolide) may be indicated. Dopamine 
agonists can affect mood and behaviour, including depression, psycho-
sis and risk-taking behaviour (e.g. gambling), and patients should be 
warned about these potential side-effects.
Surgery and radiotherapy
Surgical decompression is usually necessary only when a macropro-
lactinoma has failed to shrink sufciently with dopamine agonist therapy, 
and this may be because the tumour has a signicant cystic component. 
Surgery may also be performed in patients who are intolerant of dopamine 
agonists. Microadenomas can be removed selectively by trans-sphenoidal 
surgery with a cure rate of about 80%, but recurrence is possible; the cure 
rate for surgery in macroadenomas is substantially lower.
External irradiation may be required for some macroadenomas to 
prevent regrowth if dopamine agonists are stopped.
20.58  Dopamine agonist therapy: drugs used to treat 
prolactinomas
Drug
Oral dose*
Advantages
Disadvantages
Bromocriptine
2.5–15 mg/day
2–3 times daily
Available for 
parenteral use
Short half-
life; useful 
in treating 
infertility
Proven long-
term efcacy
Ergotamine-like 
side-effects 
(nausea, 
headache, 
postural 
hypotension, 
constipation)
Frequent dosing 
so poor adherence
Rare reports of 
brotic reactions 
in various tissues
Cabergoline
250–1000  
µg/week
2 doses/week
Long-acting, so 
missed doses 
less important
Reported to 
have fewer 
ergotamine-
like side-
effects
Limited data 
on safety in 
pregnancy
Associated 
with cardiac 
valvular brosis 
in Parkinson’s 
disease
Quinagolide
50–150 µg/day
Once daily
A non-ergot 
with few 
side-effects 
in patients 
intolerant of 
the above
Limited data 
on safety in 
pregnancy
*Tolerance develops for the side-effects. All of these agents, especially bromocriptine, must be 
introduced at low dose and increased slowly. If several doses of bromocriptine are missed, the 
process must start again.

[[p749]]
698  ENDOCRINOLOGY
Pregnancy
Hyperprolactinaemia often presents with infertility, so dopamine agonist 
therapy may be followed by pregnancy. Patients with microadenomas 
should be advised to withdraw dopamine agonist therapy as soon as 
pregnancy is conrmed. In contrast, macroprolactinomas may enlarge 
rapidly under oestrogen stimulation and these patients should continue 
dopamine agonist therapy and need measurement of prolactin levels and 
visual elds during pregnancy. All patients should be advised to report 
headache or visual disturbance promptly.
Acromegaly
Acromegaly is caused by growth hormone (GH) secretion from a pituitary 
tumour, usually a macroadenoma, and carries an approximate twofold 
excess mortality when untreated.
Clinical features
If GH hypersecretion occurs before puberty, then the presentation is with 
gigantism. More commonly, GH excess occurs in adult life and presents 
with acromegaly. If hypersecretion starts in adolescence and persists into 
adult life, then the two conditions may be combined. The clinical features 
are shown in Figure 20.31. The most common complaints are headache 
and sweating. Additional features include those of any pituitary tumour 
(see Fig. 20.29).
Investigations
The clinical diagnosis must be conrmed by measuring GH levels 
during an oral glucose tolerance test and measuring serum IGF-1. 
In normal subjects, plasma GH suppresses to below 0.5 µg/L (approx-
imately 2 mIU/L). In acromegaly, GH does not suppress and in about 
30% of patients there is a paradoxical rise; IGF-1 is also elevated. 
The rest of pituitary function should be investigated as described in 
Box20.51. Prolactin concentrations are elevated in about 30% of 
patients due to co-secretion of prolactin from the tumour. Additional 
tests in acromegaly may include screening for colonic neoplasms with 
colonoscopy.
Management
The main aims are to improve symptoms and to normalise serum GH 
and IGF-1 to reduce morbidity and mortality. Treatment is summarised 
in Box 20.56
Surgical
Trans-sphenoidal surgery is usually the rst line of treatment and may 
result in cure of GH excess, especially in patients with microadenomas. 
More often, surgery serves to debulk the tumour and further second-line 
therapy is required, according to post-operative imaging and glucose 
tolerance test results.
Medical
If acromegaly persists after surgery, medical therapy is usually 
employed to lower GH levels to below 1.0 µg/L (approximately 
3 mIU/L) and to normalise IGF-1 concentrations. Medical therapy may 
be discontinued after several years in patients who have received 
radiotherapy once the latter has been effective. Somatostatin ana-
logues (such as octreotide, lanreotide or pasireotide) can be admin-
istered as slow-release injections every few weeks. Somatostatin 
Skull growth – prominent
supraorbital ridges with
large frontal sinuses
Prognathism
(growth of lower jaw)
Enlargement of lips,
nose and tongue
Headache
Hypertension
Increased sweating
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiovascular disease
(2–3 ) 
(2–3 ) 
Enlargement
of liver
Thickened skin
IGT (25%)/type 2
diabetes (10%)
Colonic cancer
Enlargement of hands
Arthropathy
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Myopathy
Enlargement of feet
Increased heel pad thickness
Fig. 20.31 Clinical features of acromegaly. (IGT = impaired glucose tolerance)

[[p750]]
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland  699
20
analogues can also be used as primary therapy for acromegaly either 
as an alternative or in advance of surgery, given evidence that they 
can induce modest tumour shrinkage in some patients. Dopamine 
agonists are less effective at lowering GH but may sometimes be 
helpful, especially with associated prolactin excess. Pegvisomant is 
a peptide GH receptor antagonist administered by daily self-injection 
and may be indicated in some patients whose GH and IGF-1 concen-
trations fail to suppress sufficiently following somatostatin analogue 
therapy.
Radiotherapy
External radiotherapy is increasingly employed as third-line treatment if 
acromegaly persists after surgery, to stop tumour growth and lower GH 
levels. However, GH levels fall slowly (over many years) and there is a risk 
of hypopituitarism.
Craniopharyngioma
Craniopharyngiomas are benign tumours that develop in cell rests of 
Rathke’s pouch, and may be located within the sella turcica, or com-
monly in the suprasellar space. They are often cystic, with a solid com-
ponent that may or may not be calcied (Fig. 20.32). In young people, 
they are diagnosed more commonly than pituitary adenomas. They may 
present with pressure effects on adjacent structures, hypopituitarism 
and/or cranial diabetes insipidus. Other clinical features directly related to 
hypothalamic damage may also occur. These include hyperphagia and 
obesity, loss of the sensation of thirst and disturbance of temperature 
regulation, and these features can be signicant clinical challenges to 
manage.
Craniopharyngiomas can be treated by the trans-sphenoidal route 
but surgery may also involve a craniotomy, with a relatively high risk 
of hypothalamic damage and other complications. If the tumour has 
a large cystic component, it may be safer to place in the cyst cav-
ity a drain that is attached to a subcutaneous access device, rather 
than attempt a resection. Whatever form it takes, surgery is unlikely 
to be curative and radiotherapy may often be given to reduce the risk 
of relapse. Unfortunately, craniopharyngiomas often recur, requiring 
repeated surgery. They often cause considerable morbidity, usually 
from hypothalamic obesity, water balance problems and/or visual 
failure.
Diabetes insipidus
This uncommon disorder is characterised by the persistent excretion of 
excessive quantities of dilute urine and by thirst. It is classied into two 
types:
 cranial diabetes insipidus, in which there is decient production of 
vasopressin by the hypothalamus
 nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, in which the renal tubules are 
 unresponsive to vasopressin.
The underlying causes are listed in Box 20.59
Clinical features
The most marked symptoms are polyuria (>3 L per 24 hours) and poly-
dipsia. The patient may pass 5–20 L or more of urine in 24 hours. This 
A
B
Fig. 20.32 Craniopharyngioma. 
presents in younger patients; it is often cystic and calcied, as shown in this MRI 
20.59  Causes of diabetes insipidus
Cranial
Structural hypothalamic or high stalk lesion
 See Box 20.53
Idiopathic
Genetic defect
 Dominant (AVP gene mutation)
 Recessive (DIDMOAD syndrome – association of diabetes insipidus with 
diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness)
Nephrogenic
Genetic defect
 V2 receptor mutation
 Aquaporin-2 mutation
 Cystinosis
Metabolic abnormality
 Hypokalaemia
 Hypercalcaemia
Drug therapy
 Lithium
 Demeclocycline
Poisoning
 Heavy metals
Chronic kidney disease
 Polycystic kidney disease
 Sickle-cell anaemia
 Inltrative disease

[[p751]]
700  ENDOCRINOLOGY
is of low specic gravity and osmolality. If the patient has an intact thirst 
mechanism, is conscious and has access to oral uids, then he or she 
can maintain adequate uid intake. However, in an unconscious patient 
or a patient with damage to the hypothalamic thirst centre, diabetes 
insipidus is potentially lethal. If there is associated cortisol deciency, 
then diabetes insipidus may not be manifest until glucocorticoid replace-
ment therapy is given. The most common differential diagnosis is primary 
polydipsia, caused by drinking excessive amounts of uid in the absence 
of a defect in vasopressin or thirst control.
Investigations
Diabetes insipidus can be conrmed if serum vasopressin is undetect-
able (although the assay for this is not widely available) or the urine is 
not maximally concentrated (i.e. <600 mOsmol/kg) in the presence of 
increased plasma osmolality (i.e. >300 mOsmol/kg). Sometimes, the 
diagnosis can be conrmed or refuted by random simultaneous samples 
of blood and urine, but more often a dynamic test is required. The water 
deprivation test described in Box 20.60 is widely used, but an alternative 
is to infuse hypertonic (5%) saline and measure vasopressin or better still 
co-peptin secretion in response to increasing plasma osmolality. Thirst 
can also be assessed during these tests on a visual analogue scale. 
Anterior pituitary function and suprasellar anatomy should be assessed 
in patients with cranial diabetes insipidus (see Box 20.51).
In primary polydipsia, the urine may be excessively dilute because 
of chronic diuresis, which ‘washes out’ the solute gradient across the 
loop of Henle, but plasma osmolality is low rather than high. DDAVP 
(see below) should not be administered to patients with primary 
polydipsia, since it will prevent excretion of water and there is a risk 
of severe water intoxication if the patient continues to drink uid to 
excess.
In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, appropriate further tests may 
include plasma electrolytes, calcium, ultrasound of the kidneys and 
urinalysis.
Management
Treatment of cranial diabetes insipidus is with des-amino-des-aspar-
tate-arginine vasopressin (desmopressin, DDAVP), an analogue of vas-
opressin that has a longer half-life. For chronic replacement therapy 
DDAVP may be administered intranasally and orally, although the latter 
formulation has variable bioavailability. In sick patients, DDAVP should be 
given by intramuscular injection. The dose of DDAVP should be adjusted 
on the basis of serum sodium concentrations and/or osmolality. The prin-
cipal hazard is excessive treatment, resulting in water intoxication and 
hyponatraemia. Conversely, inadequate treatment results in thirst and 
polyuria. The ideal dose prevents nocturia but allows a degree of polyuria 
from time to time before the next dose (e.g. DDAVP nasal dose 5 µg in 
the morning and 10 µg at night).
The polyuria in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is improved by thiazide 
diuretics (e.g. bendroumethiazide 5–10 mg/day), amiloride (5–10 mg/
day) and NSAIDs (e.g. indometacin 50 mg 3 times daily), although the 
last of these carries a risk of reducing glomerular ltration rate.
Disorders affecting multiple endocrine 
glands
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
Multiple endocrine neoplasias (MEN) are rare autosomal dominant syn-
dromes characterised by hyperplasia and formation of adenomas or 
malignant tumours in multiple glands. They fall into four groups, as shown 
in Box 20.61. Some other genetic diseases also have an increased risk 
of endocrine tumours; for example, phaeochromocytoma is associated 
with von Hippel–Lindau syndrome and neurobromatosis type 1.
The MEN syndromes should be considered in all patients with two 
or more endocrine tumours and in patients with solitary tumours who 
report other endocrine tumours in their family. Inactivating mutations in 
MEN1 (MENIN), a tumour suppressor gene on chromosome 11, cause 
MEN 1, whereas MEN 2a and 2b are caused by gain-of-function muta-
tions in the RET proto-oncogene on chromosome 10. These cause con-
stitutive activation of the membrane-associated tyrosine kinase RET, 
which controls the development of cells that migrate from the neural 
crest. In contrast, loss-of-function mutations of the RET kinase cause 
Hirschsprung’s disease. MEN 4 is extremely rare and is associated with 
loss-of-function mutations in the CDNK1B gene on chromosome 12; 
20.60  How and when to do a water deprivation test
Use
 To establish a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus and to differentiate cranial from 
nephrogenic causes
Protocol
 No coffee, tea or smoking on the test day
 Free uids until 0730 hrs on the morning of the test, but discourage patients 
from ‘stocking up’ with extra uid in anticipation of uid deprivation
 No uids from 0730 hrs
 Attend at 0830 hrs for measurement of body weight and plasma and urine 
osmolality
 Record body weight, urine volume, urine and plasma osmolality and thirst score 
on a visual analogue scale every 2 hrs for up to 8 hrs
 Stop the test if the patient loses 3% of body weight
 If plasma osmolality reaches >300 mOsmol/kg and urine osmolality 
<600 mOsmol/kg, then administer DDAVP (see text) 2 µg IM
Interpretation
 Diabetes insipidus is conrmed by a plasma osmolality >300 mOsmol/kg with a 
urine osmolality <600 mOsmol/kg
 Cranial diabetes insipidus is conrmed if urine osmolality rises by at least 50% 
after DDAVP
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is conrmed if DDAVP does not concentrate the 
urine
 Primary polydipsia is suggested by low plasma osmolality at the start of the test
20.61  Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes
MEN 1 (Wermer syndrome)
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
 Pituitary tumours
 Pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours (e.g. non-functioning, insulinoma, 
gastrinoma)
 Bronchial and thymic carcinoids
 Adrenal tumours
 Cutaneous lesions (e.g. lipomas, collagenomas, angiobromas)
MEN 2a (Sipple syndrome, and formerly known as MEN 2)
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
 Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
 Phaeochromocytoma
MEN 2b (formerly MEN 3)
 As for MEN 2a above (though medullary thyroid cancer occurs earlier, even 
within the rst year of life)
 Marfanoid habitus
 Skeletal abnormalities (e.g. craniosynostosis)
 Abnormal dental enamel
 Multiple mucosal neuromas
MEN 4
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
 Pituitary tumours
 Possible tumours in the adrenals, reproductive organs, kidneys
 Possible pancreatic, gastric, bronchial and cervical neuro-endocrine tumours

[[p752]]
Further information  701
20
this gene codes for the protein p27, which has putative tumour sup-
pressor activity. Predictive genetic testing can be performed on rela-
tives of individuals with MEN syndromes, after appropriate counselling.
Individuals who carry mutations associated with MEN should be 
entered into a surveillance programme. In MEN 1, this typically involves 
annual history, examination and measurements of serum calcium and 
prolactin, and MRI of the pituitary and pancreas every 2 years; some 
centres also perform regular CT or MRI scans of the chest. In individ-
uals with MEN 2a and 2b, annual history, examination and measure-
ment of serum calcium, calcitonin and urinary or plasma catecholamine 
metabolites should be performed. Because the penetrance of medullary 
carcinoma of the thyroid approaches 100% in individuals with a RET
mutation, prophylactic thyroidectomy should be performed in early child-
hood in most patients. The precise timing of surgery in childhood should 
be guided by the specic mutation in the RET gene.
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
Two distinct autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes are known: APS 
types 1 and 2.
The most common is APS type 2 (Schmidt syndrome), which typically 
presents in women between the ages of 20 and 60. It is usually dened 
as the occurrence in the same individual of two or more autoimmune 
endocrine disorders, some of which are listed in Box 20.62. The mode of 
inheritance is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance and there 
is a strong association with HLA-DR3 and CTLA-4.
Much less common is APS type 1, which is also termed autoimmune 
poly-endocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). This 
is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by loss-
of-function mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene AIRE, which is 
20.62  Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS)*
Type 1 (APECED)
 Addison’s disease
 Hypoparathyroidism
 Type 1 diabetes
 Primary hypothyroidism
 Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
 Nail dystrophy
 Dental enamel hypoplasia
Type 2 (Schmidt syndrome)
 Addison’s disease
 Primary hypothyroidism
 Graves’ disease
 Pernicious anaemia
 Primary hypogonadism
 Type 1 diabetes
 Vitiligo
 Coeliac disease
 Myasthenia gravis
*In both types of APS, the precise pattern of disease varies between affected individuals.
(APECED = autoimmune poly-endocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy)
responsible for the presentation of self-antigens to thymocytes in utero. 
This is essential for the deletion of thymocyte clones that react against 
self-antigens and hence for the development of immune tolerance. The 
most common clinical features are described in Box 20.62, although the 
pattern of presentation is variable and other autoimmune disorders are 
often observed.
Endocrine effects of cancer immunotherapy
Modern cancer treatment increasingly uses immunotherapy, includ-
ing immune check-point inhibitors. Whilst highly effective anti-cancer 
agents, these may cause endocrine dysfunction, most commonly hypo-
pituitarism and hypothyroidism. It is crucial that these axes are monitored 
during therapy and that there is a high index of suspicion for potential 
secondary hypoadrenalism in patients presenting with fatigue and tired-
ness, especially in those on the anti-CTLA-4 antibody ipilumumab, and a 
low threshold for glucocorticoid replacement.
Late effects of childhood cancer therapy
The therapies used to treat cancers in children and adolescents, includ-
ing radiotherapy and chemotherapy, may cause long-term endocrine 
dysfunction. These complications are discussed in detail in Chapter 33).
Opioid-induced endocrine dysfunction
Opioids may cause secondary hypoadrenalism and hypogonadism. With 
the increasingly widespread use of these analgesics more patients will 
present with vague features of lethargy that may represent secondary 
adrenal insufciency, which needs to be investigated and treated as 
described on p. 685.
Further information
Websites
british-thyroid-association.org British Thyroid Association: provider of guidelines, 
e.g. treatment of hypothyroidism and the investigation and management of 
thyroid cancer.
btf-thyroid.org British Thyroid Foundation: a resource for patient leaets and 
support for patients with thyroid disorders.
endocrinology.org British Society for Endocrinology: useful online education 
resources and links to patient support group.
endo-society.org American Endocrine Society: provider of clinical practice 
guidelines.
pituitary.org.uk Pituitary Foundation: a resource for patient and general 
practitioner leaets and further information.
thyroid.org American Thyroid Association: provider of clinical practice  
guidelines.

[[p753]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p754]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 20.1. A 28-year-old man presents to his general practitioner with 
recent onset of weight loss, heat intolerance and palpitations. On 
examination a small goitre with a 2 cm discrete nodule is noted. 
TFTs show TSH < 0.01 mU/L (RR 0.2–4.5 mIU/L), and free T4
25 pmol/L (RR 9–21 pmol/L. TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) is 
1.1 IU/L (RR 0 –1.6 IU/L). Prior to attendance at the endocrine 
clinic, a thyroid ultrasound is performed which conrms a benign-
looking 2 cm nodule in the context of a multinodular goitre. What 
would be the most appropriate next step?
 A. 
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the nodule
 B. 
Hemi-thyroidectomy
 C. 
Carbimazole
 D. 
Scintigraphy
 E. 
Radioiodine (400 MBq)
Answer: D.
The patient has thyrotoxicosis with an equivocal TRAb, no discrimina-
tory clinical features of Graves’ disease and evidence of nodular thyroid 
disease. In this context, it is useful to perform scintigraphy to determine 
whether this is a ‘hot’ nodule (i.e. autonomously producing thyroid hor-
mone). This has important implications as ‘hot’ nodules are almost never 
malignant and treatment with radioiodine has a high likelihood of restor-
ing euthyroidism (as opposed to Graves’ disease where the likeliest out-
come is permanent hypothyroidism).
20.2.  A 42-year-old male presented to his family doctor with a 
6-month history of weight gain, fatigue and muscle weakness. 
The doctor noticed that he had centripetal obesity and 
abdominal striae and referred him to your endocrine clinic. The 
patient has no history of recent or current use of oral or inhaled 
steroids. You carry out some tests and nd the following results:
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST): serum 
cortisol measured after 48 hours is 125 nmol/L (a normal response 
is a serum cortisol of < 50 nmol/L [1.8 μg/dL])
Late night (2300 hours) salivary cortisol: 18.4 nmol/L on 
the rst occasion and 16.8 nmol/L on repeat testing (local RR < 
3.6 nmol/L)
Plasma adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) at 0900 hours: 
undetectable (RR 1.5–13.9 pmol/L)
What would be the next most appropriate next investigation to 
request in this patient?
 A. 
Computerised tomography (CT) of the adrenal glands
 B. 
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation test
 C. 
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST)
 D. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the pituitary gland
 E. 
Measurement of 24-hour urine free cortisol production
Answer: A.
The clinical features suggest Cushing’s syndrome, which is conrmed 
by the failure of cortisol suppression in the LDDST and the (repeated) 
high late-night cortisol level. The absence of detectable ACTH indicates 
an adrenal cause, with pituitary ACTH secretion being suppressed by 
high levels of cortisol. The most likely causes at this stage are a corti-
sol-secreting adrenal tumour (adenoma or more rarely carcinoma), so the 
most appropriate test is a CT scan of the adrenal glands.
There is no indication to carry out either a CRH stimulation test or an 
HDDST, as these tests are used to help to distinguish between pitui-
tary-dependent Cushing’s syndrome and Cushing’s syndrome caused 
by ectopic ACTH secretion. Similarly, there is no indication for an MRI 
of the pituitary gland as the undetectable ACTH indicates an adrenal 
cause. 24-hour urine free cortisol production would be expected to be 
decreased, but this test is not necessary, as the diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome has already been conrmed.
20.3. 
A 45-year-old man is incidentally found to have an elevated 
plasma calcium (2.7 mmol/l) on two separate occasions. Which of the 
following would make a diagnosis of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcae-
mia (FHH) more likely?
 A. 
Normal plasma calcium recorded 5 years previously
 B. 
PTH concentration within the reference range
 C. 
Previous history of nephrolithiasis
 D. 
Family history of hypercalcaemia in a rst-degree relative
 E. 
Previous history of osteoporosis
Answer: D.
FHH is an autosomal dominant condition caused by mutations in the 
calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene. It is typically associated with 
relatively modest hypercalcaemia and an absence of the end-organ 
damage associated with primary hyperparathyroidism. Previously nor-
mal calcium levels would be more consistent with the onset of primary 
hyperparathyroidism. PTH concentration in the upper half of the refer-
ence range is commonly encountered in primary hyperparathyroidism 
and does not help discriminate between this condition and FHH.

[[p755]]
Diabetes mellitus
21
JR Petrie
JG Boyle
Clinical examination of people with diabetes 704
Functional anatomy and physiology 707
Investigations 710
Establishing the diagnosis of diabetes 713
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes 713
Presenting problems in diabetes 719
Hypoglycaemia 719
Diabetic ketoacidosis 721
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state 723
Hypoglycaemia 725
Management of diabetes 727
Education, diet and lifestyle 730
Glucose-lowering agents 733
Insulin therapy 738
Transplantation 743
Management of diabetes in special situations 744
Complications of diabetes 747
Life expectancy/mortality 747
Infections and diabetes 748
Diabetic eye disease 749
Diabetic kidney disease 749
Diabetic neuropathy 750
Diabetic foot disease 751
Skin and rheumatological complications of diabetes 753

[[p756]]
704    DIABETES MELLITUS
Clinical examination of people with diabetes
Blood pressure
Skin
Bullae
Granuloma annulare
Vitiligo
Axillae
Neck
Carotid pulse
Bruits
Thyroid enlargement
Eyes (see opposite)
Visual acuity
Cataract/lens opacity
Fundoscopy
Insulin injection sites
(see opposite)
Hands
(see opposite)
Feet (see opposite)
Inspection
Peripheral pulses
Sensation
Abdomen
Hepatomegaly
(fatty infiltration of liver)
Legs
Muscle-wasting
Sensory abnormality
Hair loss
Tendon reflexes
Exudative maculopathy
Necrobiosis lipoidica
Charcot neuroarthropathy
Neuropathic foot ulcer
Head
Xanthelasma
Cranial nerve palsy/eye
movements/ptosis
Observation
 Weight loss in insulin deficiency
 Obesity in type 2 diabetes
 Mucosal candidiasis
 Dehydration – dry mouth,
↓tissue turgor
 Air hunger – Kussmaul breathing
   in ketoacidosis
2
3
1
11
10
9
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
5
7
8
9
10
11
6
4
8
Acanthosis nigricans
in insulin resistance
‘Prayer sign’
Insets (Acanthosis nigricans) From Lim E (ed.). Medicine and surgery: an integrated textbook. Edinburgh: Elsevier Ltd; 2007. (Exudative maculopathy) Courtesy of Dr A.W. Patrick 
and Dr I.W. Campbell.

[[p757]]
Clinical examination of people with diabetes    705
Visual acuity1
 Check distance vision using Snellen chart at 6 m
 Check near vision using standard reading chart
Lens opacication
 Look for a normal red reex using the 
ophthalmoscope held 30 cm from the eye
Fundal examination
 Use digital retinal photography (where available)2
 Where not available (or in an emergency), 
dilate pupils with mydriatic drops (unless 
contraindicated) and examine using direct 
ophthalmoscopy in a darkened room
 Note features of diabetic retinopathy (p. 1230), 
including photocoagulation scars from previous 
laser treatment
Background retinopathy. Courtesy of Dr A.W. 
Patrick and Dr I.W. Campbell
Proliferative retinopathy. Courtesy of Dr A.W. 
Patrick and Dr I.W. Campbell
*
Several abnormalities are more common in 
diabetes than in the general population:
 Limited joint mobility (‘cheiroarthropathy’) 
causes painless stiffness. The inability to 
extend (to 180°) the metacarpophalangeal or 
interphalangeal joints of at least one nger 
bilaterally can be demonstrated in the ‘prayer 
sign’ (see Box 1)
 Dupuytren's contracture (p. 1061) causes 
nodules or thickening of the skin and knuckle 
pads
 Carpal tunnel syndrome (p. 1193) presents 
with wrist pain radiating into the hand
 Trigger nger (exor tenosynovitis) may be 
present
 Muscle-wasting/sensory changes may be 
present in peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy 
(more common in the lower limbs) 
*
Main areas used
 Anterior abdominal wall
 Upper thighs
 Upper outer arms
Inspection
 Bruising
 Subcutaneous fat deposition (lipohypertrophy)
 Erythema, infection (rare)
Lipohypertrophy of the upper arm.
1Note that visual acuity can alter reversibly with acute 
hyperglycaemia due to osmotic changes affecting the 
lens. Most patients with retinopathy do not have altered 
visual acuity, except after a vitreous haemorrhage or 
in some cases of maculopathy. 2The number of elds 
captured, the use of mydriatic drops (e.g. tropicamide) 
and how images are read depends on the setting and 
technology available
*Usually only examined if symptoms reported
*If applicable should be checked at all 
consultations
Focus on detecting abnormal sensation and circulation 
to determine appropriate level of care required and 
prevent future ulceration/amputation.
Inspection
 Ulcers or skin breaks (require urgent referral for 
podiatry assessment and treatment)
 Localised bacterial or fungal infection (may require 
antibiotic/antifungal treatment)
 Discoloration (dusky colour) of the skin indicating 
critical ischaemia (if conrmed requires urgent 
vascular assessment)
 Callus (hard skin) formation on weight-bearing 
areas, ingrowing toenails (these require routine 
referral for podiatry to prevent ulceration)
 Fungal infection may affect skin between toes, and 
nails (topical or systemic antifungal treatment may 
be appropriate)
 Clawing of the toes/loss of the plantar arch (may 
reect neuropathy)
 Severe deformity may reect Charcot 
neuroarthropathy (see p. 752)
Circulation
 Peripheral pulses – dorsalis pedis and posterior 
tibial (document at least annually). If neither is 
palpable, the foot is at ‘moderate’ risk of ulceration, 
even if sensation is normal
 Assess capillary rell in nail-beds if pulses absent
 Skin temperature is raised in Charcot 
neuroarthropathy
Sensation
 ‘Stocking’ distribution in typical peripheral 
sensorimotor neuropathy
 Test light touch with a 10 gram monolament on 
the dorsal surfaces of the toes and metatarsals. If 
absent in one or more of ve places, the risk of foot 
ulceration is increased 5–10-fold (‘moderate’), even 
if pulses are present (document at least annually)
 Testing of other sensation modalities (vibration, 
pain, proprioception) is not routine unless 
neuropathy is being fully evaluated
Reexes (not routinely performed)
 Ankle reexes are lost in severe sensorimotor 
neuropathy
People with diabetes who have: (i) normal pulses 
and sensation, (ii) good footcare (nail cutting, lack of 
callus) and (iii) well-tting footwear can be reassured 
and reviewed annually without regular podiatry.
Monolament. This is applied gently until it bends 
at each of ve points on both feet. Areas of callus 
should be avoided as sensation is reduced. 
Diabetes affects every system in the body. 
Clinical assessment is dominated by history 
and investigation rather than clinical examina-
tion. In routine clinical practice, the most impor-
tant aspects of clinical examination relate to 
complication screening:
 Blood pressure measurement
 Foot examination (for pulses and sensation) 
to determine risk of (or presence of) ulcera-
tion (p. 752)
 Insulin injection sites (if applicable): inspect to 
check they are not over-used as this leads to 
impaired or unpredictable insulin absorption 
(lipohypertrophy, see Box 8)
 Retinal screening (see Box 7): check this has 
been performed according to local guidelines
Other clinically useful information:
 Technology: clinical inspection of the arm 
and abdomen may reveal the use of a con-
tinuous glucose monitoring (CGM) device 
and/or insulin pump delivering a continuous 
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)
Other relevant clinical signs:
 Hands: there may be thickening of the skin and 
tendons (due to non-enzymatic glycation of colla-
gen from long-term hyperglycaemia, see Box 1)
 Skin (uncommon):
 Acanthosis nigricans (axilla and neck): 
associated with forms of diabetes involv-
ing severe insulin resistance (see Box 4)
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum: rash 
with scarred central yellow area (red margin 
when active) over the shins (see Box 10)
7
1
8
11

[[p758]]
706    DIABETES MELLITUS
Decile of fasting glucose
Percent with retinopathy
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
Fig. 21.1 Prevalence of retinopathy by decile of fasting glucose. There is a 
small inection point at 4 mmol/L, but a major inection at 8 mmol/L. Adapted from 
World Health Organization and International Diabetes Federation. Denition and 
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and intermediate hyperglycaemia: report of a WHO/
IDF consultation. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006. https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/43588
2045
World
9.6%
2030
9.2%
2019
8.3%
North America and Caribbean
13.0%
12.3%
11.1%
South and Central America
9.9%
9.5%
8.5%
Middle East and North Africa
13.9%
13.3%
12.2%
Africa
5.2%
5.1%
4.7%
South Asia
12.6%
12.2%
11.3%
Western Pacific
12.8%
12.4%
11.4%
Europe
7.8%
7.3%
6.3%
Fig. 21.2 Current and projected diabetes prevalence in adults by region (2019–2045). Adapted from International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas, 9th edn. 
Brussels; 2019. Available at https://www.diabetesatlas.org.
Diabetes mellitus is a clinical syndrome with many causes (see Box 21.6), 
which is characterised by the presence of hyperglycaemia (mellitus being 
Latin for ‘sweet’). Type 2 diabetes accounts for around 90% of cases, 
while type 1 diabetes accounts for most of the remainder. In the United 
States, more than 20% of adults over the age of 65 years have type 2 
diabetes, while in the UK people with diabetes occupy almost 20% of 
acute hospital beds.
All forms of diabetes are ultimately a consequence of absolute or 
relative insulin deciency. Although type 1 and type 2 diabetes share 
the clinical phenotype of hyperglycaemia and carry risks of similar 
complications, their aetiology and pathophysiology are very different. 
In type 1 diabetes, there is an absolute deciency of insulin because 
of an immune-mediated destruction of insulin-producing β cells in the 
pancreatic islets of Langerhans. In contrast, in type 2 diabetes, concen-
trations of circulating insulin are typically elevated, but there is a rela-
tive deciency of insulin because there is reduced sensitivity to insulin in 
peripheral tissues (due to obesity) and the β cells cannot make sufcient 
insulin to overcome this ‘insulin resistance’.
Diabetes carries a heavy personal burden for those affected as well as 
high nancial costs to health-care systems and society at large. In 2017, 
diabetes caused 4 million deaths globally, and health-care expenditure 
attributed to diabetes was estimated to be at least 727 billion US dollars, 
or 10% of total health-care expenditure. Acutely, high glucose results 
in marked symptoms of thirst, polydipsia and polyuria. If left untreated, 
it can lead to life-threatening metabolic decompensation requiring hos-
pitalisation, especially in type 1 diabetes. Long-term hyperglycaemia is 
responsible for diabetes-specic ‘microvascular’ complications, par-
ticularly affecting the eyes (retinopathy), kidneys (nephropathy) and feet 
(neuropathy). These occur at a younger age in type 1 diabetes due to its 
earlier average age of onset.
Although the onset of clinical diabetes is often experienced as sudden 
in individual cases, there may have been a pre-clinical phase of months or 
even years when abnormal glucose values were not identied. Scientically, 
there is no clear ‘cut off’ between normal and abnormal glucose levels, so 
international bodies have derived diagnostic criteria for diabetes (Box 21.2) 
based on blood glucose concentrations above which there is an apprecia-
ble risk of developing diabetic retinopathy, the most common microvascu-
lar complication (Fig. 21.1). Lower levels of hyperglycaemia (above normal) 
are classied as ‘pre-diabetes’ (Box 21.2).
The prevalence of diabetes is rising. Globally, it is estimated that 463 
million people had diabetes in 2019 (9.3% of the world adult population), 
approximately 90% with type 2 diabetes. This gure is expected to reach 
700 million by 2045. Prevalence is highest in the Middle East and low-
est in parts of Africa, varying around the world (Fig. 21.2) according to 

[[p759]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    707
ethnicity as well as environmental factors (obesity, diet, habitual physical 
activity, urbanisation and economic development). A pronounced rise in 
the prevalence of type 2 diabetes occurs in migrant populations from 
low-income to industrialised countries. In many high-income countries, 
type 2 diabetes is no longer rare in children and adolescents, particularly 
in people of Hispanic, non-Hispanic Black and South Asian ethnicity. In 
some of these countries, increased survival is a factor underlying rising 
prevalence.
Type 1 diabetes is also subject to geographical variation and is gen-
erally more prevalent in countries closer to the polar regions. Finland, 
for instance, has the highest rate of type 1 diagnosis per year at >60 
per 100 000 of the population, whereas in China, India and Venezuela 
the incidence is only 0.1 per 100 000. The incidence of type 1 diabetes 
is also increasing: between 1989 and 2013, 3.4 % more children were 
diagnosed worldwide each year. Type 1 diabetes is more common in 
people of European descent than in other ethnic groups and, for rea-
sons that are not understood, more people are diagnosed in the winter 
months.
Functional anatomy and physiology
As a supply (and uptake) of glucose is essential for the functioning of all 
organs and tissues, a host of metabolic and physiological processes are 
involved in precise regulation of its levels in blood.
Insulin
Insulin is synthesised in the β cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans 
as a pro-hormone (pro-insulin), consisting of A- and B-chains, linked by 
C-peptide (see Fig. 21.23). C-peptide is cleaved by β-cell peptidases to 
create insulin (the A- and B-chains are joined by two disulde bonds) and 
free C-peptide. In a healthy individual, around 10 days’ supply of insulin is 
stored (~200–250 units). There are around one thousand β cells (approxi-
mately 70% of the islet cell population) in each of around one million islets 
scattered diffusely throughout the pancreas. The islets also contain α and 
δ cells, which synthesise respectively glucagon and somatostatin; F cells 
(also known as PP cells) synthesise pancreatic polypeptide. The islets are 
highly metabolically active, but each individual has a total mass of less than 
1 g (see Fig. 21.3B). They are highly vascularised, to allow synthesised 
hormones to enter the portal circulation; despite making up only 1%–2% 
of total pancreatic mass, they receive 10%–15% of pancreatic blood ow.
Regulation of insulin secretion
The pancreatic β cell is designed to regulate blood glucose concentra-
tions tightly by coupling glucose and other nutrient stimuli with insulin 
secretion (Fig. 21.3). Entry of glucose into the pancreatic β cell is by facili-
tated diffusion down its concentration gradient through insulin-independ-
ent cell membrane glucose transporters (GLUT1 or GLUT2). Glucose is 
metabolised by glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. The rst step 
of the glycolytic pathway, the conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phos-
phate, is catalysed by the enzyme glucokinase (GK). The generation of 
glucose-6-phosphate is directly proportional to the concentration of glu-
cose, thus making GK a very effective physiological glucose sensor in 
the β cell. When glucose is metabolised, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
is generated, closing an ATP-sensitive potassium channel (KATP). This 
depolarises the cell membrane, triggering release of calcium, which in 
turn activates voltage-sensitive calcium channels resulting in secretion of 
Accessory ampulla
Ampulla
of Vater
Duodenum
Blood capillary
 cell
 cell
 cell
Arteriole
F cell
Venule
Glucose
GLUT
1
2
3
4
5
Glucose
Nucleus
HNF1α
HNF4α
HNF1β
Glucokinase
Glycolysis
Incretin-acting
drugs
Insulin
KIR6.2
SUR1
ATP
GLP-1
Ca2+
K+
Mitochondria
Sulphonylureas
A
B
C
Oxidative
phosphorylation
Fig. 21.3 Pancreatic structure and endocrine function. 
pancreas contains about 1 million islets, which are scattered throughout the exocrine 
parenchyma. Histology is shown in Figure 21.8
β
cells that produce insulin and is surrounded by a cortex of endocrine cells that produce 
other hormones, including glucagon (α cells), somatostatin (δ cells) and pancreatic 
β cell. (1) 
Glucose enters the cell via a glucose transporter (GLUT1 or GLUT2). (2) Glucose then 
enters glycolysis, and subsequent oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria results 
in a rise in intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP). (3) This ATP acts to close the KATP
channel (which consists of four KIR6.2 subunits and four SUR1 subunits). This leads to 
membrane depolarisation. (4) The rise in membrane potential results in calcium inux 
due to opening of a voltage-gated calcium channel. This rise in intracellular calcium 
causes insulin secretory vesicles to fuse with the cell membrane, leading to insulin 
secretion. (5) Other stimuli, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) or gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide (GIP), act on G-protein-coupled receptors to increase cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) and amplify the insulin secretion. Genetic defects in the β cell 
result in diabetes. The primary genes are glucokinase (the initial step in glycolysis) and 
HNF1α, HNF4α and HNF1β (nuclear transcription factors). Two groups of drugs act on 
the β cell to promote insulin secretion. Sulphonylureas act to close the KATP channel, 
causing membrane depolarisation, calcium inux and insulin secretion. Incretin-acting 
drugs either increase the concentration of endogenous GLP-1 and GIP (the dipeptidyl 
peptidase 4, or DPP-4, inhibitors) or act as directly on the GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1 
receptor agonists). Both of these drug groups act to augment insulin secretion, but only 
following an initial stimulus to insulin secretion through closure of β cell KATP channels 
by glucose (or sulphonylureas).

[[p760]]
708    DIABETES MELLITUS
1st phase
2nd phase
Basal
secretion
Insulin secretion
Glucose stimulus
0–5
mins
Time
B
The incretin effect
Time
After oral
glucose
After
intravenous
glucose
Insulin
A
Fig. 21.4 Insulin secretion in response to elevated glucose. 
effect describes the observation that insulin secretion is greater when glucose is 
given by mouth than when glucose is administered intravenously to achieve the same 
rise in blood glucose concentrations. The additional stimulus to insulin secretion 
is mediated by release of peptides from the gut and these actions are exploited in 
in response to an elevated blood glucose, followed by a sustained second phase.
insulin. Therefore, the amount of insulin released in response to this sim-
ple pathway at any given time is intrinsically linked to the blood glucose 
concentration at that moment.
Insulin release can be potentiated by other nutrients and peptides and 
by neuronal control via the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous 
system. Two peptides that potentiate insulin release from β cells following 
ingestion of food are glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and gastric inhib-
itory polypeptide (GIP), which are released from gastrointestinal L cells 
and K cells respectively when nutrients reach the duodenum and upper 
jejunum. Thus, for a given ambient concentration of glucose sensed by 
the β cell, more insulin is secreted when the glucose has been ingested 
orally (when gut peptides are released) than when glucose was admin-
istered intravenously. This is termed the ‘incretin effect’ (Fig. 21.4A) and 
GLP-1 and GIP are known as ‘incretin hormones’. The incretin effect is 
diminished in type 2 diabetes.
Insulin is secreted from β cells into the portal circulation (see Fig. 21.3) 
and classically this occurs in two phases (see Fig. 21.4B). The rapid rst 
phase represents release of pre-formed insulin from granules within the 
β cells, starting almost immediately following a rise in blood glucose and 
is completed within 15 minutes. The second phase is more prolonged 
(occurring over the following 2–3 hours) and is a consequence of de 
novo insulin synthesis.
Actions of insulin
Insulin is an anabolic hormone (i.e. it promotes the storage of nutri-
ents) and has pleiotropic effects on glucose, fat and protein metabolism 
(Box 21.1). It also stimulates cell proliferation and reduces apoptosis. The 
actions of insulin are mediated through the cell membrane insulin receptor. 
The receptor belongs to the tyrosine kinase superfamily and is coupled to 
an extremely complicated intracellular signalling network. A key action of 
insulin is to lower blood glucose and, in part, this is mediated by promoting 
the uptake of glucose into muscle and adipose tissue; at a cellular level, 
the binding of insulin to its receptor causes cell membrane glucose trans-
porter GLUT4 to translocate from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane, 
permitting the uptake of glucose into adipose and muscle cells (Fig. 21.5).
Glucagon
Alpha cells make up about 20% of the human islet cell population. 
Glucagon has opposite effects to insulin: for example, it acts on the liver 
to stimulate glycogenolysis, releasing stored glucose (‘hepatic glucose 
production’) and causing blood glucose levels to rise. Glucagon is criti-
cally important in the defence against hypoglycaemia. Its secretion by α
cells is inhibited locally by β-cell insulin secretion (i.e. a ‘paracrine’ effect) 
and also by somatostatin from δ cells. Glucagon secretion is also inhib-
ited by islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin), which is co-secreted from β
cells with insulin. Thus insulin and glucagon are tightly and reciprocally 
regulated, such that the ratio of insulin to glucagon in the portal vein is 
a major determinant of hepatic glucose production and other metabolic 
processes, including lipolysis and ketogenesis.
Blood glucose homeostasis
Blood glucose is precisely regulated and maintained within a narrow 
range (between 4.0 and 5.4 mmol/L (72–99 mg/dL)) when fasting. This 
is essential for ensuring a physiological continuous supply of glucose to 
Insulin
i
i
Glucose g
g
PIP2
PIP3
GLUT4
GLUT4
Akt
GSV
PI3K
AS160
AS160
IRS 1/2
Plasma membrane
P
P
IR
Fig. 21.5 Insulin receptor signalling. Insulin (i) binds to the insulin receptor (IR) 
triggering a complex signalling cascade including phosphorylation (P) of insulin 
receptor substrate (IRS) by tyrosine kinase. IRS associates with and activates 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). PI3K stimulates Akt, which phosphorylates and 
inactivates AS160. This leads ultimately to translocation of glucose transporter 4 
(GLUT4) from GLUT4 storage vesicles (GSVs) to the cell surface, allowing cells to take 
up interstitial glucose (g). Note that there are many other elements of insulin receptor 
signalling (not shown) that mediate the other aspects of insulin’s pleiotropic actions.
21.1  Metabolic actions of insulin
Increase
Decrease
Carbohydrate metabolism
Glucose transport (muscle, adipose tissue)
Glycogen synthesis
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
Lipid metabolism
Triglyceride synthesis
Fatty acid synthesis (liver)
Lipoprotein lipase activity (adipose tissue)
Lipolysis
Lipoprotein lipase (muscle)
Ketogenesis
Fatty acid oxidation (liver)
Protein metabolism
Amino acid transport
Protein synthesis
Protein degradation

[[p761]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    709
the central nervous system. The brain has little capacity to store energy 
in the form of glycogen or triglyceride, while the blood–brain barrier is 
largely impermeable to fatty acids. Therefore, the brain depends on the 
liver for a constant supply of glucose for oxidation and hence generation 
of ATP.
Glucose homeostasis is achieved through the coordinated actions 
of multiple organs, but mainly reects a balance between the entry of 
glucose into the circulation from the liver, supplemented by intestinal 
absorption of glucose after meals, and the uptake of glucose by periph-
eral tissues, particularly skeletal muscle and brain. After ingestion of a 
meal containing carbohydrate, a substantial rise in blood glucose levels 
is prevented by:
 suppression of hepatic glucose production (by gluconeogenesis and 
glycogenolysis)
 stimulation of hepatic glucose uptake (and its subsequent storage 
as glycogen, i.e. glycogen synthesis)
 stimulation of glucose uptake by peripheral tissues (muscle and 
adipose) (Fig. 21.6).
These effects are mediated primarily by a post-prandial rise in por-
tal vein insulin in response to increasing blood glucose, augmented by 
incretin hormones, together with a fall in portal glucagon concentrations. 
Depending on the size of the carbohydrate load, around one-quarter to 
one-third of ingested glucose is taken up in the liver.
When intestinal glucose absorption declines between meals, blood 
glucose levels are maintained by increased hepatic glucose output via 
both gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. This is a consequence of fall-
ing portal vein insulin concentrations and rising glucagon levels. The main 
substrates for gluconeogenesis are glycerol and amino acids, as shown 
in Figure 21.6. At times of substantially increased metabolic demand for 
energy, such as during exercise or other acute stress, hepatic glucose 
output can be further transiently increased by activation of the sympa-
thetic nervous system and release of hormones such as adrenaline (epi-
nephrine), noradrenaline (norepinephrine), cortisol and growth hormone, 
which antagonise the actions of insulin.
Fat metabolism
Adipocytes (and the liver) synthesise triglyceride from non-esteried 
(‘free’) fatty acids (FFAs) and glycerol. High circulating insulin levels after 
meals promote triglyceride accumulation and storage in adipose tis-
sue. In contrast, in the fasting state, low insulin levels permit lipolysis 
and the release into the circulation of FFAs, which can be oxidised by 
many tissues. Their partial oxidation in the liver provides substrate (glyc-
erol) and energy (in the form of ATP) to drive gluconeogenesis, but also 
ketones (acetoacetate, which can be reduced to 3-hydroxybutyrate or 
decarboxylated to acetone), which are generated in hepatocyte mito-
chondria. Ketones (also known as ketone bodies) are organic acids that 
can be oxidised and utilised as an alternative metabolic fuel for the brain 
when glucose is not available (e.g. during illness and prolonged fasting). 
Thus, when insulin levels are low (and glucagon and catecholamine lev-
els are high), increased lipolysis and delivery of FFAs to the liver results 
in the production of ketones (see Fig. 21.6). However, the rate at which 
Liver
Adipose tissue
Muscle
Gut
Gluconeogenesis
FFAs
Amino acids
Lactate
Pyruvate
Proteolysis
Glucose
GLUT4
GLUT4
Ketones
Oxidation
Glucose
Glycogen
Oxidation
FFAs
Triglycerides
Food
Glucose
Glycogen
Ketogenesis
Oxidation
Glycerol
FFAs
Glucose
Glycerol
+
Fig. 21.6 Major metabolic pathways of fuel metabolism and the actions of insulin. ⊕ indicates stimulation and ⊖ indicates suppression by insulin. In response to a 
rise in blood glucose, e.g. after a meal, insulin is released, suppressing gluconeogenesis and promoting glycogen synthesis and storage. Insulin promotes the peripheral uptake 
of glucose, particularly in skeletal muscle, and encourages storage (as muscle glycogen). It also promotes protein synthesis and lipogenesis, and suppresses lipolysis. The 
release of intermediate metabolites, including amino acids (glutamine, alanine), 3-carbon intermediates in oxidation (lactate, pyruvate) and free fatty acids (FFAs), is controlled by 
insulin. In the absence of insulin, e.g. during fasting, these processes are reversed and favour gluconeogenesis in liver from glycogen, glycerol, amino acids and other 3-carbon 
precursors.

[[p762]]
710    DIABETES MELLITUS
ketones can be utilised by peripheral tissues is ‘capped’: blood ketone 
concentrations therefore rise (hyperketonaemia) when the rate of pro-
duction by the liver exceeds their removal.
Investigations
Urine glucose
While a colorimetric test for glucose is included in all standard urine ‘dip-
sticks’, it is no longer used as a screening procedure and is rarely of clin-
ical value. If apparent glycosuria is detected, it will always require further 
assessment by blood testing (see below), e.g. there can be cross-reac-
tion with β-lactam antibiotics, levodopa and salicylates. Some individuals 
have a high ‘renal threshold’ for glucose excretion, i.e. glucose is not 
detected in their urine despite a high blood glucose concentration. A low 
renal threshold for glucose (i.e. decreased reabsorption following ltra-
tion) is common during pregnancy and in healthy young adults, and is of 
no consequence.
Blood glucose
Measurement of blood glucose concentration is the cornerstone of dia-
betes diagnosis, but varies markedly according to whether taken in the 
fasted or fed state. Glucose concentrations are slightly lower in venous 
than in arterial or capillary blood, as tissues extract glucose. Whole-blood 
glucose concentrations are lower than separated plasma concentrations, 
because red blood cells contain relatively little glucose. Venous plasma 
measurements are the most reliable for diagnostic purposes (Boxes 21.2
and 21.3). Laboratory venous plasma glucose testing utilises a simple 
enzymatic reaction (glucose oxidase) and is cheap, reliable and usually 
automated.
Glucose can also be measured in capillary blood from a ‘ngerprick’ 
sample using test strips read with a portable electronic meter. This has 
been the traditional method by which people with type 1 diabetes adjust 
their insulin doses and detect impending hypoglycaemia. The same 
applies for people with insulin-treated type 2 diabetes and to a lesser 
extent for those treated with sulphonylureas (in whom hypoglycaemia 
occurs about 10 times less frequently, but is nevertheless a risk). The 
main limitation of capillary glucose monitoring (other than the transient 
pain associated with the ngerprick) is the practical limit on the number 
of measurements that can be performed over a 24-hour period. Blood 
glucose can be extremely variable, especially in people with type 1 dia-
betes, and so intermittent testing (such as 4–6 capillary measurements 
per day) may miss substantial peaks and troughs in blood glucose, espe-
cially overnight when no ‘routine’ measurements are usually performed.
Capillary blood glucose testing is also used as a ‘near-patient test’ to 
monitor glucose levels at the bedside in hospitalised patients with diabe-
tes and in situations where hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia is a poten-
tial consequence of a medical condition or its treatment, e.g. intravenous 
insulin therapy (hyper- and hypoglycaemia), high-dose glucocorticoids 
(hyperglycaemia) and acute liver failure (hypoglycaemia). Arterial blood 
glucose levels are often reported, along with several other analytes, by 
‘near-patient’ blood gas analysers in critical care and emergency depart-
ments. As with capillary testing, the blood glucose data provided can be 
useful in monitoring patients who are acutely unwell and at risk of hyper- 
and/or hypoglycaemia.
It is important to note, however, that capillary and arterial whole blood 
glucose measurements are less accurate than laboratory venous plasma 
glucose measurements. The capillary and arterial glucose measurement 
devices are designed to give patients and/or clinicians an approxima-
tion of the prevailing blood glucose. Where high levels of precision are 
required, e.g. when making a diagnosis of diabetes (which will have sub-
stantial implications for the patient) or in the evaluation of spontaneous 
hypoglycaemia (see Ch. 20), laboratory venous plasma blood glucose 
concentrations should be measured.
Interstitial glucose
An increasingly established approach to measure glucose in people with 
diabetes is continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). CGM systems use 
a tiny sensor inserted under the skin to measure glucose in interstitial 
uid. CGM devices display both the current glucose and trend arrows, by 
automatically transmitting to a receiver, smartphone or smartwatch appli-
cation. CGM devices can also be downloaded onto a personal com-
puter. The use of CGM has accelerated in recent years and is becoming 
a standard of care in type 1 diabetes management in high-income coun-
tries. CGM can be intermittently scanned (isCGM or ‘ash’ CGM) or pro-
vide real-time CGM (rtCGM). The sensor can stay in place for up to 2 
weeks before being replaced and provides measurements of glucose 
levels every 5 minutes for rtCGM or every 15 minutes for isCGM. The 
most recent devices do not require calibration against capillary blood 
glucose measurements. Less expensive (isCGM) devices require to be 
scanned at least once every 8 hours or the data stored in the sensor are 
lost (see Fig. 21.7).
Interstitial glucose correlates well with blood glucose, but has a 
10- to-15-minute lag when blood glucose is rapidly changing. This can 
lead to discrepancies between contemporaneous CGM and capillary 
blood glucose measurements; these can also occur due to intrinsic inac-
curacies (neither is as accurate as a laboratory measurement). Accuracy 
of CGM devices is constantly improving, with newer devices reporting 
mean absolute relative difference (MARD) of interstitial uid and blood 
glucose of <11%.
Daily use of CGM improves glycaemic control in type 1 diabetes, pro-
viding useful information on daily glucose proles and, in particular, night-
time glucose patterns. It can reveal high and low glycaemic excursions 
that are not identied by capillary glucose testing. Alarms are incorpo-
rated into all rtCGM and some isCGM devices to warn about impending 
low glucose and high glucose events. Alarms are particularly important 
21.2  Diagnostic criteria for diabetes and pre-diabetes
Diabetes is conrmed by international consensus as:
 plasma glucose in random sample or 2hrs after a 75 g glucose load 
≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) or
 fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or
 HbA1c ≥ 48 mmol/mol
In asymptomatic patients, two diagnostic tests are required to conrm diabetes
Denitions of ‘pre-diabetes’ vary between expert bodies:
 impaired fasting glucose:
 fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL) and <7.0 mmol/L 
(126 mg/dL) (World Health Organization) or
 fasting plasma glucose ≥5.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) and <7.0 mmol/L 
(126 mg/dL) (American Diabetes Association)
 impaired glucose tolerance:
 fasting plasma glucose <7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) and 2-hr glucose after 
75 g oral glucose drink ≥7.8 (140 mg/dL) and <11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
 HbA1c:
 42–47 mmol/mol (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence [NICE] 
guidelines, UK) or
 39–47 mmol/mol (American Diabetes Association)
21.3  How to perform an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
Preparation before the test
 Unrestricted carbohydrate diet for 3 days
 Fasted overnight for at least 8 hours
 Rest for 30 mins
 Remain seated for the duration of the test, with no smoking
Sampling
 Measure plasma glucose before and 2 hours after a 75 g oral glucose drink

[[p763]]
Investigations    711
during the night (when periods of even quite severe biochemical hypo-
glycaemia may go undetected) and for people with impaired awareness 
of hypoglycaemia (see p. 725). Early identication of low glucose (by 
alarm or a trend arrow showing rapidly declining glucose) allows prompt 
corrective action (i.e. ingesting sugar-containing foods and drinks), and 
thus may prevent a mild episode of hypoglycaemia becoming a severe 
episode. Identication of high glucose also allows self-administration, if 
appropriate, of additional ‘correction’ doses of insulin.
Initiation of CGM requires education and support to overcome poten-
tial information overload and extract meaningful from the extensive data 
generated. Online resources are provided by the manufacturing com-
panies and also by user forums. The functionality that allows people 
with diabetes to remotely share their glucose levels with family members 
(e.g. a child with diabetes can share data with a parent), caregivers and 
their diabetes specialist team (e.g. facilitating remote consultations) is an 
important advance. CGM can be linked with continuous subcutaneous 
insulin infusion (CSII) devices (‘insulin pumps’) to permit the creation of 
‘sensor-augmented’ systems; such systems can be life-transforming for 
people with type 1 diabetes and are discussed in detail on p. 741.
Urine and blood ketones
Ketones can be measured in either urine (using dipsticks) or blood 
using portable electronic meters (integrated into some capillary glucose 
meters). Urine tests detect acetoacetate (by the nitroprusside reaction), 
while blood testing strips detect beta-hydroxybutyrate (β-OHB), the 
major ketone found in blood during diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Blood 
testing is particularly useful to guide self-management during ‘sick days’ 
as an early warning sign of incipient DKA, but also to guide emergency 
in-patient management (see p. 721) e.g. monitoring resolution of DKA 
(Box 21.4).
Ketonuria/ketonaemia is not pathognomonic of diabetes and can be 
found after exercise in non-diabetic people who have been fasting or 
exercising strenuously, repeated vomiting, or eating a ‘ketogenic’ diet 
(with a macronutrient composition that is both high in fat and low in 
carbohydrate).
Glycated haemoglobin
Glycated haemoglobin is accepted as the international standard method 
for assessing glycaemic control in diabetes as it reects average blood 
glucose over a period of weeks or months.
During hyperglycaemia, slow non-enzymatic covalent attachment 
of glucose to haemoglobin (glycation) increases the proportion in the 
HbA1 (and specically HbA1c) fraction, relative to non-glycated adult 
haemoglobin (HbA0). These fractions can be separated by chromatog-
raphy although other laboratory methods can also be used. The rate 
of formation of HbA1c is directly proportional to ambient blood glucose 
0
3.9
10
6.2
11.5
5.7
3.6
12.6
21
00.00
02.00
04.00
06.00
08.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
22.00
00.00
0
3.9
10
4.7
6.7
5.1
6.5
21
00.00
02.00
04.00
06.00
08.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
22.00
00.00
0
3.9
10
7.0
5.2
5.6
9.6
10.8
9.6
21
00.00
02.00
04.00
06.00
08.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
22.00
00.00
0
3.9
10
5.9
10.8
9.6
21
00.00
02.00
04.00
06.00
08.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
22.00
00.00
Fig. 21.7 Download from intermittently scanned (‘ash’) continuous glucose monitor (isCGM). Glucose data from four consecutive days are shown. Each small 
open circle (o) on the graph represents an occasion when the sensor has been scanned by the patient and there is a corresponding glucose level displayed at the bottom 
of the graph. The grey section represents the ideal target range of 3.9–10.0 mmol/L. Low glucose episodes are in red. Note the substantial variation in glucose within each 
24-hour period (with frequent episodes of low and high glucose) and the variation between comparable time points on different days. Such variation could not be detected by 
intermittent capillary glucose testing. Each daily graph has a short period when no data are provided; this is because the time between sensor scans exceeded 8 hours.

[[p764]]
712    DIABETES MELLITUS
concentration: a rise of 11 mmol/mol in HbA1c corresponds to an 
approximate average increase of 2 mmol/L (36 mg/dL) in blood glucose. 
Although HbA1c concentration reects the integrated blood glucose con-
trol over the lifespan of erythrocytes (typically 120 days), HbA1c is most 
sensitive to changes in glycaemic control occurring in the month before 
measurement.
Since 2011, the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and 
Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) has developed a standard system for report-
ing HbA1c (IFCC-standardised HbA1c) reported in mmol/mol. However, it 
is important to be aware of the ‘percentage’ units that were previously 
used as many people with diabetes are more familiar with these (and 
many specialist publications use dual-reporting) (Box 21.5).
HbA1c may be erroneously low (i.e. lower than would be anticipated 
for the prevailing average blood glucose) in conditions associated with 
shorter red cell lifespan (e.g., chronic blood loss, sickle cell anaemia, thal-
assaemia, pregnancy) and after blood transfusion (as transfused red cell 
concentrate usually comes from non-diabetic donors). Conversely, HbA1c
may be erroneously high in conditions that increase red cell lifespan (iron, 
vitamin B12 or folate deciency anaemia, splenectomy). It may be difcult 
to interpret with some assay methods in patients who have uraemia or 
a haemoglobinopathy. It is particularly important to be aware of this in 
pregnancy care and also in health-care settings in which red cell disor-
ders and nutritional deciency are prevalent, especially if HbA1c is used in 
the diagnosis of diabetes (see below).
Islet autoantibodies
As type 1 diabetes is characterised by inammatory inltration of 
pancreatic β cells, it can be useful when making a diagnosis of dia-
betes to identify evidence of autoimmunity. Islet antibodies include: 
anti-insulin, anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), anti-protein tyrosine 
phosphatase-related proteins (IA-2) and anti-zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8). 
They are generally measured using specic immunoassays and, as with 
other such assays, ‘false-positive’ results can occur due to assay inter-
ference. Islet antibodies may also be found in healthy individuals and 
although some of these may go on and develop type 1 diabetes in the 
future (particularly if they have rst-degree relatives with type 1 diabe-
tes), many will not develop diabetes. The signicance of islet antibodies 
is greater when they are detected at concentrations greater than the 
95th centile of the general population (i.e. in ‘high titre’) and if multiple 
antibodies are detectable. A single positive autoantibody confers a 
5-year risk of type 1 diabetes of 20%–25%, rising to 50%–60% risk with 
two autoantibodies and 70% with three autoantibodies. Conversely, as 
autoantibody levels can wane over time, they may be negative in people 
with established type 1 diabetes. Pragmatically, if anti-GAD and anti-IA-2 
antibodies are measured together, either or both will be ‘positive’ in 
approximately 85% of newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes; measurement of 
anti-ZnT8 antibodies at the same time increases sensitivity to over 90% 
(i.e. fewer than 10% of cases will be antibody negative). Islet autoanti-
body testing is becoming standard in some high-income countries for 
people commenced on insulin therapy within 3 years of diagnosis. A 
negative autoantibody result should prompt consideration of an alterna-
tive diagnosis to type 1 diabetes; however, as type 1 diabetes can still 
occur in people with negative antibodies, the clinical diagnosis of type 1 
diabetes should not immediately be rejected.
C-peptide
C-peptide (see Fig. 21.23) can be readily measured in blood and urine. It 
is secreted by β cells in equimolar concentrations to insulin, but is not a 
constituent of synthetic insulin. Therefore C-peptide is a useful marker of 
endogenous insulin secretion, particularly in insulin-treated individuals (in 
whom a direct measurement of insulin does not distinguish exogenous 
from endogenous insulin).
Severe endogenous insulin deciency (typically serum C-peptide < 200 
pmol/L) is found in type 1 diabetes, diabetes secondary to other pan-
creatic disorders and some forms of monogenic diabetes (see p. 719). 
‘Undetectable’ serum C-peptide was traditionally considered pathogno-
monic of type 1 diabetes; however, the use of modern high-sensitivity 
C-peptide immunoassays (e.g. with a lower limit of detection of 3 pmol/L) 
has demonstrated that there is a spectrum of retained endogenous insu-
lin secretion in type 1 diabetes. Persistent endogenous insulin secretion, 
in any form of diabetes, even though insufcient to maintain normogly-
caemia, can have a smoothing effect on blood glucose, i.e. peaks and 
troughs in glucose are reduced because there is a retained ability to vary 
insulin secretion (upwards or downwards) in response to prevailing blood 
glucose.
In type 2 diabetes, C-peptide concentrations are usually signicantly 
elevated (typically > 900 pmol/L) reecting increased insulin secretion 
in response to tissue insulin resistance. However, in forms of type 2 
diabetes where there is a degree of endogenous insulin deciency (such 
as with long diabetes duration), lower levels of C-peptide may occur.
Although there is overlap between C-peptide levels in the different 
forms of diabetes, a one-off measurement of random (non-fasting) serum 
C-peptide can be used to identify individuals who have been misclassi-
ed, e.g. labelled as type 1 diabetes, when they have type 2 diabetes 
or vice versa. If C-peptide is used in this way, blood glucose must be 
checked simultaneously to ensure it is > 4.0 mmol/L (> 72 mg/dL), as 
hypoglycaemia lowers endogenous insulin secretion and thus C-peptide. 
C-peptide measurement is also used in the diagnosis of spontaneous 
hypoglycaemia (p. 689).
Urine albumin (‘microalbuminuria’)
Standard urine dipstick testing for albumin detects urinary albumin at 
concentrations above 300 mg/L, but much lower concentrations can be 
measured using specic albumin dipsticks or quantitative biochemical 
21.4  Interpretation of capillary blood ketone measurements
Measurement1
Interpretation
< 0.6 mmol/L
Normal; no action required
0.6–1.5 mmol/L
Suggests metabolic control may 
be deteriorating; the patient should 
continue to monitor and seek medical 
advice if sustained/progressive
1.5–3.0 mmol/L
High risk of diabetic ketoacidosis; seek 
medical advice
>3.0 mmol/L
Severe ketosis suggests presence 
of diabetic ketoacidosis; seek urgent 
medical advice
1To convert to mg/dL, multiply values by 18. 
21.5  Conversion between DCCT and IFCC units for HbA1c
DCCT units (%)
IFCC units (mmol/mol)
4
20
5
31
6
42
7
53
8
64
9
75
10
86
IFCC HbA1c (mmol/mol) = [DCCT HbA1c(%) − 2.15] × 10.929
(DCCT = Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; IFCC = International Federation of Clinical 
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine)

[[p765]]
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes    713
laboratory tests, permitting detection of microalbuminuria (≥30 mg/L, 
see Box 18.11). Microalbuminuria (in the absence of urinary tract infec-
tion) has therapeutic implications as it is an important early indicator of 
diabetic nephropathy and a risk marker for macrovascular complications. 
Microalbuminuria may progress to overt (dipstick positive) proteinuria.
Establishing the diagnosis of diabetes
Glycaemia can be classied into three categories: normal, impaired 
(pre-diabetes) and diabetes (see Box 21.2). The glycaemia cut-off that 
denes diabetes is based on a level above which there is a signicant risk 
of microvascular complications, particularly retinopathy (see Fig. 21.1). 
People categorised as having pre-diabetes have blood glucose levels 
that carry a negligible risk of microvascular complications, but are at 
increased risk of developing diabetes (5%–10% in this category develop 
diabetes each year).
Diabetes has traditionally been diagnosed using venous plasma glu-
cose measurements (random or fasting) and (if required) a 75 g oral glu-
cose tolerance test (OGTT; see Box 21.3). When a person has symptoms 
of diabetes, the diagnosis can be conrmed with either a fasting glu-
cose of ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or a random glucose of ≥11.1 mmol/L 
(200 mg/dL) (see Box 21.2). Asymptomatic individuals should have a 
second conrmatory test. Diabetes should not be diagnosed on cap-
illary blood glucose results. In 2011, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) began to advocate the use of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) as 
a diagnostic test, with an HbA1c of ≥48 mmol/mol indicative of diabetes. 
This has been adopted in some countries, including the UK where it is 
recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE). However, in part due to the analytical issues raised by prevalent 
haemoglobinopathies and other factors that affect HbA1c independent of 
average blood glucose (see p. 711), diagnosis by HbA1c has not been 
adopted by the International Diabetes Federation. As HbA1c reects the 
last 2–3 months of glycaemia, it should not be used to diagnose diabetes 
when the duration of onset of symptoms has been short; in this context, 
fasting or random glucose measurements are still required to conrm or 
rule out a diagnosis.
Pre-diabetes has two forms based on blood glucose criteria, namely 
‘impaired glucose tolerance’ (IGT) and ‘impaired fasting glucose’ (IFG). 
In IGT, fasting glucose is normal, but 2-hour glucose is elevated above 
normal (but not high enough for diabetes). In IFG, fasting glucose is ele-
vated above normal (not high enough for diabetes), but 2-hour glucose 
is normal. Pre-diabetes may also be diagnosed using HbA1c, but criteria 
vary between international bodies (see Box 21.2). Pre-diabetic states 
are not associated with a substantial risk of microvascular disease, but 
with an increased risk of conversion to diabetes (particularly IFG) and 
an increased risk of macrovascular disease, i.e. myocardial infarction, 
stroke and peripheral vascular disease (particularly IGT) (see Box 21.3). 
Individuals in whom pre-diabetes is detected (often when screening for 
diabetes) should be advised of their risk of progression to diabetes, given 
advice about lifestyle modication to reduce this risk (as for type 2 dia-
betes), and be screened for treatable cardiovascular risk factors such as 
hypertension and dyslipidaemia.
The diagnostic criteria for diabetes in pregnancy (gestational diabetes) 
are more stringent (see Box 32.12). HbA1c should not be used to diag-
nose diabetes in pregnancy.
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes
At a fundamental level, diabetes is a consequence of absolute or relative
deciency of insulin, although the underlying genes, precipitating envi-
ronmental factors and pathophysiology differ substantially between the 
various forms. In type 1 diabetes and diabetes secondary to pancreatic 
pathology there is an absolute insulin deciency that requires treatment 
with insulin. At the other end of the spectrum, mutations in the insulin 
receptor cause diabetes due to severe insulin resistance (e.g. Rabson–
Medenhall and Donohue syndromes); such individuals have extremely 
high levels of insulin, but have a relative deciency because insulin can-
not exert a functional effect via an abnormal receptor. In type 2 diabe-
tes, there is usually a combination of both β-cell dysfunction and insulin 
resistance, although here the insulin resistance is usually a consequence 
of signalling effects downstream from the insulin receptor (see below). 
Although it is generally helpful to classify diabetes on an aetiological 
basis (Box 21.6), many individuals have diabetes due to a combination 
of factors, e.g. an individual with type 1 diabetes who becomes obese 
and insulin resistant (sometimes known as ‘double diabetes’); an indi-
vidual with signicant obesity and a previous distal pancreatectomy; or 
an individual with a pathogenic monogenic diabetes gene mutation and 
strongly positive islet autoantibodies.
Pathogenesis of diabetes
Insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome
The precise mechanisms causing insulin resistance are complicated. 
Abnormalities have been reported in many post-receptor intracellular 
signalling pathways downstream from the insulin receptor, including 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), but none of the common abnor-
malities are sufcient to cause type 2 diabetes in the absence of other 
abnormalities. A single abnormality can usually be compensated for by 
other pathways (‘redundancy’), so ‘multiple hits’ may be necessary for 
signicant insulin resistance to occur. The exact combination of abnor-
malities present differs between individuals (i.e. the condition is ‘heter-
ogeneous’) and there is a wide range of physiological insulin sensitivity 
even in non-diabetic individuals. Factors associated with insulin resist-
ance are shown in Box 21.7
Obesity is a major cause of insulin resistance. Intra-abdominal ‘central’ 
adipose tissue is metabolically active and releases large quantities of FFAs, 
which may induce insulin resistance because they compete with (or inhibit 
use of) glucose as a fuel supply for oxidation, e.g. in muscle. In addition, 
adipose tissue releases a number of hormones (including a variety of pep-
tides, called ‘adipokines’) that act on specic receptors to inuence sen-
sitivity to insulin in other tissues. Examples of adipokines include leptin, 
adiponectin, interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha. Venous drain-
age of visceral adipose tissue is into the portal vein and so central obesity 
may have a particularly potent inuence on hepatic insulin sensitivity and 
thereby adversely affect hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism.
21.6  Aetiological classication of diabetes mellitus
Type 1 diabetes*
Type 2 diabetes*
Other specic types
 Genetic defects of β-cell function (see Box 21.8)
 Genetic defects of insulin action (e.g., lipodystrophies)
 Pancreatic disease (e.g. pancreatitis, pancreatectomy, neoplastic disease, cystic 
brosis, haemochromatosis, brocalculous pancreatopathy)
 Excess endogenous production of hormonal antagonists to insulin, e.g.:
Growth hormone – acromegaly
Glucocorticoids – Cushing’s syndrome
Glucagon – glucagonoma
Catecholamines – phaeochromocytoma
Thyroid hormones – thyrotoxicosis
 Drug-induced (e.g. glucocorticoids, thiazide diuretics, HIV drugs, immune 
checkpoint inhibitors)
 Associated with genetic syndromes (e.g. Down syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, 
Turner syndrome, DIDMOAD (Wolfram syndrome), Friedreich's ataxia, myotonic 
dystrophy)
 Gestational diabetes
*The World Health Organization also recognises ‘slowly evolving, immune-mediated 
diabetes of adults’ and ‘ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes’ as ‘hybrid’ forms of diabetes.
(DIDMOAD = diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, nerve deafness)

[[p766]]
714    DIABETES MELLITUS
inherited, their cumulative effect can be signicant. Individuals with 
genetically lower β-cell mass and function may not have abnormal 
blood glucose at birth, but are more susceptible to developing dia-
betes in later life, particularly if the individual becomes insulin resistant 
or acquires additional loss of β cells (e.g. through exposure to a toxin 
or following pancreatic surgery). Genetic variants may also code for 
proteins that increase susceptibility of β cells to environmental toxins or 
pro-inammatory cytokines.
Autoimmune destruction and other disorders of the pancreas leading 
to loss of β-cell mass are discussed in subsequent sections. Increasing 
age is associated with a decline in β-cell mass and function and expo-
sure to certain chemicals (notably alcohol) can also be toxic to β cells.
Elevated plasma glucose and FFAs exert toxic (and potentially reversi-
ble) effects on pancreatic β cells, respectively known as glucotoxicity and 
lipotoxicity. These effects are often apparent as severe hyper glycaemia 
(and even ketoacidosis) and may occur at the time of diagnosis of 
diabetes.
In type 2 diabetes, deposition of a peptide known as islet amyloid 
polypeptide may be observed in islets. It is not entirely clear if this con-
tributes to the decline in β-cell function in type 2 diabetes or if it is simply 
a manifestation of other insults to the pancreas. Obesity is a pro-inam-
matory state and cytokines released from adipose tissue (including IL-1β, 
IFN-γ, TNF-α, leptin and resistin) may also contribute to β-cell dysfunc-
tion in type 2 diabetes.
21.7  Factors associated with insulin resistance and insulin 
deciency
Insulin resistance
Insulin deciency
Genetic factors*
Single gene mutations
Multiple gene variants
Central obesity
Ethnicity
Reduced physical activity
Hormone excess (see Box 21.6)
Drugs, e.g. glucocorticoids
Genetic factors*
Single gene mutations
Multiple gene variants
Increasing age
Autoimmune destruction
Pancreatic pathology (see Box 21.6)
Toxins, e.g. alcohol, cytokines
Infections, e.g. SARS-CoV-2
Glucotoxicity
Lipotoxicity
Deposition of islet amyloid polypeptide
*Single gene mutations generally have a large effect size, while gene variants individually have a 
small effect size, but collectively the effect size can be important.
Some ethnic groups, e.g. South Asians and certain indigenous peo-
ples of America and Australasia, have a very high prevalence of insulin 
resistance. In part this may simply relate to genetic and environmental 
factors associated with increased obesity in general. However, a com-
mon feature in these groups is that for a given body mass index, there is 
a greater degree of central rather than peripheral adiposity when com-
pared, for example, to people of European descent.
Physical activity is another important determinant of insulin sensitivity. 
Inactivity is associated with down-regulation of intracellular insulin-sensitive 
kinases (enzymes that increase the activity of other enzymes by phos-
phorylation) and may promote accumulation of FFAs within skeletal mus-
cle. Sedentary people are therefore more insulin-resistant than active 
people with the same degree of obesity. Moreover, physical activity 
allows non-insulin-dependent glucose uptake into muscle, reducing the 
‘demand’ on pancreatic β cells to produce insulin.
Although the pathogenic mutations in single genes with a large effect 
(e.g. mutations in the insulin receptor that negatively impact on its func-
tion as mentioned above) are extremely rare, genetic factors neverthe-
less play a very important role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. 
Genome-wide association studies have shown that many common and 
rare gene variants are associated with increased and decreased sensi-
tivity to insulin. Obesity has a strong genetic element (see p. 764), often 
relating to impaired hypothalamic mechanisms of appetite and satiety, 
and so many of the identied gene variants associated with obesity are 
also associated with insulin resistance. Ethnic differences in adipose 
deposition are also likely to have a genetic basis, although this has 
not yet been conclusively proven (many genetic studies to date have 
had included mainly participants of European descent). Non-obesity 
related genetic variants associated with insulin resistance are mostly 
either directly involved in glucose metabolism or in the insulin intracel-
lular signalling cascade.
Increasing age is associated with reduced insulin sensitivity, but this 
may be a consequence of increased adiposity and reduced lean muscle 
mass rather than a direct effect of ageing. Drugs (notably glucocorti-
coids) and excess of hormones such as cortisol and growth hormone 
(see Box 21.6) can also antagonise the action of insulin.
As well as being associated with hyperglycaemia, insulin resistance is 
also associated with a cluster of other conditions. These include hyper-
tension, dyslipidaemia (elevated small dense low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol, elevated triglycerides and low high-density lipopro-
tein (HDL) cholesterol), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (Ch. 24) and, 
in women, polycystic ovarian syndrome. This cluster has been termed 
the ‘insulin resistance syndrome’ or ‘metabolic syndrome’ and is usu-
ally associated with central obesity, impaired glucose tolerance and an 
increased risk of macrovascular disease. Severe insulin resistance is also 
associated with acanthosis nigricans (see p. 704), i.e. dark pigmentation 
of body folds and creases, particularly in the axillae, groins and neck.
β-cell dysfunction
Insulin deciency occurs across a spectrum that ranges from complete 
deciency (e.g. following a total pancreatectomy), through the severe 
insulin deciency of type 1 diabetes, to more minor degrees of insulin 
insufciency that only become important if increased demand is placed 
upon the pancreas, e.g. by obesity-induced insulin resistance. In this 
latter situation, insulin deciency may be more relative than absolute, i.e. 
the β cells may produce substantial amounts of insulin, but not in suf-
cient quantities to overcome an insulin-resistant state. Insulin deciency 
may be the consequence of a number of different factors, some of which 
are listed in Box 21.7
There is wide variation in the capacity of the pancreas to produce 
insulin, because of natural variation in β-cell mass and the inherent ef-
ciency of the β cells. Single gene mutations with a large effect on β-cell 
mass and function are uncommon, but form the basis of most forms 
of monogenic diabetes (Box 21.8). Most of the variation in β-cell mass 
and function is mediated by multiple genes, each with a very small 
effect. However, where a large number of adverse genetic variants are 
21.8  Monogenic diabetes mellitus: maturity-onset diabetes of 
the young (MODY)
Functional defect
Main type*
Gene mutated*
β-cell glucose 
sensing
MODY2
GCK
The set point for basal insulin release is altered, causing a high fasting 
glucose, but sufcient insulin is released after meals. As a result, the HbA1c
is often normal and microvascular complications are rare. Treatment is rarely 
required.
β-cell transcriptional 
regulation
MODY3
MODY5
MODY1
HNF1α
HNF1β
HNF4α
Diabetes develops during adolescence/early adulthood and can be managed 
with diet and tablets for many years, but ultimately, insulin treatment is 
required. The HNF1α and 4α forms respond particularly well to sulphonylurea 
drugs. All types are associated with microvascular complications. HNF1β
mutations also cause renal cysts and renal failure.
*Other gene mutations have been found in rare cases. For further information, see 
diabetesgenes.org.

[[p767]]
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes    715
Type 1 diabetes
Pathogenesis
Type 1 diabetes is an immune-mediated disorder involving T-cell destruc-
tion of β cells in the pancreatic islets (‘insulitis’). The natural history of 
type 1 diabetes is classically based on a ‘gene-environment interaction’ 
model, i.e. genetically susceptible individuals develop β-cell autoimmun-
ity following exposure to an environmental trigger. This results in a pro-
gressive loss of β cells over a period of months or years, until they have 
little functional capacity (Fig. 21.8). Although insulitis is a T-cell-mediated 
response, circulating autoantibodies to islet and/or β-cell antigens can 
be present long before the clinical presentation of type 1 diabetes 
(see p. 712).
The histological appearance of insulitis is of an inammatory inltrate 
of mononuclear cells (activated macrophages, helper cytotoxic and sup-
pressor T lymphocytes, natural killer cells and B lymphocytes) within 
islets (see Fig. 21.8). The specic mechanisms inducing this process are 
unknown, but the hypothesis that it is triggered in susceptible individuals 
by viral infection has been supported by detection of enterovirus-specic 
mRNA in fresh pancreatic tissue samples from recently diagnosed adults. 
Even when type 1 diabetes is established, heavily inltrated islets may be 
seen adjacent to unaffected lobules. Although the principal metabolic 
effect of insulitis is β cell destruction, inammation can also be detected 
in adjacent exocrine (acinar) tissue.
Genetic predisposition
Type 1 diabetes is strongly inuenced by genetic factors, but does 
not follow a simple Mendelian pattern of inheritance. Monozygotic 
twins have a concordance rate of 30%–50% for the condition, while 
dizygotic twins have a concordance of 6%–10%. In the United States, 
the risk of developing type 1 diabetes is 1:20 for those with a rst-de-
gree relative, compared with 1:300 in the general population. Children 
of mothers with type 1 diabetes have a 1%–4% risk of developing 
type 1 diabetes, but children of fathers with type 1 diabetes have a 
10% risk. If both parents have the condition the risk is up to 30%. 
Notwithstanding this genetic inuence, 80%–85% of new cases do 
not have a family history.
These observations are consistent with polygenic inheritance (see 
Box 21.6); over 20 different regions of the human genome have an 
association with type 1 diabetes risk. Most interest has focused on the 
human leucocyte antigen (HLA) region within the major histocompati-
bility complex on the short arm of chromosome 6. The HLA haplotypes 
DR3 and/or DR4 are associated with increased susceptibility to type 1 
diabetes in people of European descent and are in ‘linkage disequilib-
rium’ (i.e. tend to be transmitted together) with the neighbouring alleles 
of the HLA-DQA1 and DQB1 genes. The latter may be the main deter-
minants of genetic susceptibility, since these HLA class II genes code 
for proteins on the surface of cells that present foreign and self-anti-
gens to T lymphocytes (p.78). However, candidate gene studies and 
genome-wide association studies have also implicated other genes, 
e.g. CD25, PTPN22, SH2B3, IL2RA and IL-10. The majority of these 
risk loci are involved in immune responsiveness, such as recognition of 
pancreatic islet antigens, T cell development and immune regulation. 
The genes associated with type 1 diabetes overlap with those for coe-
liac disease and thyroid disease, consistent with clustering of these 
conditions in individuals or families.
Environmental predisposition
The wide geographical and seasonal variations in incidence, and 
the rapid acquisition of local disease incidence rates in migrants 
from low- to high-incidence countries, suggest that environmental 
factors have an important role in precipitating the development of 
type 1 diabetes.
Although there are many hypotheses, the nature of these environmen-
tal factors is unknown. They may trigger type 1 diabetes through direct 
toxicity to β cells or by stimulating an autoimmune reaction directed 
against β cells. Potential candidates fall into four main categories:
 1. Viruses: in addition to enteroviruses (e.g. Coxsackie B4), other 
viruses including mumps, rubella (in utero), cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein–Barr virus and most recently retroviruses.
 2. Toxins: various dietary nitrosamines (found in smoked and cured 
meats) and coffee. Bovine serum albumin (BSA), a major constit-
uent of cow's milk, has also been implicated, since children who 
are given cow's milk early in infancy are more likely to develop 
type 1 diabetes than those who are breastfed. BSA may cross the 
neonatal gut wall and raise antibodies that cross-react with a heat-
shock protein expressed by β cells.
 3. Hygiene hypothesis: it has been proposed that reduced expo-
sure to microorganisms in early childhood limits maturation of 
the immune system and increases susceptibility to autoimmune 
disease.
 4. Vitamin D: as the highest incidences are in areas where there is less 
sunlight (including northern Europe), low levels of vitamin D may be 
important. However, no clear cause–effect relationship has been 
identied.
Normal islet
β-cell mass
Environmental triggers
Genetic
susceptibility to
immune dysfunction
Inflammatory cell infiltration of islet
Immune-mediated β-cell destruction
Autoantibodies present in blood
Overt
diabetes
Loss of first-phase
insulin secretion
Pre-diabetes
Insulitis
β-cell destruction
Time
Fig. 21.8 Pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Proposed sequence of events in the development of type 1 diabetes. Environmental triggers are described in the text. Insets 
(normal islet, β-cell destruction) Courtesy of Dr A. Foulis, Department of Pathology, University of Glasgow.

[[p768]]
716    DIABETES MELLITUS
Immune checkpoint inhibitors, increasingly used in oncology, can 
trigger the development of autoimmune disorders, including type 1 dia-
betes (see Ch. 7). The natural history of the onset of immune-mediated 
destruction of the pancreas seems to occur at an accelerated rate com-
pared to the standard trajectory of type 1 diabetes, and there is often 
very severe insulin deciency resulting in marked glycaemic variability.
Metabolic disturbances in type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes presents when progressive β-cell destruction has 
crossed a threshold at which adequate insulin secretion and normal 
blood glucose levels can no longer be sustained. Above a certain level, 
high glucose levels are toxic to the remaining β cells (glucotoxicity) so that 
profound insulin deciency rapidly ensues, causing the metabolic seque-
lae shown in Figure 21.9. Hyperglycaemia leads to glycosuria and dehy-
dration, while glycosuria, lipolysis and proteolysis result in weight loss. 
Ketoacidosis occurs when generation of ketones exceeds the capacity 
for their metabolism. Elevated blood H+ ions drive K+ out of the intra-
cellular compartment, while secondary hyperaldosteronism encourages 
urinary loss of K+. Thus, new cases of type 1 diabetes usually present 
with a short history (typically a few weeks) of hyperglycaemic symptoms 
(see Box 21.9) and weight loss, and in the most severe cases (usually 
when the diagnosis is delayed) DKA can develop (p. 721).
Clinical course of type 1 diabetes
The natural course of type 1 diabetes involves initially a loss of rst-
phase insulin secretion, followed by a period of pre-diabetes and then 
clinically undiagnosed diabetes, before a diagnosis of diabetes is made 
(Fig. 21.8). By this point, more than 80%–90% of β-cell mass has usually 
been destroyed. Following institution of insulin therapy, there may be a 
‘honeymoon period’ lasting several weeks or months, during which there 
is a partial recovery in β-cell function as the glucotoxic effect is reversed 
by correction of hyperglycaemia. During the honeymoon period, the 
production of signicant endogenous insulin means that exogenous 
insulin requirements may be very low and some individuals may even 
be able to stop insulin for a few weeks or months. Typically glycaemic 
control is good during this period, with modest glucose variability and a 
low risk of hypoglycaemia. In most patients, the immune-mediated pro-
cess eventually destroys the majority of remaining β-cells, resulting in 
severe insulin deciency, increased requirements for exogenous insulin 
and more marked glycaemic variability.
It is increasingly recognised that a proportion of individuals with type 
1 diabetes retain in the long term a subset of viable β cells with a capac-
ity to secrete small amounts of endogenous insulin. The resulting spec-
trum of retained endogenous insulin production can be identied by 
measuring C-peptide (see p. 712). A shorter duration of diabetes and a 
later age at onset are associated with increased likelihood of signicant 
detectable C-peptide. As exemplied by the honeymoon period, higher 
C-peptide concentrations are associated with reduced glucose variabil-
ity and hypoglycaemia, and increased time in range (Fig. 21.10). Higher 
C-peptide concentrations are also associated with reduced HbA1c, exog-
enous insulin requirements, frequency of ketoacidosis and microvascular 
↓Glucose uptake
and utilisation
↑Glycogenolysis
Hyperglycaemia
Glycosuria
Osmotic diuresis
Dehydration
Hyperosmolarity
Secondary
hyperaldosteronism
K+ deficiency
↑Gluconeogenesis
↑Lipolysis
↑Proteolysis
↑FFA and glycerol
to liver
↓Renal function
↑Lactate
↑Ketogenesis
Metabolic acidosis
Absolute insulin deficiency
Fig. 21.9 Acute metabolic complications of insulin deciency. (FFA = free fatty acid)
21.9  Symptoms of hyperglycaemia
 Polyuria
 Nocturia
 Thirst, dry mouth
 Polydipsia
 Tiredness, fatigue, lethargy
 Change in weight (usually weight 
loss)
 Blurring of vision
 Pruritus vulvae, balanitis (genital 
candidiasis)
 Nausea
 Headache
 Hyperphagia; predilection for sweet 
foods
 Mood change, irritability, difculty in 
concentrating, apathy

[[p769]]
Aetiology and pathogenesis of diabetes    717
complications. There is currently much research activity aimed at halt-
ing or slowing the decline in endogenous insulin production early in the 
course of type 1 diabetes (‘C-peptide preservation’), using agents such 
as biologic immunosuppressants.
Type 1 diabetes presenting in adults
While type 1 diabetes is classically thought of as a disease of children 
and young adults (most commonly presenting between 5 and 7 years 
of age and at or near puberty), it can manifest at any age. Over 40% 
of cases developing in adults over 30 years of age – although some of 
these diagnoses may be incorrect, with a small proportion actually having 
unrecognised type 2 diabetes or monogenic diabetes.
Some adults have a more insidious onset of hyperglycaemia and have 
‘slowly evolving immune-mediated diabetes of adults’, previously known 
as ‘latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood’ (LADA). This is essentially 
a subset of type 1 diabetes with usually a single islet autoantibody pres-
ent in high titre (usually anti-GAD), greater retention of β-cell function 
and hyperglycaemia that does not require immediate commencement of 
insulin therapy. Affected individuals often have features of the metabolic 
syndrome and are initially managed with a working diagnosis of type 
2 diabetes, but recognised retrospectively as having progressed more 
rapidly to requiring insulin treatment than is typical for type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes
Pathogenesis
Type 2 diabetes is a heterogeneous condition characterised by varying 
degrees of insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction, commonly asso-
ciated with obesity. Approximately 40% of overall type 2 diabetes risk 
is determined by genetic factors, with the rest due to environmental 
(acquired) factors. Insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction have both 
genetic and environmental determinants (see relevant sections above). 
The relative contribution of insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction var-
ies between individuals, with most having an important contribution from 
both factors, but some having severe insulin resistance with less marked 
β-cell dysfunction, and others having signicant insulin deciency and 
minimal insulin resistance. For example, type 2 diabetes is increasingly 
seen in children and young adults, usually driven by insulin resistance due 
to extreme obesity (often on a background of an ethnic predisposition to 
diabetes). By contrast, type 2 diabetes may also occur in non-obese 
individuals (who have more pronounced β-cell dysfunction), particularly 
in the elderly. Many of the rarer types of diabetes (see Box 21.6) were 
previously categorised as type 2 diabetes, and it is likely that this list 
will expand in time as genetic studies provide more insights into the 
aetiology of diabetes. The natural history of ‘typical’ type 2 diabetes is 
shown in Figure 21.11. Individuals at high risk of type 2 diabetes usu-
ally have a degree of genetic predisposition to either pancreatic β-cell 
dysfunction (measured as β-cell glucose sensitivity), insulin resistance 
(measured as insulin-mediated glucose uptake) or both. Each of these 
phenotypes declines with age and the trajectory of decline is particularly 
determined by weight gain. The resulting rise in glucose levels over time 
(initially small) is compensated by an increase in insulin secretion rate, 
which is teleologically a homeostatic attempt to maintain normal blood 
glucose levels. However, unless weight gain can be reversed at an early 
stage, β-cell function continues to decline such that a relative state of 
insulin deciency in prediabetes and early diabetes becomes absolute. 
This is mediated by obesity-associated factors such as glucotoxicity, 
lipotoxicity, pro-inammatory cytokines and/or the deposition of amyloid 
polypeptide in pancreatic islets. It has been estimated that at the time 
of diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, around 50% of β-cell function has been 
10.0
3.9
12 am
12 pm
Time
Time
Time
12 am
40%
High
25%
High
40%
In range
70%
In range
100%
In range
20%
Low
5% Low
10.0
3.9
12 am
12 pm
12 am
10.0
3.9
12 am
12 pm
12 am
Blood glucose
(mmol/L)
B
A
Fig. 21.10 Patterns of glycaemic variability in type 1 diabetes. Three patterns of glycaemic variability are shown, all associated with the same average blood glucose 
by many factors including individual behaviours (carbohydrate intake, timing and dose of insulin) and C-peptide status (high C-peptide associated with low glycaemic variability).
Insulin
resistance
Plasma
glucose
Time
Pre-
diabetes
Early
diabetes
Advanced
diabetes
Normal range
Glucose
sensitivity
Insulin
secretion
β cell
Fig. 21.11 Natural history of type 2 diabetes. Individuals predisposed to type 
2 diabetes may have insulin levels at the lower end of normal and higher than 
normal insulin resistance (not shown in this gure), due to genetic factors. As insulin 
resistance increases (green) there is a compensatory increase in insulin secretion 
(grey), which initially maintains plasma glucose (blue) in the normal range. Eventually, 
the β cells are unable to compensate adequately and blood glucose rises, producing 
hyperglycaemia. Normal ranges are shown by horizontal bars shaded in same colours. 
Redrawn with permission from the original courtesy of Professor E. Ferrannini, 
University of Pisa.

[[p770]]
718    DIABETES MELLITUS
lost. As β-cell function continues to decline over time, there is an escalat-
ing requirement for glucose-lowering therapy. In the most extreme form, 
there is pancreatic β-cell ‘exhaustion’ and, as in type 1 diabetes, insulin 
therapy is required to prevent ketoacidosis.
Risk factors for type 2 diabetes
Genetic predisposition
Genetic factors are important in type 2 diabetes, as shown by marked 
differences in susceptibility in different ethnic groups and by studies 
in monozygotic twins in whom concordance rates for type 2 diabetes 
approach 100%. People with an affected sibling with onset before the 
age of 40 have a 50% lifetime risk, declining to 30% if the sibling’s age is 
>65 years. Genome-wide association studies have identied >400 gene 
variants that are associated with type 2 diabetes, each exerting a small 
effect and together explaining only about 10% of the overall genetic var-
iance. Most code either for proteins involved in β-cell function or in reg-
ulation of cell cycling and turnover (i.e. β-cell mass); a smaller proportion 
affect control of appetite and satiety (i.e. individual susceptibility to weight 
gain) and insulin resistance. Thus, the major genetic susceptibility to type 
2 diabetes relates to how well an individual’s pancreas produces insulin. 
The largest population genetic effect described to date is a variation in 
TCF7L2 (a transcription factor involved in glucose metabolism in pan-
creas and liver); 10% of the population have two copies of the risk variant 
for this gene and have a nearly two-fold increase in risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes. Other common variants explain much lower risk than 
this, with many explaining less than a 10% increase. However, an individ-
ual with a high genetic burden (e.g. more than 40 risk variants) compared 
to one with very few is more than 2.5 times more likely to develop diabe-
tes. Rarer variants tend to have larger effects on type 2 diabetes risk than 
common variants: e.g. in Greenland 3% of people carry a homozygous 
variant in an insulin signalling gene, TBC1D4, that results in muscle insu-
lin resistance and a 10-fold increased risk of type 2 diabetes.
Lifestyle factors and obesity
Epidemiological studies show that type 2 diabetes is associated with 
reduced physical activity and a diet high in saturated fats and rened sug-
ars, and low in fresh fruit and vegetables. Type 2 diabetes is also strongly 
associated with economic deprivation, social disadvantage, excess alco-
hol consumption and smoking. These factors are all in turn associated with 
obesity, which is strongly linked with insulin resistance. The risk of devel-
oping type 2 diabetes increases with rising body mass index (BMI), such 
that risk is increased 10-fold in people with a BMI of more than 30 kg/m2
(Ch. 22). However, although the majority of individuals with type 2 diabetes 
are obese, only a minority of obese people develop diabetes, as most 
obese people are able to increase insulin secretion to compensate for the 
increased demand resulting from obesity and insulin resistance. Those 
who develop type 2 diabetes are less able to produce sufcient insulin to 
overcome insulin resistance because of genetic and/or acquired factors.
Age
Type 2 diabetes is more common with increasing age (see Fig. 21.12). 
In the UK, it now affects approximately 25% of people aged between 
60 and 80 years. In 2019, over 80% of all cases of type 2 diabetes in 
Scotland occurred after the age of 50 years. This association reects 
declining β-cell mass and function with increasing age and the increasing 
tendency to insulin resistance due to greater obesity and reduced lean 
muscle mass.
Ethnicity
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes varies considerably according to eth-
nicity. For example, Figure 21.12 shows that within the United States the 
prevalence of diabetes is lowest in those of non-Hispanic White ethnicity 
and increases across the categories of non-Hispanic Black, Hispanic, 
Asian and nally Indigenous peoples. Genetic factors are likely to explain 
some of this variance, but environmental factors are also important, 
such as cultural practices and socio-economic status, which in turn are 
reected in diet, physical activity and levels of obesity.
Interaction of risk factors for type 2 diabetes
In addition to the risk factors described above, type 2 diabetes is also 
more common in people with previous ‘stress hyperglycaemia’, in 
women with previous gestational diabetes and in those who had a very 
low birth weight. All the risk factors for type 2 diabetes are inter-related 
and usually have additive effects. For example, increasing BMI is associ-
ated with a younger age of onset of type 2 diabetes (Fig. 21.13), because 
increased insulin resistance unmasks the genetic inability of the pancreas 
to produce adequate amounts of insulin. Type 2 diabetes also occurs 
at a younger age and lower BMI in people whose father and mother 
are both affected, presumably because they have inherited an increased 
number of genetic variants associated with β-cell dysfunction and insu-
lin resistance. The threshold of weight gain at which type 2 diabetes 
occurs is lower for South Asians, who develop the condition on average 
5–10 years earlier than people of European descent.
Clinical course and metabolic disturbances in type 2 diabetes
In comparison with type 1 diabetes, the risk of acute metabolic decom-
pensation is low in type 2 diabetes due to relative rather than absolute 
insulin deciency. Even small amounts of insulin are sufcient to suppress 
lipolysis and proteolysis, so profound weight loss and DKA are much 
less common. Hyperglycaemia may therefore be detected incidentally on 
screening, or even following detection of retinal abnormalities at a routine 
optician appointment, i.e. before the onset of symptoms. The proportion 
of cases remaining undetected at any one time varies among health-
care systems, but is estimated to be as high as 20%. At diagnosis, there 
may be a history of fatigue and ‘osmotic symptoms’ (thirst, polyuria and 
nocturia) for many months.
However, despite the ‘typical’ natural history of type 2 diabetes, it is 
important to remember that some people with type 2 diabetes develop 
marked and acute osmotic symptoms and weight loss. This may be a 
12–19
20–44
45–64
Age (years)
65–74
≥75
NHW
50
40
30
20
10
0
Prevalence (%)
NHB
Hispanic
Asian
IA
Fig. 21.12 Age-specic prevalence of diagnosed type 2 diabetes in the United 
States by ethnicity. NHW = non-Hispanic White; NHB = non-Hispanic Black; 
IA = Indigenous American. Adapted from Golden et al. Racial/ethnic differences in 
the burden of type 2 diabetes over the life course: a focus on the USA and India. 
Diabetologia 2019; 62(10):1751–1760. © Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of 
Springer Nature, 2019
20
25
BMI (kg/m2)
30
35
40
0
20
40
60
80
Mean age of onset of
type 2 diabetes (years)
Fig. 21.13 Relationship between age of onset of type 2 diabetes and body 
mass index. On average, type 2 develops at a younger age in people with increased 
body mass index.

[[p771]]
Presenting problems in diabetes    719
late presentation with advanced β-cell failure (and absolute insulin de-
ciency), but more often acute decompensation reects a ‘vicious spiral’ 
of decline which is at least in part reversible. In this scenario, severe 
hyperglycaemia is associated with a craving for sugar, with large volumes 
of sugary drinks consumed in an effort to quench thirst. This causes 
glucotoxicity leading to reduced insulin secretion and increased lipolysis 
with high circulating FFAs aggravating the decompensation (lipotoxic-
ity). Education and dietary intervention can lead to rapid symptomatic 
improvement, but in the most severe instances, hyperglycaemic hyper-
osmolar state (p. 723) and even diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) can occur.
Ketosis and DKA in type 2 diabetes is referred to as ‘ketosis-prone’ 
diabetes or ‘Flatbush syndrome’. This was named after the Flatbush 
neighbourhood of New York, which had a large population of African 
American and African Carribean origin and in which presentation with 
DKA was noted in the 1980s to be as common with type 2 diabetes as 
with type 1 diabetes. It remains unclear whether ketosis-prone diabetes 
is a unique type or a subset of more severe type 2 diabetes, but it is now 
recognised to occur in sub-Saharan African, South Asian and Hispanic 
populations. Importantly in this scenario, insulin treatment is required ini-
tially, but as glucose and lipid levels are controlled, β cells recover and 
oral treatments such as metformin can be effective within 3months, i.e. 
insulin treatment can be carefully discontinued.
Intercurrent illness, e.g. infection (including with COVID-19, p. 293) or 
acute myocardial infarction, increases the production of stress hormones 
that oppose insulin action. This can precipitate an acute exacerbation of 
insulin resistance and insulin deciency, and result in more severe hyper-
glycaemia and dehydration with ketosis (p. 745). If the hyperglycaemia 
resolves following successful treatment of the illness, then this is retrospec-
tively termed ‘stress hyperglycaemia’. Affected individuals have a signi-
cantly increased risk of type 2 diabetes in subsequent years, presumably 
because they had pre-existing β-cell dysfunction and/or insulin resistance. 
In some individuals, hyperglycaemia persists, probably because of undiag-
nosed type 2 diabetes that was exacerbated by the acute illness.
Other forms of diabetes
Other causes of diabetes are shown in Box 21.6. These can broadly be 
classied as:
 genetic disorders, which are either monogenic (mutation in or dele-
tion of a single gene) or part of a genetic syndrome
 secondary to endocrine disorders, e.g. excess secretion of 
counter-regulatory hormones (those that oppose the effects of insulin)
 secondary to more generalised diseases of the pancreas (most 
commonly pancreatitis and cystic brosis)
 drug-induced causes, e.g. glucocorticoid therapy, which may pre-
cipitate hyperglycaemia (‘steroid-induced diabetes’) in susceptible 
individuals (i.e. with pre-existing insulin-resistance and/or β-cell dys-
function). Affected individuals who recover normal glucose tolerance 
after cessation of the precipitating drug remain at increased risk of 
type 2 diabetes.
Pancreatic diabetes
Diabetes due to more generalised pancreatic disease is a common form 
of ‘secondary diabetes’, which is often not accurately distinguished from 
other forms of diabetes. It may be caused by acute or chronic pancreati-
tis, either due to alcohol excess or to gall bladder (stone) disease. While 
chronic pancreatitis may be associated with recurrent abdominal pain, 
it can also be asymptomatic in many patients. As it may go unrecog-
nised, it is important to be aware of the possibility of pancreatic exocrine 
deciency in all cases of diabetes; this can be detected by screening 
for low faecal enzyme elastase in a stool sample, particularly in the pres-
ence of chronic diarrhoea (see p. 850). Adequate oral pancreatic enzyme 
replacement can reduce abdominal pain, improve absorption of ingested 
nutrients and enhance well-being. This may facilitate adjustment of insu-
lin doses and reduces risk of hypoglycaemia in affected individuals, who 
usually require insulin therapy.
In some geographical regions, including South Asia, a form of chronic 
calcic pancreatitis heralded by chronic abdominal pain can present in 
adolescence or early adulthood (known as brocalculous pancreatic dia-
betes). It is associated with mutations in the gene SPINK1, which codes 
for an anti-protease enzyme and is therefore now thought to result from 
slow pancreatic auto-digestion. It is also associated with a high risk of 
pancreatic cancer.
Diabetes may also be a consequence of other disorders involving the 
pancreas, including haemochromatosis (‘bronze diabetes’), cystic bro-
sis and pancreatic carcinoma.
Monogenic diabetes
Monogenic diabetes accounts for approximately 4% of diabetes in those 
diagnosed under the age of 30 in the UK. While there are a number of 
monogenic disorders of insulin action, the most common are caused by 
defects in insulin secretion. Monogenic disorders of the β cell cause two 
diabetes subtypes: maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY; see 
Box 21.8) and neonatal diabetes. The common genes involved in MODY 
and neonatal diabetes are shown in Figure 21.3C.
The term MODY was coined in 1974 to signify non-insulin-requiring dia-
betes developing under the age of 25 years in at least one family member. It 
is dominantly inherited, which means that many cases have a family history 
of diabetes spanning three generations or more. MODY has been recog-
nised since the 1990s to be a heterogeneous condition, with multiple single 
gene subtypes. One form is caused by a mutation in the β-cell glucose 
sensor enzyme glucokinase (see Fig. 21.3B) and affected individuals have 
an altered set-point for glucose. Glucokinase MODY results in a high fast-
ing glucose (usually >5.5 mmol/L (99 mg/dL)), but a normal post-prandial 
response and slight elevation of HbA1c. It is important to identify these indi-
viduals as they do not develop diabetes complications and do not require 
glucose-lowering drug therapy and monitoring. The other forms of MODY 
are mostly caused by defective transcription factors that play a key role 
in β-cell development and function (hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1α, 
1β and 4α). Patients with transcription factor MODY develop progressive 
diabetes in adolescence or early adulthood and the diabetes is progressive, 
requiring oral glucose-lowering therapy before eventually needing insulin. 
Patients with HNF1α and 4α MODY are extremely sensitive to sulphonyl-
ureas, so this is the treatment of choice for these individuals. Many cases 
have been described in which after genetic diagnosis it has been possible 
to discontinue long-term insulin therapy. As HNF1β is a critical transcription 
factor not only in pancreatic development, but also in renal and genital tract 
development in utero, individuals with HNF1β mutations often have renal 
cystic disease and genital tract malformation including infertility.
Neonatal diabetes is variably dened as diabetes that presents in the 
rst 6 months of life, presenting as profound insulin deciency with hyper-
glycaemia and DKA. Approximately half of patients with neonatal diabetes 
have a transient form that remits by about oneyear of age, with diabetes 
recurring in adolescence or early adulthood; the remainder have perma-
nent neonatal diabetes. Approximately two-thirds of individuals with the 
permanent form have an activating mutation in genes encoding the KIR6.2 
and SUR1 subunits of the KATP channel (see Fig. 21.3C). These cause it 
to be insensitive to glucose-mediated increase in intracellular ATP; as a 
result, pancreatic β cells do not secrete insulin and insulin treatment is 
required from soon after birth. However, as affected individuals respond to 
sulphonylureas, genetic diagnosis can transform their lives, with over 90% 
managed with oral sulphonylurea treatment. The KATP channel is found 
in neurons so mutations can severely affect their function causing devel-
opmental delay and epilepsy. Early sulphonylurea treatment can in some 
cases prevent or improve these neurological consequences.
Presenting problems in diabetes
Hyperglycaemia
Although the presence or absence of diabetes is simply based on con-
rmation of hyperglycaemia above the diagnostic threshold, dening 

[[p772]]
720    DIABETES MELLITUS
which type of diabetes has developed can be more complex in some 
individuals. Initial management involves a careful clinical assessment to 
decide whether (and if so what type of) immediate treatment is required 
(Fig.21.14). Failure to initiate insulin treatment when it is required can 
result in the development of DKA and even death. Therefore, when the 
cause of diabetes is in doubt, it may be necessary to start insulin treat-
ment with a view to later withdrawal if it becomes apparent alternative 
glucose-lowering therapy is sufcient. Such decisions require careful dis-
cussion and explanation at a time of high stress.
The classical symptoms of hyperglycaemia and clinical features of 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes are shown respectively in Box 21.9 and 
Box 21.10. The classic ‘osmotic symptoms’ of polyuria (including noc-
turia), thirst and polydipsia are a consequence of the diuretic effect of sig-
nicant glycosuria. Weight loss is due to dehydration and loss of calories 
in urine from glycosuria and, in type 1 diabetes, proteolysis and lipolysis. 
Severe osmotic symptoms and rapid weight loss are classically asso-
ciated with the onset of type 1 diabetes, but type 2 diabetes may also 
present with these symptoms. Uncontrolled hyperglycaemia is asso-
ciated with increased susceptibility to infection, such as skin infection 
(boils), genital candidiasis (with pruritus) or urine infection (see p. 748).
At the extremes of age, the distinction between type 1 and type 
2 diabetes is usually obvious, but uncertainty can occur, particularly 
between the ages of 25 and 50 years. However, although type 2 dia-
betes is classically a condition of middle and old age, it is increas-
ingly diagnosed in children and young adults. Type 1 diabetes most 
commonly occurs in younger people, but can occur at any age and 
may develop more insidiously in older individuals (p. 717). Family his-
tory of diabetes is common in type 2 diabetes and MODY and there 
may be a family history of autoimmune conditions in type 1 diabetes. 
Ethnicity and obesity may point to a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, but 
type 1 diabetes can present in any race and at any weight, and it is 
important not to assign an incorrect diagnostic label at an early stage 
simply based on stereotypical features. Other causes of diabetes (see 
Box 21.6), such as pancreatic diabetes, should not be forgotten, par-
ticularly if there are suggestive symptoms or signs (e.g. chronic alcohol 
excess).
All patients presenting with hyperglycaemia should be tested for 
ketonuria/ketonaemia. The presence of raised ketones implies abso-
lute insulin deciency and indicates the need for referral to a secondary 
care centre for further assessment and treatment. This will usually indi-
cate a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes but it should be remembered that 
10%–15% of cases of DKA occur in people with type 2 diabetes. Islet 
autoantibody and C-peptide testing can be helpful in establishing the 
underlying cause of diabetes (p. 712), although C-peptide is most dis-
criminatory when used at least 3 years after diagnosis (see Box 21.10). 
Sometimes it may be necessary for clinicians to counsel patients that 
their diagnosis is provisional and that a denitive diagnosis will only be 
possible once time has elapsed, the results of supplementary investi-
gations are available and the responsiveness to different therapies can 
be assessed
New-onset hyperglycaemia
in people not known to have diabetes
Confirm diagnosis of diabetes
(Box 21.2)
Weigh up most likely diagnosis
 by comparing and contrasting
features of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes (see Box 21.10).
Where appropriate consider
other forms of diabetes
   Type 1 diabetes
 Glucose monitoring
 Education
 SC insulin
 Specialist referral
    Type 2 diabetes
 Glucose monitoring
 Education
 ± Glucose-lowering
   therapy
Clinically well
and
Mild or no symptoms
of hyperglycaemia
and
No ketonaemia
and
Eating and drinking
Refer for immediate assessment
Rule out
DKA
(see
Boxes 21.12
and 21.13)
Rule out
HHS
(see
Box 21.13)
Not DKA/HHS
commence VRII,
(see 
Box 21.26)
Clinically unwell
and/or
Marked symptoms
of hyperglycaemia
and/or
Ketonaemia
Fig. 21.14 Assessment and initial management of new-onset hyperglycaemia. (DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; HHS = hyperosmotic hyperglycaemic state; VRII = variable 
rate insulin infusion)

[[p773]]
Presenting problems in diabetes    721
Diabetic ketoacidosis
DKA is an acute metabolic complication of diabetes that is a conse-
quence of absolute insulin deciency. It is a medical emergency with 
important complications including hypoglycaemia, hypokalaemia, pul-
monary oedema, acute respiratory distress syndrome and cerebral 
oedema. Although mortality rates have fallen in the UK over the past 
two decades, a single episode of DKA is associated with an approx-
imate 5% risk of death, rising to almost 25% in those with recurrent 
DKA, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. Death most 
commonly relates to the underlying precipitating illness rather than 
direct metabolic complications. DKA most commonly occurs in people 
with type 1 diabetes and can be the rst presentation of the condition 
(see Box 21.10). It can also occur in type 2 diabetes, particularly if it 
has been longstanding or in individuals who are ketosis-prone (i.e. have 
signicant β-cell dysfunction) or who have been misclassied as type 
2 rather than type 1 diabetes. In established diabetes, DKA may be 
precipitated by an underlying illness or physiological stress. Infection is 
the most common of these: pneumonia and urinary tract infection are 
often implicated. Acute myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular disease 
and pancreatitis are other common examples of a precipitating illness. 
Physiological stress such as surgery, trauma and pregnancy can also 
be implicated. The second most common cause of DKA is insulin de-
ciency due to discontinuation (accidental or deliberate) or inadequate 
delivery (error in administration, insulin pump failure, pen malfunction, 
out of date or inadequate storage) of insulin. Drug and social history 
may reveal glucocorticoid, sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) 
inhibitors or cocaine use, all of which have been associated with DKA. 
In young people with recurrent episodes of DKA, psychological or per-
sonality factors are frequent causes of insulin omission and infrequent 
or absent monitoring of glucose levels.
Pathogenesis
A clear understanding of the biochemical basis and pathophysiology of 
DKA is fundamental for its efcient treatment (see Fig. 21.9). DKA is char-
acterised by the cardinal biochemical triad of:
 hyperglycaemia (blood glucose >11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)) or 
known diabetes* and
 hyperketonaemia (≥3.0 mmol/L on ngerprick testing) or ketonuria 
(more than 2+ on urine dipstick testing) and
 metabolic acidosis (venous bicarbonate <15 mmol/L and/or venous 
pH <7.3 (H+> 50 nmol/L)).
*DKA can occur without hyperglycaemia (‘euglycaemic DKA’, i.e. glucose <11 mmol/L 
(<198 mg/dL)), but this occurs in fewer than 5% of cases.
Severe hyperglycaemia (in some cases >100 mmol/L (1800 mg/dL)) 
causes a profound osmotic diuresis leading to dehydration and elec-
trolyte loss, particularly of sodium and potassium. Ketosis is a conse-
quence of insulin deciency, exacerbated by elevated catecholamines 
and other stress hormones, leading to unrestrained lipolysis and supply 
of free fatty acids (FFAs) for hepatic ketogenesis. When this exceeds the 
capacity to metabolise acidic ketones, these accumulate in blood. The 
resulting metabolic acidosis forces hydrogen ions into cells, displacing 
potassium ions.
There are signicant decits of water and electrolytes in DKA. The 
average loss of water in moderately severe DKA in an adult is around 
100 ml/kg. About half the decit of total body water is derived from the 
intracellular compartment and occurs comparatively early in the devel-
opment of acidosis with few clinical features; the remainder represents 
loss of extracellular uid sustained in the later stages, when marked 
contraction of extracellular uid volume occurs, with haemoconcentra-
tion, a decreased blood volume, and nally a fall in blood pressure and 
subsequent oliguria (<0.5 ml/kg/hr). There are also decits in sodium 
(7–10 mmol/kg), chloride (3–5 mmol/kg) and potassium (3–5 mmol/kg). 
The plasma concentration of potassium gives very little indication of the 
total body decit. Plasma potassium may even be raised initially due 
to disproportionate loss of water, catabolism of protein and glycogen, 
and displacement of potassium from the intracellular compartment by 
H+ ions. However, soon after treatment is started, there is likely to be 
a precipitous fall in the plasma potassium due to dilution of extracellu-
lar potassium by administration of intravenous uids, the movement of 
potassium into cells induced by insulin, and the continuing renal loss of 
potassium (due to secondary hyperaldosteronism as a result of reduced 
renal perfusion).
The level of hyperglycaemia does not correlate with the severity of 
the metabolic acidosis, i.e. moderate elevation of blood glucose may be 
associated with life-threatening ketoacidosis. Type 1 diabetes in preg-
nancy and the use of sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors 
are two situations in which euglycaemic DKA can occur. Conversely, in 
other situations, hyperglycaemia predominates and acidosis is minimal, 
resulting in a hyperosmolar state (p. 723).
Clinical assessment
The clinical features of ketoacidosis are listed in Box 21.11. These usu-
ally progress rapidly over the course of several hours. DKA should be 
considered if there are the typical presenting symptoms of diabetes 
in association with nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, hyperventilation, 
dehydration or reduced consciousness. In a severe and rapidly pro-
gressing case, the striking features are volume depletion, sunken eyes, 
dry mucous membranes (mouth and nose), dry axillae, decreased 
skin turgor (e.g. at the subclavicular area), reduced jugular venous 
pressure, tachycardia and hypotension. Breathing may be deep and 
sighing (Kussmaul's breathing) due to the compensatory hyperventi-
lation of severe metabolic acidosis. The breath may have the sweet 
smell of acetone, similar to nail polish remover or pear drops. Acute 
confusion, a reduced conscious level, or even coma may be pres-
ent. In infected patients, including those with sepsis, pyrexia may not 
be present initially because of vasodilatation secondary to acidosis, 
indeed mild hypothermia may be present. Abdominal pain and vom-
iting are common features of DKA and may mimic an acute abdomen 
(see Ch. 9). It is important to examine for signs of a precipitant; aus-
cultation of the chest for signs of consolidation, examination of the 
abdomen for peritonism or obstruction and inspection of the skin for 
cellulitis or wounds. Careful examination of the feet for new ulceration 
or ischaemia is imperative.
21.10  Typical characteristics of type 1 and type 2 diabetes1
Type 1
Type 2
Age at onset
< 40 years
> 50 years
Duration of 
symptoms
Weeks
Months to years
Body weight
Normal or low
Obese
Ketonuria
Yes
No
Non-fasting serum 
C-peptide2
<200 pmol/L
>900 pmol/l
Rapid ketosis/ 
decompensation 
without insulin 
treatment
Yes
No
Autoantibodies
Positive
Negative
Family history of 
diabetes
Less common
Common
Other autoimmune 
disease
Common
Uncommon
1The data in this table are typical examples; however, none of these are perfect discriminators, 
e.g. obese people can get type 1 diabetes; young adults can get type 2 diabetes. 2C-peptide is 
most discriminatory when used >3 years after diagnosis. C-peptide may be >200 pmol/L in 
people with type 1 diabetes in the ‘honeymoon period’ and may be <600 pmol/l in people with 
type 2 diabetes who have a marked hyperglycaemia (due to glucotoxicity).

[[p774]]
722    DIABETES MELLITUS
Investigations
Initial assessment should include the following:
 Venous blood: for urea and electrolytes, glucose, bicarbonate and 
acid–base status to conrm the presence of hyperglycaemia and 
acidosis. Hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia are common. Serum 
amylase is usually elevated in DKA, but rarely indicates coexisting 
pancreatitis.
 Blood (or urine if unavailable) analysis for ketones (p. 710).
 Electrocardiogram (ECG) to look for evidence of acute myocardial 
infarction or electrolyte abnormalities.
 Chest X-ray to look for evidence of lung consolidation or pulmonary 
oedema.
 Infection screen: full blood count, blood and urine culture, C-reactive 
protein, COVID-19 swab if at risk. (N.B. leucocytosis occurs com-
monly in DKA, but generally represents a stress response rather 
than infection.)
 Pregnancy test: in all women of childbearing age.
Assessment of severity
The presence of one or more of the features listed in Box 21.12 is indic-
ative of severe DKA.
Management
DKA is a medical emergency that should be treated in hospital, preferably 
in a high-dependency area. The aims of DKA management are to correct 
circulating volume and electrolyte imbalance while halting lipolysis and 
suppressing ketogenesis. It is important to identify and treat precipitating 
causes as well as to prevent complications. The central tenets of the 
management of DKA include intravenous insulin, intravenous uid and 
potassium replacement. An agreed evidence-based protocol should be in 
place. A referral to the diabetes specialist team should be made as early 
as possible with review within 24 hours. Regular clinical and biochemi-
cal review is essential, particularly during the rst 24 hours of treatment. 
Monitoring for complications is paramount during management. Vital 
signs including cardiac monitoring should be regularly assessed per pro-
tocol: low oxygen saturations may suggest the development of pulmonary 
oedema and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). In children and 
adolescents, the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) should be monitored hourly 
for cerebral oedema. Supportive measures may include nasogastric tube 
insertion for persistent vomiting or reduced level of consciousness and 
urinary catheter insertion to assess urine output and monitor treatment of 
oliguria (<0.5 ml urine/kg/hr). An example of the implementation of a UK 
guideline for the management of DKA is shown in Figure 21.15
Fluid replacement
In adults, rapid uid replacement should be commenced as soon as a 
diagnosis of DKA is conrmed (see Fig. 21.15). A rapid uid bolus over 
10–15 minutes may be required if systolic blood pressure is <90 mmHg. 
A more cautious approach is advised in young adults, in pregnancy, 
in older adults and those with a history of kidney or heart failure. Most 
guidelines favour correction of the extracellular uid decit with isotonic 
21.11  Clinical features of diabetic ketoacidosis
Symptoms
 Polyuria, thirst
 Weight loss
 Weakness
 Nausea, vomiting
 Leg cramps
 Blurred vision
 Abdominal pain
Signs
 Dehydration
 Hypotension (postural or supine)
 Cold extremities/peripheral 
cyanosis
 Tachycardia
 Air hunger (Kussmaul’s breathing)
 Smell of acetone
 Hypothermia
 Delirium, drowsiness, coma (10%)
saline (0.9% sodium chloride). Introduction of 10% glucose is recom-
mended when the blood glucose falls below 14 mmol/L (252 mg/dL). The 
0.9% saline infusion should be continued to correct circulating volume, 
with glucose infusion concurrently to prevent hypoglycaemia during rapid 
uptake of circulating glucose into cells.
Insulin replacement
A xed-rate intravenous insulin infusion should be commenced accord-
ing to local protocols (for example a UK guideline recommends 0.1 U/kg 
body weight/hr (see Fig. 21.15). Blood glucose and blood ketones 
should be monitored hourly. Response to treatment should be assessed 
by a blood ketone concentration falling by at least 0.5 mmol/L/hr. Venous 
bicarbonate or glucose can be used if blood ketone testing is unavaila-
ble (aiming for an increase or decrease by 3.0 mmol/L/hr respectively). 
If blood ketones are not falling by at least 0.5 mmol/L/hr then the insulin 
infusion should be increased according to local protocols, after check-
ing for malfunction of the insulin infusion. A long-acting insulin analogue 
in a dose equivalent to the individual’s usual regimen should continue to 
be administered subcutaneously during the initial management of DKA. 
This provides basal insulin for when the intravenous insulin is discon-
tinued and reduces the risk of rebound hyperglycaemia (or even DKA) 
recurring in hospital due to insulin interruption or omission – this should 
be a ‘never event’. The xed rate insulin infusion should be continued 
until DKA has resolved, dened as blood ketone <0.6 mmol/L, bicarbo-
nate >15 mmol/L and venous pH >7.3.
Potassium replacement
Careful monitoring of potassium is essential to the management of 
DKA as both hypo- and hyperkalaemia can occur (see above) and 
are life-threatening. Potassium is not usually recommended with the 
initial 1 litre of 0.9% sodium chloride as the primary focus at this stage 
is on restoring circulating volume and renal failure may be present. 
Potassium should be measured urgently on a venous blood gas sam-
ple and then reassessed after 1 hour, 2 hours and then 2 hourly there-
after. Treatment with 0.9% sodium chloride with potassium chloride 
40 mmol/L is recommended if the serum potassium is between 3.5 and 
5.5 mmol/L and there is no evidence of oliguria (see Fig. 21.15). If 
potassium is >5.5 mmol/L then potassium is not added to uid replace-
ment. If potassium is <3.5 mmol/L at presentation then begin cardiac 
monitoring and involve the critical care team as additional potassium 
will be required. Most guidelines aim to maintain potassium between 
4.0 and 5.0 mmol/L.
Intravenous bicarbonate and phosphate
Adequate uid and insulin replacement should resolve the acidosis. The 
use of intravenous bicarbonate therapy is not generally recommended 
(due to lack of evidence of benet), but may be considered in the context 
of a pH of <6.9 following discussion with a senior specialist clinician. 
Acidosis may reect an adaptive response, improving oxygen delivery to 
the tissues, and so excessive bicarbonate may induce a paradoxical fall 
21.12  Indicators of severe diabetic ketoacidosis
 Blood ketones >6 mmol/L
 Bicarbonate <5 mmol/L
 Venous/arterial pH <7.0 (H+ >100nmol/L)
May also be:
 Persistent hypotension or oliguria
 Hypokalaemia (<3.5 mmol/L)
 Glasgow Coma Scale score <12
 O2 saturation <92% on air
 Systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg
 Heart rate >100 or <60 beats per minute
 Anion gap >16 mmol/L
(pH 7.0–7.25 = moderate DKA; pH 7.26–7.30 = ‘mild’ DKA)

[[p775]]
Presenting problems in diabetes    723
in cerebrospinal uid pH; this has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of cerebral oedema in children and young adults. There is little evidence 
for intravenous phosphate replacement, but levels of <0.6 mmol/L are 
often corrected, particularly in the presence of respiratory or muscle 
weakness.
Ongoing management
Restoration of the usual insulin regimen, by subcutaneous injection, 
should not be instituted until the patient is: (i) biochemically stable and 
(ii) able to eat and drink normally. The xed rate insulin infusion should 
be continued for 30 minutes after short-acting (or premixed) insulin is 
given at a mealtime. If using an insulin pump, then the infusion should 
be started during the daytime at the usual basal rate (commencement 
overnight is not recommended as ward staff may be unfamiliar with this 
method of insulin delivery) and the xed insulin rate infusion should be 
continued until the next meal bolus is given.
It is important to review the precipitating factors that led to DKA. 
Glycaemic control, glucose monitoring, insulin injection technique and 
injection sites should all be considered. If insulin pump therapy is used 
then it is important to ensure that there is an adequate supply of equip-
ment, the insulin pump is working (for example not out of warranty) and 
that there is access to ‘back up’ insulin within expiry date via pen injector 
devices. DKA prevention should be discussed and written guidance on 
‘sick day rules’ provided or reinforced. A blood ketone meter should be 
provided. A telephone number for the diabetes specialist team should be 
made available at the point of discharge from hospital. Given the mor-
tality rates associated with DKA, early educational assessment and the 
provision of a personalised management plan are critical. Specialist psy-
chological support may also be necessary.
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) is a medical emergency that 
is a consequence of prolonged relative insulin deciency and so requires 
a different management approach from DKA. There is no precise deni-
tion of HHS, but it is characterised by hypovolaemia, severe hyperglycae-
mia (> 30 mmol/L (>540 mg/dL)) and hyperosmolality (serum osmolality 
> 320 mOsmol/kg), without signicant ketonaemia (<3 mmol/L) or acido-
sis (pH > 7.3 (H+ <50 nmol/L), bicarbonate >15 mmol/L). It most often 
occurs in older people (often in long-term care) who may have impaired 
thirst perception, cognitive impairment or reduced ability to drink 
water. Conscious level is often impaired, particularly when osmolality is 
> 340 mOsmol/L. Mortality rates are higher than DKA (up to 20%) reect-
ing the age and frailty of the population, but it is increasingly seen in 
younger adults particularly at the time of diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.
The pathogenesis of HHS is incompletely understood. As with DKA, 
there is glycosuria, leading to an osmotic diuresis, but renal loss of water 
is in excess to that of sodium and potassium (hypernatraemia is a com-
mon nding). In HHS, hyperglycaemia usually develops over a longer 
period than in DKA (a few days to weeks), causing more profound hyper-
glycaemia and dehydration (uid loss may be 10–22 L in a person weigh-
ing 100 kg). The reason that people with HHS do not develop signicant 
ketoacidosis is unclear, although it has been speculated that insulin 
levels, although too low to stimulate glucose uptake in insulin-sensitive 
tissues, are still sufcient to prevent lipolysis and subsequent ketogen-
esis. Differentiating HHS and DKA in individual cases can be challeng-
ing, particularly in the setting of severe intercurrent illness that can be 
complicated by starvation ketosis, non-ketotic acidosis (acute kidney 
injury, lactic acidosis) and the increased prescription of SGLT2 inhibitors. 
 Confirm diagnosis
 Assess severity
 Start FRII (0.1 unit/kg/hr),
   or local protocol
 Continue SC basal insulin
   analogue if normally taken
Insulin
Fluid
Assess response hourly
Blood ketones falling
≥0.5 mmol/hr
Blood ketones not
falling ≥0.5 mmol/hr
Continue FRII until
resolution of DKA, i.e.
Blood ketones ≤0.6 mol/L
and
Venous pH > 7.3
and
Bicarbonate > 15 mmol/L
 Check infusion pump
   working/connected
 Adjust FRII according
   to local protocol
BP < 90 mmHg
BP > 90 mmHg
BP < 90 mmHg
Repeat fluid bolus
Senior help
Fluid bolus
500 ml normal
saline over
10-15 min
1 L normal
saline over
60 mins
 1 L normal saline over 2 hours
 1 L normal saline over 4 hours
more cautious fluid replacement
in certain circumstances (see text)
Accurate fluid balance and aim
for urine output ≥ 0.5 ml/kg/hr
> 5.5
mmol/L
3.5-5.5
mmol/L
< 3.5
mmol/L
Add 40 mmol/L
KCl (premixed) –
Senior help if not
responding
No
added
KCl
 Maintain potassium 4-5 mmol/L
Add 10%
glucose
125 ml/hr
when
glucose
< 14 mmol/L
Add KCl to second
litre of normal saline
if K <5.5
Add
40 mmol/L
KCl
(premixed)
Potassium
Measure venous blood gas urgently
Reassess at 1 hr and
2 hr and 2 hourly thereafter
Fig. 21.15 Emergency management of diabetic ketoacidosis. (BP = blood pressure; FRII = xed rate insulin infusion; KCl = potassium chloride; SC = subcutaneous)

[[p776]]
724    DIABETES MELLITUS
The clinical features of HHS and DKA are compared and contrasted in 
Box21.13. A mixed picture of HHS and DKA can occur in up to one-third 
of hyperglycaemic crises. If the predominant diagnosis is unclear then 
early specialist input is required to guide management and if necessary 
adjust local protocols.
HHS is more likely to occur when high glucose levels are sustained over 
many weeks or months. Common precipitating factors include infection 
(such as pneumonia or urinary tract infection) and other acute illness 
(such as acute myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular events), leading to 
an increase in counter-regulatory hormones. HHS can also occur in the 
context of drug therapy, such as glucocorticoids, and post-operatively in 
hospital. Poor prognostic signs include hypothermia, hypotension (sys-
tolic blood pressure <90 mmHg), tachy- or bradycardia, severe hyper-
natraemia (sodium >160 mmol/L), serum osmolality >360 mOsmol/kg, 
and the presence of multiple comorbidities.
The principles of therapy are shown in Figure 21.16. The aims are to 
normalise osmolality and blood glucose, replace uid and electrolyte 
losses, and prevent complications such as arterial or venous thrombosis 
(via subcutaneous thromboprophylaxis), foot ulceration (with careful pro-
tection of feet – see p. 751), cerebral oedema and central pontine mye-
linosis (see Ch. 19). Co-morbidities also need to be taken into account; 
for example, rapid uid replacement may precipitate cardiac failure in 
patients with coronary artery disease, while delirium commonly occurs 
in older patients. Historically, management of HHS was modelled on 
DKA protocols, but there is increasing recognition of better outcomes 
using a slower approach to correction of the electrolyte and other meta-
bolic abnormalities (in contrast to DKA there is no urgent need to correct 
ketoacidosis). As HHS occurs in people whose brains are at higher risk 
of injury, rapid shifts in osmolality should be avoided with less aggres-
sive uid replacement and rate of glucose lowering guided by serial cal-
culations of serum osmolality and glucose. Key recommendations are 
that 0.9% sodium chloride solution alone is used for initial treatment and 
that insulin is introduced only when the rate of fall in blood glucose has 
plateaued.
If osmolality cannot be measured frequently, osmolarity can be calcu-
lated using the following equation from measurements of plasma electro-
lytes and glucose (in mmol/L) and used as a surrogate (the normal range 
is 280–296 mOsmol/L):
Plasma osmolarity
Na
glucose
urea
=
+
+
+
2[
]
[
]
[
]
A limitation of this approach is that hyperglycaemia, by increasing 
serum osmolality, causes the movement of water out of cells into plasma, 
reducing Na+ levels by dilution. Therefore, in the presence of hypergly-
caemia, a corrected [Na+] can be calculated for use in this formula by 
21.13  Typical characteristics of HHS and DKA
HHS
DKA
Age
Older
Younger
Classication
Established pre-
diabetes/type 2 
diabetes or rst 
presentation
Established type 
1 diabetes or rst 
presentation
Duration of onset
Days to weeks
Hours to days
Abdominal pain
Uncommon
Common
Volume depletion
10%–20%
5%–10%
Insulin deciency
Relative
Absolute
Glucose
Usually >30 mmol/L
Usually >11.1 mmol/L
Ketonaemia
<3.0 mmol/L
>3.0 mmol/L
Acidosis
Bicarbonate >15
pH >7.3
Bicarbonate <15
pH 7.0–7.3
(DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; HHS = hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state)
Fluid and potassium
                     0–60 mins
Start FRII at a rate of 0.05 units/kg/hr
IF significant ketonaemia
(blood ketone >1 mmol/L)
ONLY AFTER commencing fluid
                    1 to 6 hours
IF glucose is decreasing by
<5 mmol/L/hr (<90 mg/dL/hr) 
AND positive fluid balance is adequate
(aim for 2-3 litres after 6 hours)
THEN increase the rate of FRII to
0.1 units/kg/hr 
OR start a FRII at a rate of
0.05 units/kg/hr if not already started
                   After 6 hours
Increase or decrease the rate of FRII
by 1 unit/hr to maintain blood glucose
in the range 10–15 mmol/L
(180-270 mg/dL) and ensure ketones
are clearing
Insulin
0–60 minutes
1 L 0.9% saline over 1 hour (more
rapid if BP < 90 mmHg)
                    After 1 hour
Adjust the rate of fluids according
to clinical status and osmolality
 Aim for positive balance of 2-3 L
   after 6 hours, 3-6 L after 12 hours
 Rate of fluid should normally be
   0.5-1.0 L/hr
 Aim for osmolality to decrease
   by 3-8 mosmol/kg/hr
 Rate of fall of sodium should not
   exceed 10 mmol/L in 24 hrs
 If glucose < 14 mmol/L add 10%
   glucose at 125 mmol/hr
 Adjust KCl replacement to maintain
   4-5 mmmol/L
Fig. 21.16 Emergency management of hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state. Dashed intravenous infusion line represents ‘if required’. (FRII = xed rate insulin infusion; 
KCl = potassium chloride)

[[p777]]
Presenting problems in diabetes    725
21.14  Levels of hypoglycaemia
 Level 1 hypoglycaemia (alert value) as <3.9 mmol/L but ≥3.0 mmol/L 
(<70 mg/dL but ≥54 mg/dL)
 Level 2 hypoglycaemia (clinically signicant) is dened as <3.0 mmol/L 
(<54 mg/dL). This level is unequivocally low and suggests clinically important 
biochemical hypoglycaemia
 Level 3 hypoglycaemia (severe) is dened as any low blood glucose level 
leading to cognitive impairment and the need for external assistance to provide 
glucose, glucagon or other corrective activity
adding 1.6 mmol/L to the measured [Na+] for every 5.55 mmol/L (100 mg/
dL) increment of serum glucose above normal.
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia has been dened by the American Diabetes Association 
in three distinct levels (see Box 21.14) – level 1 (alert value), level 2 
(clinically signicant) and level 3 (severe). When hypoglycaemia devel-
ops in people without diabetes, it is called ‘spontaneous’ hypoglycae-
mia: denition, causes and investigation are described on page 689. 
Hypoglycaemia seldom occurs in people without diabetes, but is very 
common in people with diabetes, mainly due to insulin and (to a lesser 
extent) sulphonylurea therapy. Unlike endogenous insulin, secretion of 
which is down-regulated when blood glucose falls, these therapies con-
tinue to act even when blood glucose is low.
More than 10% of people with type 1 diabetes report an episode 
of level 3 hypoglycaemia per year. CGM devices show more frequent 
episodes of level 2 hypoglycaemia – up to every 2 days in some stud-
ies. Importantly this is more frequent than hypoglycaemia measured 
by self-reported events or blood glucose monitoring. This nding is 
likely related to the improved detection by CGM. There may be an 
element of over-reporting at lower levels of interstitial uid glucose, 
owing to lower reliability of some CGM devices, but accuracy of CGM 
devices is constantly improving.
The critical importance of glucose as a fuel source for the brain means 
that, in health, a number of mechanisms are in place to ensure that glu-
cose homeostasis is maintained. If blood glucose falls, three primary 
physiological defence mechanisms operate:
 endogenous insulin release from pancreatic β cells is suppressed
 release of glucagon from pancreatic α cells is increased
 the autonomic nervous system is activated, with release of catecho-
lamines both systemically and within tissues.
In addition, stress hormones, such as cortisol and growth hormone, 
are released into the blood. These actions reduce peripheral glucose 
uptake and increase hepatic glucose production, maintaining a glu-
cose supply to the brain. Retained endogenous insulin secretion in 
people with type 1 diabetes (measured using C-peptide) has a glu-
cose smoothing effect that reduces the frequency of hypoglycaemia, 
as insulin secretion is inhibited by falling blood glucose levels. However, 
in most individuals with type 1 diabetes endogenous insulin production 
falls to minimal amounts within a few years of diagnosis, increasing 
glucose variability and the risk of hypoglycaemia. In addition, within 
5years of diagnosis, many people with type 1 diabetes lose their ability 
to release glucagon during hypoglycaemia. The reasons for this are 
unknown and may result from loss of α-cell regulation by insulin or other 
products of the β cell.
Rates of hypoglycaemia are generally lower in insulin-treated type 
2 diabetes than in type 1 diabetes, particularly in individuals with shorter 
duration of diabetes. This is likely due to preservation of signicant 
endogenous insulin release for longer in most individuals, but also to 
differences in insulin regimens, i.e. more frequent use of intermediate- or 
longer- (rather than short-) acting insulins.
Level 3 hypoglycaemia is about 10 times less common in people with 
type 2 diabetes treated with sulphonylureas than in those treated with 
insulin therapy. As these agents were previously widely prescribed, the 
proportion of cases of hypoglycaemia attributable to their use was high. 
However, with decreasing use of sulphonylureas over the last 20 years 
(due to the advent of newer agents), this proportion has dramatically 
fallen. Nevertheless, hypoglycaemia remains a signicant risk in older peo-
ple who are taking these agents, particularly those with renal impairment.
Clinical assessment
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia (Box 21.15) comprise two main groups: 
those related to acute activation of the autonomic nervous system 
and those secondary to glucose deprivation of the brain (neuroglyco-
penia). Symptoms of hypoglycaemia are idiosyncratic, differing with 
age and duration of diabetes, and also depending on the circum-
stances in which hypoglycaemia occurs. Hypoglycaemia also affects 
mood, inducing a state of increased tension and low energy. Learning 
to recognise the early onset of hypoglycaemia is an important aspect 
of the education of people with diabetes managed with insulin.
Awareness of hypoglycaemia
For most individuals, the glucose level (threshold) at which they rst 
become aware of hypoglycaemia is not constant, but varies accord-
ing to the circumstances in which hypoglycaemia arises (e.g. dur-
ing the night or during exercise). In addition, with longer duration of 
diabetes, and particularly in response to frequent hypoglycaemia, 
the threshold for generation of symptom responses to hypoglycae-
mia shifts to a lower glucose concentration. This cerebral adaptation 
has a similar effect on the counter-regulatory hormonal response to 
hypoglycaemia. Taken together, this means that individuals with type 
1 diabetes may develop reduced (impaired) awareness of hypogly-
caemia. Symptoms can be experienced less intensely, or even be 
absent, despite blood glucose concentrations below level 2 hypo-
glycaemia. Such individuals are at an especially high risk of level 3 
hypoglycaemia. The prevalence of impaired awareness of hypogly-
caemia increases with time; overall, it affects around 20%–25% of 
people with type 1 diabetes and under 10% with insulin-treated type 
2 diabetes.
Risk factors and causes of hypoglycaemia
Risk factors and causes of hypoglycaemia in patients taking insulin or 
sulphonylurea drugs are listed in Box 21.16. Hypoglycaemia is the limit-
ing factor in glycaemic management for people with type 1 diabetes: it 
is unpleasant and fear of the lived experience and its consequences is 
understandable. In some people with diabetes, fear can have a major 
impact on their willingness and ability to achieve target glucose levels. 
Level 3 hypoglycaemia can cause serious morbidity (e.g. convulsions, 
coma, cerebral oedema, focal neurological lesions) and has a mortality 
21.15  Most common symptoms of hypoglycaemia
Autonomic
 Sweating
 Trembling
 Pounding heart
 Hunger
 Anxiety
Neuroglycopenic
 Delirium
 Drowsiness
 Speech difculty
 Inability to concentrate
 Incoordination
 Irritability, anger
Non-specic
 Nausea
 Tiredness
 Headache
N.B. Symptoms differ with age; children exhibit behavioural changes (such as naughtiness or 
irritability), while older people experience more prominent neurological symptoms (such as visual 
disturbance and ataxia).

[[p778]]
726    DIABETES MELLITUS
of up to 4% in people treated with insulin. Rarely, sudden death during 
sleep occurs in otherwise healthy young patients with type 1 diabetes 
(‘dead-in-bed syndrome’); this may be a consequence of hypoglycae-
mia-induced cardiac arrhythmia. Hypoglycaemia is very disruptive to 
normal daily activities including employment, driving (see Box 21.22), 
travel, sport and personal relationships.
Nocturnal hypoglycaemia in people with type 1 diabetes is common, 
but often undetected as it may not cause waking from sleep. People with 
diabetes may describe poor quality of sleep, morning headaches and 
vivid dreams or nightmares, or a partner may observe profuse sweating, 
restlessness, twitching or even seizures. The only reliable way to identify 
this problem is to use a CGM device with a low glucose alarm.
In healthy individuals, muscle contraction during exercise causes 
insulin-independent glucose uptake into muscle. Suppression of 
endogenous insulin secretion is key to the normal physiological 
response to exercise as glucose derived from hepatic glucose produc-
tion can be transported into muscle via other pathways; this physiolog-
ical mechanism minimises any risk of ‘spontaneous’ exercise-induced 
hypoglycaemia. However, in insulin-treated diabetes, circulating insulin 
levels may actually increase with exercise because of improved blood 
ow at the site of injection, causing a signicant risk of hypoglycaemia. 
This occurs most commonly with prolonged and/or aerobic exercise. 
In addition, the ‘double hit’ of hypoglycaemia and exercise is respon-
sible for the additional increased risk of nocturnal hypoglycaemia that 
can occur after exercise, possibly as a result of glycogen depletion. 
In contrast, high-intensity exercise may initially cause blood glucose 
to rise signicantly because of stimulation of adrenaline (epinephrine) 
production. Close monitoring of blood glucose, education and lived 
experience (usually with an element of trial and error) are key in prevent-
ing exercise-induced hypoglycaemia.
Unfortunately, hypoglycaemia sometimes occurs within the hospital set-
ting. This may result from errors in insulin dose or type of insulin prescribed 
or infusion of IV insulin without glucose. In addition, hypoglycaemia may 
occur due to changes in meal timings (e.g. fasting for procedures) or con-
tent, failure to provide usual snacks, reduced carbohydrate intake because 
of vomiting or reduced appetite, or factors related to the hospital admis-
sion, e.g. concurrent illness or discontinuation of long-term glucocorticoid 
therapy. The diabetes team has a role in continuing education of health-
care staff in all areas to prevent these situations occurring; regular review 
of any adverse events is also critical to prevention.
Management
Reversing hypoglycaemia
Treatment of hypoglycaemia depends on its severity and on whether 
the patient is conscious and able to swallow (Box 21.17). Levels 1 and 
2 hypoglycaemia should be reversed with fast-acting carbohydrate, 
repeated measurements of glucose and, if necessary, adjustment of glu-
cose lowering therapy. There is an understandable tendency to ‘over-
treat’ episodes of hypoglycaemia, resulting in signicant hyperglycaemia 
21.16  Hypoglycaemia in diabetes: common causes and risk 
factors
Excess insulin
 Erroneous injection of insulin (e.g. dose miscalculation or injection of incorrect 
insulin type)
 Deliberate overdose
 Lipohypertrophy at injection sites (causing variable insulin absorption)
 Bariatric surgery (can cause hyperinsulinaemia)
Increased sensitivity to insulin
 Exercise
 Weight loss
 Sudden reduction in glucocorticoids
 Unrecognised Addison's disease
Reduced carbohydrate intake/increased metabolic demand
 Irregular or missed meal
 Gastroparesis due to autonomic neuropathy causing variable carbohydrate 
absorption
 Bariatric surgery
 Malabsorption, e.g. coeliac disease
 Eating disorder
 Early pregnancy
 Breast feeding
Reduced gluconeogenesis and/or glycogen reserves
 Alcohol
 Chronic kidney disease*
 Advanced liver disease*
Increased glucose variability
 Absent/minimal endogenous insulin secretion (reduced C-peptide)
 Long-duration type 1 diabetes/insulin-treated type 2 diabetes
 Young age of onset of type 1 diabetes
Reduced ability to detect hypoglycaemia
 Impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia
 Rapid improvement in and/or strict glycaemic control
 Previous severe hypoglycaemia
 Long-duration type 1 diabetes/duration of insulin-treated type 2 diabetes
 Older age
 Dementia
 Sleep
 No or inadequate glucose monitoring
*Also cause reduced insulin clearance.
21.17  Emergency treatment of hypoglycaemia
Biochemical or symptomatic hypoglycaemia (Levels 1 and 2)
In the UK, it is recommended that all glucose levels <4.0 mmol/L1 are treated  
(‘4 is the oor’). People with diabetes who recognise developing hypoglycaemia are 
encouraged to treat immediately. Options available include:
 Oral fast-acting carbohydrate (10–15 g) is taken as glucose drink or tablets or 
confectionery, e.g. 5–7 Dextrosol tablets (or 4–5 Glucotabs)
 Repeat capillary glucose measurement 10–15 mins later. If still < 4.0 mmol/L, 
repeat above treatment
 If blood glucose remains < 4.0 mmol/L after three cycles (30–45 mins), contact 
a doctor. Consider glucagon 1 mg IM or IV 10% glucose (600–800mL/hour –
caution in renal and cardiac disease)
 Once blood glucose is >4.0 mmol/L, take additional long-acting carbohydrate of 
choice
 Do not omit insulin injection if due but review regimen
Severe (Level 3)
This means individuals are either unconscious or unable to treat hypoglycaemia 
themselves. Treatment is usually by a relative or by paramedical or medical staff. 
Immediate treatment as below is needed.
 If patient is unconscious/tting or very aggressive or nil by mouth, parenteral 
treatment is required:
IV 75 mL 20% dextrose over 15 mins (= 15 g)2
Or
IV 150 mL 10% dextrose over 15 mins
Or
 IM glucagon (1 mg) – may be ineffective in undernourished people, severe 
liver disease and in repeated hypoglycaemia. Caution in hypoglycaemia 
induced by oral glucose-lowering therapy.
 If patient is conscious and able to swallow, but confused, disorientated or 
aggressive:
Give 2 tubes of 40% glucose gel – squeezed into mouth between teeth and 
gums
Repeat blood glucose measurement after 10–15 mins and if ineffective  
after 3 cycles call doctor and consider IM glucagon (1 mg) or IV 10%  
glucose
14.0 mmol/L = 72 mg/dL. 2Use of 50% dextrose is no longer recommended.  
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)  
Adapted from updated JBDS Diabetes at the Front Door guideline, March 2020. 
Available at: abcd.care/resource/diabetes-front-door.

[[p779]]
Management of diabetes    727
in the aftermath. Level 3 hypoglycaemia may also be treated with oral 
carbohydrate if the patient does not have impaired consciousness. 
If parenteral therapy is required, then as soon as the individual is able 
to swallow, oral glucose should be given. Full recovery may not occur 
immediately and reversal of cognitive impairment may not be complete 
until 60 minutes after normoglycaemia is restored. When hypoglycaemia 
has occurred in a patient treated with a long- or intermediate-acting insu-
lin or a long-acting sulphonylurea, such as glibenclamide, the possibility 
of recurrence should be anticipated; to prevent this, infusion of 10% dex-
trose titrated to the patient's blood glucose, or provision of additional oral 
carbohydrate may be necessary.
If a person with diabetes fails to regain consciousness after blood glu-
cose is restored to normal, then cerebral oedema and other causes of 
impaired consciousness – such as alcohol intoxication, a post-ictal state 
or cerebral haemorrhage – should be considered. Cerebral oedema is 
associated with a high mortality and morbidity.
Following recovery, it is important to try to identify a cause and make 
appropriate adjustments to therapy. Unless the reason for a hypoglycae-
mic episode is clear, people with diabetes should be advised to reduce 
the next dose of insulin by 10%–20% and seek medical advice about 
further adjustments in dose.
The management of self-poisoning with oral glucose-lowering agents 
is described on page 228.
Reducing future risk of hypoglycaemia
Every diabetes consultation should include gathering information about 
any low glucose levels measurements, the nature of symptoms with the 
measured levels of hypoglycaemia and whether there have been any 
episodes of level 3 hypoglycaemia. It is important to review blood glu-
cose monitoring and CGM data with the patient to determine the details 
around each episode: recognition of patterns can be aided by increas-
ing the number of measurements and triangulation with diary recordings 
of insulin dosing, carbohydrate intake and physical activity. The lived 
experience of previous hypoglycaemia and any resultant fear should be 
explored. Education is fundamental to the prevention of hypoglycaemia 
and should focus on risk factors for, and treatment of, hypoglycaemia. 
The importance of regular glucose monitoring, exible insulin regimens 
and the need to have glucose (and glucagon) readily available should be 
reinforced. Relatives and friends also need to be familiar with the symp-
toms and signs of hypoglycaemia and should be instructed in how to 
help (including how to inject glucagon).
The goal is always to minimise the risk of hypoglycaemia while still 
reaching target glucose levels and HbA1c. Adjustments in insulin regimen 
based on patterns of glucose should be agreed with the person with dia-
betes over time to achieve their goals. HbA1c targets should be indivdual-
ised to balance the risk of hypoglycaemia with the risk of complications. 
Upgrading insulin regimens to rapid-acting and long-acting insulin ana-
logues is associated with a lower frequency of nocturnal hypoglycaemia. 
The use of CGM devices (particularly those with low glucose alarms), is 
invaluable. CGM values and trend arrows provide important information 
upon which to base decisions on doses of short-acting (bolus) insulin 
to be administered in relation to planned carbohydrate ingestion; thus, 
glucose can be kept to target while hypoglycaemia is prevented. The 
use of sensor-augmented CSII systems, particularly those that incorpo-
rate a ‘low glucose suspend’ feature, can virtually abolish hypoglycae-
mia. Transplantation should be considered in cases of severe intractable 
hypoglycaemia (see p. 742).
Management of diabetes
Contemporary specialist diabetes care is delivered by a multidisciplinary 
team including medical staff, specialist nurses, nursing assistants, dieti-
cians, podiatrists, pharmacists, retinal screeners, psychologists, health 
care assistants and administrative staff. Ideally these staff are co-located 
in an ambulatory care or diabetes centre, which need not necessarily 
be on a hospital site, and there should be close and dynamic links 
with primary care and community-based diabetes specialist nurses, all 
involved in continuing professional development.
The aims for both types 1 and 2 diabetes are initially to relieve osmotic 
symptoms (see p. 725) and then to minimise the risks of long-term 
microvascular and macrovascular complications. Microvascular compli-
cations are prevented by targeting hyperglycaemia, but control of mac-
rovascular complications also requires management of associated risk 
factors, particularly hypertension, dyslipidaemia and cigarette smoking. 
Initial investigation and management is outlined in Figure 21.20.
Due to the risk of complications, people with all forms of diabetes 
should be kept under review with regular monitoring, adjustment of 
treatment, and screening to detect treatable complications as early as 
possible. Diabetes care is delivered in primary care for the majority of 
people with type 2 diabetes and in specialist centres for those with type 1 
diabetes or complex treatment regimens and/or complications. A check-
list for follow-up visits is given in Box 21.18. Frequency of appointments 
usually ranges from 3-monthly to annually depending on whether targets 
are being achieved.
Type 2 diabetes Where there are no ‘red ags’ of ketosis or rapid 
weight loss, initial management of type 2 diabetes involves dietary and 
lifestyle advice, which should aim at inducing remission of the condition 
(see p. 732). However, adding in oral glucose-lowering drugs is more 
likely to be required at an early stage for those who have symptomatic 
hyperglycaemia or a high HbA1c. Education is key to achieving and main-
taining a healthy lifestyle in type 2 diabetes. Management should be indi-
vidualised, taking into account personal and cultural beliefs, individual 
circumstances, comorbidities and other factors.
Type 1 diabetes People with a new diagnosis of type 1 diabetes require 
substantial initial education and support around diet, glucose monitoring, 
the technicalities of insulin administration and dose adjustment, and the 
recognition and treatment of hypoglycaemia (Box 21.19). A diagnosis of 
type 1 diabetes can be profoundly life-altering not least because individ-
uals have often previously been healthy and have now been diagnosed 
with a long-term condition that requires restrictions to diet and lifestyle, 
regular nger-pricks and multiple daily injections. Hypoglycaemia is 
unpleasant, can be socially embarrassing and can have signicant mor-
bidity and indeed mortality. Type 1 diabetes also has signicant poten-
tial impact on employment, education, driving, overseas travel, family 
planning and can result in increased travel and life insurance premiums. 
Therefore, people living with type 1 diabetes often have higher levels of 
psychological and psychiatric morbidity and require substantial ongoing 
support and encouragement from diabetes healthcare professionals, 
including psychological support.
As duration of type 1 diabetes increases, maintenance of good gly-
caemic control can become progressively more challenging, despite 
the lived experience of managing insulin therapy. Hypoglycaemia tends 
to become more frequent, as protective counter-regulatory hormone 
responses and warning symptoms diminish. Maintaining strict glycae-
mic control, with minimal hypoglycaemia, is extremely challenging with 
conventional subcutaneous insulin therapy and requires motivation and 
meticulous attention in terms of dietary factors, glucose monitoring and 
decision-making around insulin dosing.
Some individuals with type 1 diabetes have long-term sub-optimal 
glycaemic control. The reasons for this are complex, but in many cases 
relate to difculty nding time to devote the effort required to self-manage 
the condition in the context of other events and demands within their 
personal, family and work lives. Such factors vary across the lifespan 
with major differences between individuals. Other individuals have more 
serious psychological problems in accepting or adjusting to the diagno-
sis. These factors can lead to behaviours that have a negative impact 
on glycaemic control such as: omission of insulin injections (either delib-
erate or accidental), taking insulin injections after meals, taking xed 
doses of insulin or doses based on symptoms (e.g. taking extra insulin 
when person feels thirsty), under-dosing with insulin to reduce risk of 
hypoglycaemia, consumption of foods high in unrened carbohydrate, 

[[p780]]
728    DIABETES MELLITUS
non-adherence to carbohydrate counting, over-treatment of episodes 
of hypoglycaemia and avoidance of glucose monitoring. Attempts to 
improve glycaemic control may involve enhanced input and support 
from diabetes specialist nurses and dietitians, more regular review in 
out-patient clinics, referral into structured education programmes and 
(increasingly) provision or recommendation of technologies like CGM and 
CSII therapy (where resources permit). However, even with these poten-
tially life-transforming interventions and technologies, type 1 diabetes 
remains a very challenging condition.
Type 1 diabetes is associated with other immune-mediated disorders 
(see Ch. 4), including thyroid disease, coeliac disease, Addison’s dis-
ease, pernicious anaemia and vitiligo. Awareness of these is important 
so that they can be diagnosed promptly and managed appropriately. 
Approximately 30% of women and 15% of men with type 1 diabetes 
have at least one related immune-mediated condition. The association 
with hypothyroidism is strongest (present in ~20% overall); coeliac dis-
ease is the second most common (present in 4%) and is particularly 
associated with childhood-onset diabetes. Thyroid function should be 
checked annually in all patients with type 1 diabetes and systematic 
screening for coeliac disease is recommended in many countries.
Self-assessment of glycaemic control
Type 2 diabetes People with type 2 diabetes usually only need to self-
test capillary blood glucose regularly if they require insulin or sulphonyl-
urea therapy. For those on insulin, blood glucose testing 1–4 times daily 
(depending on the intensity of the prescribed regimen) helps guide insulin 
dosing and to manage diet, exercise and illness. It also helps detect 
and protect against hypoglycaemia. This is also the case for sulphony-
lurea therapy. People with type 2 diabetes who are on neither of these 
therapies do not have an absolute need to test blood glucose, but it 
can be useful, e.g. for self-education on the effects of food and exer-
cise on glycaemia. Fasting or pre-meal blood glucose target is usually 
5.0–7.0 mmol/L (90–126 mg/dL). Those who require to test should be 
taught how to monitor their own blood glucose using an electronic meter 
and prescribed adequate supplies of blood glucose testing strips.
Type 1 diabetes People with type 1 diabetes are advised to test capillary 
blood glucose four or more times per day as they usually require inten-
sive insulin regimens. Blood glucose meters with dual functionality for 
ketone testing are particularly useful to provide early warning of ketosis 
and help prevent ketoacidosis when blood glucose is high and/or during 
intercurrent illness.
CGM systems are increasingly becoming a standard of care in type 1 
diabetes. Specic devices are funded by the NHS in the UK, as their use 
is associated with improved glycaemic control and is cost-effective. CGM 
widens the lens through which day-to-day glycaemia can be monitored 
 21.18  How to review a patient in the diabetes clinic
Approach to the diabetes consultation
Introduction (agenda-setting)
‘How are you?’
‘What matters to you?’
(Is translator required?)
Demographics
Age, type of diabetes, duration of diabetes
Microvascular complications
Retinopathy/maculopathy
Renal function (eGFR)
Microalbuminuria/proteinuria
Foot examination
Macrovascular complications
Cardiovascular disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Peripheral vascular disease
Metabolic
BMI/weight trajectory
Diet (quality/calories)/CHO counting
Current glucose-lowering treatment 
(adherence/administration)
HbA1c
Step-wise approach to glucose monitoring 
(frequency, timing, representativeness or 
reliability of data)
Hypoglycaemia (frequency, timing, 
symptoms, context, episodes of level 3 
hypoglycaemia, consequences, driving)
Hyperglycaemia (frequency, timing, 
symptoms, context, episodes of DKA/
HHS, consequences)
Glycaemic variability if AGP available
Cardiovascular risk
BP
Cholesterol
Smoking cessation
Other
Pregnancy/contraception
Exercise
Sexual dysfunction
Alcohol
Driving
Summarise
Main action points
Goal setting
Changes to treatment
Referrals within team
Other referrals
Accessing support prior to next 
appointment
Remember:
 Person-centred (lifestyle, occupation, travel, behaviour)
 Language matters
 Start with the ‘Good News’
 Culturally sensitive
 Collaborative
 Empathetic
 Empowering
 Reassuring
 Non-judgemental
(AGP = Ambulatory Glucose Prole; BMI = Body Mass Index; CHO = carbohydrate;
DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate; HHS = hyperglycaemic 
hyperosmolar state)
 21.19  Learning outcomes on the day of type 1 diabetes diagnosis
 Explain what is type 1 diabetes
 Explore any fears and anxieties and ask questions
 Be able to check blood glucose/ketones
 Be able to administer insulin and understand the correct storage of insulin
 Understand the target blood glucose
 Understand the role of rapid-acting insulin and its relationship with food
 Understand how to safely dispose of used needles and lancets
 Appreciate that people with diabetes should follow similar dietary 
recommendations as appropriate for non-diabetic people and that insulin is 
adjusted to carbohydrate content of diet
 Understand what a ‘hypo’ is and how to treat it
 Be aware they can access their own diabetes health records
 Understand what to expect from the diabetes team, how to make contact and 
the date/time/mode of their next interaction
 Understand that notifying DVLA* about the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes is a 
legal requirement and the precautions to be taken before driving
 Understand that sub-optimal glycaemic control increases risks to both mother 
and baby
 Understand that their employer should know they have been diagnosed with 
type 1 diabetes
*Or equivalent in other countries.
(DVLA = United Kingdom Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency)

[[p781]]
Management of diabetes    729
by people with diabetes and provides a more holistic view of the lived 
experience of diabetes. CGM data are summarised in an Ambulatory 
Glucose Prole (AGP). This display provides a graphical representation 
of interstitial glucose over time, allowing trends to be readily identied 
(Fig. 21.17). Summary metrics include: mean glucose, time in range, 
time above range and time below range (see below). Glucose variability 
over time is reported as standard deviation and percentage coefcient of 
variation. A ‘Glucose Management Indicator’ is now available on some 
CGM devices corresponding to ‘estimated HbA1c’ (eA1c): the accuracy of 
this statistic increases with the volume of CGM data available (minimum 
10days and preferably >14 days).
The proportion of time spent within an optimal glycaemic range is 
increasingly recognised as a clinically meaningful tool. Time in range (TIR) 
denotes the percentage of time each day spent within agreed glucose 
targets (Fig. 21.18). The international consensus for ‘in range’ glucose val-
ues is between 3.9 and 10 mmol/L (70–180 md/dL) inclusive, with lower 
and higher levels termed time below range (TBR) and time above range 
(TAR). TIR of >70% is considered the optimum target for most people 
living with diabetes on the basis of extrapolation from the Diabetes Control 
and Complications Trial. In people at higher risk of hypoglycaemia, 50% 
TIR is accepted, with an understanding that this means more TAR. In preg-
nancy stricter glucose targets are specied (3.5–7.8 mmol/L (63–140 mg/
dL)), with 70% TIR (see Ch. 32).
Therapeutic goals
HbA1c targets
Type 1 diabetes The rst evidence that improved glycaemic control 
decreases the risk of microvascular complications in diabetes came in 1993 
from the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT). The DCCT ran-
domised adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes in the United 
States and Canada to intensive treatment (mean HbA1c 53 mmol/mol) or 
conventional treatment (mean HbA1c 75 mmol/mol) for 6.5 years. There was 
a 60% overall reduction in the risk of developing microvascular complica-
tions with an intensive therapy strategy, although severe hypoglycaemia was 
increased up to threefold in those in whom HbA1c was most reduced. Thirty-
year follow-up of both groups of DCCT participants demonstrated that mac-
rovascular complications were also reduced even many years after a period 
of intensive control – this was termed ‘metabolic memory’.
Type 2 diabetes In the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS), pub-
lished in 1998, adults with type 2 diabetes were randomised to intensive 
blood glucose control mainly with sulphonylureas and insulin (mean HbA1c
53 mmol/mol) versus conventional glucose control mainly with dietary 
treatment (mean HbA1c 64 mmol/mol) for 10 years. Rates of microvascular 
complications were reduced in those who received intensive therapy, but a 
benecial effect on macrovascular complications was observed only with 
metformin in overweight participants in whom there was a reduction in 
the rate of diabetes-related death. Follow-up of UKPDS participants over 
further decades reinforced the microvascular benets of glucose lowering 
and the specic macrovascular benets of metformin.
Other trials that examined whether lowering HbA1c below 53 mmol/mol 
could further reduce rates of complications in type 2 diabetes suggested 
that a lower target of 48 mmol/mol may only be safe for younger people 
in the initial years following diagnosis due to the risks associated with 
hypoglycaemia (see Box 21.20).
Therefore, the usual target HbA1c is 53 mmol/mol for both type 1 
and type 2 diabetes. However, an individualised target is appropriate 
depending on the needs of the person in question. For example, in 
recently diagnosed individuals with type 2 diabetes not requiring any 
agents that cause hypoglycaemia or patients with type 1 diabetes 
using sensor-augmented CSII (which can substantially reduce the risks 
of hypoglycaemia), a target of 48 mmol/mol or less may be appropriate. 
Explicit setting of a higher target (e.g. 58 mmol/mol) is acceptable in 
some cases, for example older people with shorter duration of diabe-
tes (i.e. at lower lifetime risk of complications), individuals with a high 
risk of level 3 hypoglycaemia (e.g. those with impaired awareness of 
hypoglycaemia or cognitive impairment) or those in whom hypoglycae-
mia could have a particularly adverse consequence (e.g. individuals at 
high fall risk; Box 21.20). In general, the benets of lower target HbA1c
(primarily a lower risk of microvascular disease) need to be weighed 
against increased risks (primarily hypoglycaemia). The risks of hypo-
glycaemia are higher in individuals with absent or minimal endoge-
nous insulin (e.g. type 1 diabetes and following total pancreatectomy), 
in whom there is more marked glycaemic variability (see Fig. 21.10). 
Achieving strict glycaemic targets in such individuals can be particularly 
challenging. Type 2 diabetes is associated with much lower glycaemic 
variability (due to retained endogenous insulin production), but unless 
major diet and lifestyle changes are achieved, it is usually a progressive 
condition and so there is usually a need to increase diabetes medica-
tion over time to achieve the individualised target HbA1c
Control of other risk factors
Type 2 diabetes Due to underlying insulin resistance, most people with 
type 2 diabetes have hypertension and dyslipidaemia in addition to 
hyperglycaemia. Targeting of these cardiovascular risk factors is crucial in 
reducing risk of macrovascular complications. UKPDS participants were 
Target glucose range
Time of day
Low threshold (4 mmol/L)
High threshold (10 mmol/L)
03.00
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
05.00
Median line
10th to 90th percentile
25th to 75th percentile
07.00
09.00
11.00
13.00
15.00
17.00
19.00
21.00
23.00
01.00
Estimated A1c 6.3% or 45 mmol/mol
03.00
Glucose
(mmol/L)
Fig. 21.17 Ambulatory blood glucose prole. The Ambulatory Glucose Prole (AGP) is generated by combining continuous glucose monitor (CGM) data over a prolonged 
period (usually 14 days). It provides an example of a ‘typical day’ allowing the person with diabetes and health-care professionals to make more rational adjustments to insulin 
therapy. An estimated HbA can also be derived from these data. Black/blue solid line (median line) – the average (middle) point of all glucose levels. Ideally this should be in the 
target glucose range with mimimal variability. Inner blue-shaded band (25th to 75th percentile) – most common glucose levels and how they vary from day to day. Outer light 
blue-shaded band (10th to 90th percentile) – less common glucose levels and how they vary from day to day. Adapted from DPC Toolkits, The Ambulatory Glucose Prole (AGP) 
in 4 steps. https://cdn.asp.events/CLIENT_CloserSt_D86EA381_5056_B739_5482D50A1A831DDD/sites/DPC2020/media/toolkits-2018/The-Ambulatory-Glucose-Prole-AGP-
in-4-steps.pdf.

[[p782]]
730    DIABETES MELLITUS
also randomised to tight (<150/85 mmHg) or less tight (<180/105 mmHg) 
blood pressure control: the former was associated with a reduction in 
the risk of death as well as fewer complications overall (includ-
ing retinopathy). The target for blood pressure is now usually below 
140/80 mmHg, although some guidelines suggest below 130/80 mmHg 
(e.g. in those with renal disease). As a rule, anyone with type 2 diabetes 
over the age of 40 years should be prescribed a statin, irrespective of 
their blood cholesterol level. Some guidelines do not propose a target 
level once a statin has been started, but others suggest a total cho-
lesterol of less than 4.0 mmol/L (approximately 150 mg/dL) and an LDL 
cholesterol of less than 2.0 mmol/L (approximately 75 mg/dL).
Type 1 diabetes Elevation of the same cardiovascular risk factors also 
commonly occurs over time in type 1 diabetes, but is thought at least 
in the early years to be of secondary importance to hyperglycaemia. 
Guidelines suggest targeting risk factors in those with a duration of type 
1 diabetes of over 15–20 years, or aged over 35–40 years. Similar BP 
and cholesterol treatment targets are recommended as for people with 
type 2 diabetes. Caution should be exercised in prescribing for women of 
childbearing potential, especially drugs with teratogenic potential (includ-
ing ACE inhibitors and statins).
Education, diet and lifestyle
Broadly, people with diabetes should follow similar dietary recommenda-
tions as appropriate for non-diabetic people, but if overweight or obese 
should seek to lose weight. However, this can be difcult as ‘healthy’ 
diet recommendations are rarely followed by the general population, par-
ticularly in countries in which cheap calorie-rich foods are widely availa-
ble and heavily advertised. Labelling of foods as ‘suitable for diabetics’ 
was prohibited in the UK in 2016, but some products labelled ‘diabetic’ 
are still available. These should be avoided as they are often expensive, 
sweet-tasting foods (jam, biscuits, chocolate, ice-cream) that can contain 
synthetic sugars that raise blood glucose. People with diabetes may be 
misled into believing these products are essential or especially suitable. 
Diabetes prevention programmes are in place in many countries, essen-
tially supporting low-fat healthy eating, weight reduction and increased 
physical activity (often referred to as ‘non-pharmacological intervention’).
Principles of healthy eating
Type 1 diabetes Soon after diagnosis patients should have access to a 
dietitian for education on ‘carbohydrate counting’, as this is essential 
for rational insulin dose adjustment. Books and smartphone apps are 
available that show carbohydrate content next to pictures of commonly 
consumed foodstuffs, in varying portion sizes; these can assist individ-
uals in making an educated estimate of the carbohydrate content of 
a meal (Fig. 21.19). Highly accurate information on the carbohydrate 
content of pre-prepared foods and basic ingredients is provided on 
package labels; some people with type 1 diabetes weigh food por-
tions to get as precise information as possible. Carbohydrate counting 
requires patience and diligence, but becomes easier with lived expe-
rience. In theory, people with type 1 diabetes with a normal weight 
should be able to eat unrestricted types and amounts of carbohydrate, 
as they can simply take an appropriate amount of insulin to ‘cover’ 
the carbohydrate content of the meal. However, in practice, because 
the time action proles of available exogenous insulins do not exactly 
Older people
or high risk of
hypoglycaemia
>13.9 mmol/L
(>250 mg/dL)
10.1–13.9 mmol/L
(182–250 mg/dL)
Target range:
3.9–10.0 mmol/L
(70–180 mg/dL)
<3.8 mmol/L (<70 mg/dL)
Target
<10%
<50%
<1%
>50%
Pregnancy
>7.8 mmol/L
(>140 mg/dL)
Target range:
3.5–7.8 mmol/L
(63–140 mg/dL)
3.0–3.4 mmol/L
(54–61 mg/dL)
<3.0 mmol/L
(<54 mg/dL)
Target
<25%
<1%
<4%
>70%
Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
>13.9 mmol/L
(>250 mg/dL)
10.1–13.9 mmol/L
(182–250 mg/dL)
Target range:
3.9–10.0 mmol/L
(70–180 mg/dL)
3.0–3.8 mmol/L
(54–68 mg/dL)
<3.0 mmol/L
(<54 mg/dL)
Target
<5%
<25%
<1%
>70%
<4%
Fig. 21.18 Target time in range for different groups of people with type 1 diabetes. The different coloured sections represent the proportion of time spent within a 
glucose range: Green = proportion of time spent within range; yellow = time above range; orange = time signicantly above range; red = time below range; brown = time 
signicantly below range. ‘In range’glucose levels are much lower for women who are pregnant. A lower ‘time in range’ is accepted for people at higher risk of hypoglycaemia 
and in older people. Note: as the percentages are targets they do not add up to 100%. Adapted from Battelino T, et al. Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring data 
interpretation: recommendations from the international consensus on time in range. Diabetes Care 2019, dci190028
21.20  Diabetes in old age
 Incidence: type 2 diabetes becomes more common with increasing age.
 Aetiology: almost any form of diabetes can present in older people; do not 
presume that a new diagnosis of diabetes in an older person is automatically 
due to type 2 diabetes.
 Hypoglycaemia: older people may not recognise hypoglycaemia, increasing 
their risk of severe hypoglycaemia.
 Glycaemic targets: need moderated in frail older people, especially if using 
agents that cause hypoglycaemia (insulin and sulphonylureas).
 Dementia: both Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia are more common 
in people with diabetes, which can signicantly affect ability to manage diabetes 
safely. Input from family, carers and community nurses may be essential.

[[p783]]
Management of diabetes    731
match physiological variations in endogenous insulin, the consumption 
of unrened carbohydrate (such as sweets and sugar-rich drinks) and 
large portions of carbohydrate (>60 g) invariably results in ‘spikes’ in 
blood glucose. Therefore, the best glycaemic control is generally seen 
in individuals who mostly avoid unrened carbohydrate and limit carbo-
hydrate portion size.
Education on advanced carbohydrate counting and how to man-
age diet and insulin therapy during daily life (e.g. in the context of exer-
cise, alcohol and intercurrent illness) is provided in formal structured 
and cost-effective programmes, such as ‘Dose Adjustment for Normal 
Eating’ (DAFNE). This involves one week of small group learning with 
other individuals with the condition supported by a diabetes specialist 
nurse and a dietician. The COVID-19 pandemic has led to an increased 
use of remote ‘ipped classroom’ models of education supported by 
videotelephony platforms.
Type 2 diabetes There is no ‘one size ts all’ way of eating for people 
with type 2 diabetes, beyond making healthy choices more often and 
in smaller portions, as recommended by the Food Standards Agency 
(Box 21.21). There is no xed formula for the balance of carbohydrate, 
35 g
CARBS
390
CALS
29 g
PROTEIN
16 g
FAT
1 g
FIBRE
260 g curry
98 g rice
4 g
SAT FAT
80 g
CARBS
809
CALS
57 g
PROTEIN
32 g
FAT
2 g
FIBRE
505 g curry
 228 g rice
7 g
SAT FAT
125 g
CARBS
1266
CALS
88 g
PROTEIN
49 g
FAT
3 g
FIBRE
790 g curry
357 g rice
12 g
SAT FAT
11 g
CARBS
146
CALS
11 g
PROTEIN
6 g
FAT
0 g
FIBRE
105 g curry
31 g rice
26 cm dinner plate
Curry, chicken (with white rice)
MEALS
2 g
SAT FAT
56 g
CARBS
579
CALS
41 g
PROTEIN
23 g
FAT
2 g
FIBRE
365 g curry
 161 g rice
5 g
SAT FAT
101 g
CARBS
1012
CALS
70 g
PROTEIN
39 g
FAT
3 g
FIBRE
625 g curry
290 g rice
9 g
SAT FAT
Fig. 21.19 Example of a ‘carbohydrate counting’ guide for people with diabetes. Books and smart phone apps are available that give illustrative examples of different 
foods, in different portion sizes. The macronutrient and calorie content is provided for each portion. From Cheyette C, Balolia Y. Carbs and Cals. Carb & Calorie Counter, 6th 
edition; 2016. Chello Publishing Limited.

[[p784]]
732    DIABETES MELLITUS
fat and protein (‘macronutrient composition’); neither is there a universal 
‘diet sheet’ or list of ‘banned’ foods. Current advice is loosely based 
on the principles of a ‘Mediterranean’ diet (for which there is high level 
evidence of protection against cardiovascular disease) combined with 
a focus on choosing unrened carbohydrates (e.g. brown rice, brown 
pasta, brown noodles, porridge, granary bread, and beans and lentils) 
rather than rened carbohydrates (fruit juices, pastries, white bread, 
white pasta, white rice). Nutritional advice should be tailored to indi-
viduals and take account of age, lifestyle, culture and personal circum-
stances. A variety of structured education programmes, which focus on 
dietary and lifestyle factors, are available for type 2 diabetes, including 
DESMOND (Diabetes Education and Self Management for Ongoing and 
Newly Diagnosed).
Weight management
Over 80% of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese. Central 
obesity with increased waist circumference is particularly associated with 
insulin resistance and increased cardiovascular risk. Following a diag-
nosis of type 2 diabetes, there should be an intense focus on reversing 
any unhealthy habits and behaviours with the aim, where appropriate, 
of weight loss. It is extremely challenging for most overweight people 
(with or without type 2 diabetes) to lose body weight and avoid regain. 
However, if weight loss can be achieved, it markedly improves glycaemic 
control and slows diabetes progression. Substantial weight loss in obese 
people (usually around 15 kg or about 15% initial body weight) can put 
type 2 diabetes into remission and there are programmes now available 
to help people achieve this using, for example, an 800 kcal/day liquid 
‘meal replacement’ diet with gradual and supported meal re-introduction 
at 3 months (see p. 765). Trained supervision is essential and in the UK 
is increasingly provided by the NHS.
Some health professionals and people with type 2 diabetes are strong 
advocates of low-carbohydrate, high-fat (‘ketogenic’ or ‘Atkins’) diets to 
promote weight loss, or alternatively intermittent fasting 2 days out of 
every 5 (‘5:2’ diet). Perhaps because they help to provide and sustain 
motivation, these approaches are successful in achieving and sustain-
ing weight loss in some individuals, but to date it has not been possi-
ble to predict in advance who will respond or to demonstrate general 
efcacy of these diets in controlled trials. They must only be used with 
extreme caution in type 1 diabetes due to the risks of hypoglycaemia or 
ketoacidosis.
Bariatric surgery (see p. 766) induces marked weight loss in obese 
individuals with type 2 diabetes and this is often associated with signi-
cant improvements in HbA1c and withdrawal of or reduction in diabetes 
medications. Shared decision-making is important as surgery is not with-
out risk of short- and long-term complications.
Over 50% of adults with type 1 diabetes are now also obese, at least 
in the United States and the UK. Insulin is an anabolic hormone, so if 
insulin dosing is imperfectly matched to carbohydrate intake, calorie 
ingestion may at times be required to prevent hypoglycaemia. Some 
individuals appear to be more susceptible to insulin-induced weight gain 
than others. Increasing use of technology (CSII and CGM) may help with 
this problem, as may adjunct therapy with SGLT2 inhibitors.
Exercise
People with diabetes should be advised to follow advice on physical 
activity as for the general population. Supervised and structured exer-
cise programmes may be of particular benet in type 2 diabetes. The 
American Diabetes Association recommends that all adults with diabe-
tes reduce sedentary time (avoiding periods >90 minutes) and do either 
150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity exercise or 75 minutes per 
week of vigorous-intensity exercise. Muscle-strengthening (resistance) 
exercise is recommended on 2 or more days of the week. Of course, 
older individuals and those with disabilities may not be able to follow 
these recommendations in full.
People with type 1 diabetes (and people with insulin-treated type 2 
diabetes) face additional challenges in relation to exercise compared with 
the general population due to the risk of exercise-induced hypoglycae-
mia (see p. 725). However, following support in planning reduction of 
bolus insulin dosing (and in some cases increased carbohydrate inges-
tion) prior to exercise, many can participate in high-level competitive 
sports including golf, rowing and marathon running.
Alcohol and smoking
In type 2 diabetes, recommendations on alcohol are as for the general 
population (i.e. no more than 14 units per week for adults) to prevent 
liver cirrhosis and weight gain. In type 1 diabetes (and for people with 
insulin-treated type 2 diabetes) alcohol can also reduce hypoglycaemia 
awareness and suppress gluconeogenesis, increasing risk of level 3 
hypoglycaemia. In addition, the signs of hypoglycaemia can be mistaken 
for alcohol intoxication by observers. People with insulin-treated diabetes 
are therefore advised during ingestion of alcohol to: (i) let a companion 
know that they have diabetes and how to treat them if they have hypo-
glycaemia; (ii) continue to monitor and correct blood glucose by eating 
while drinking; and (iii) measure and ensure glucose is not low before 
retiring to bed.
Given the risk of cardiovascular complications associated with diabe-
tes and despite increasing access to smoking cessation support, around 
20% of people with type 1 diabetes and 15% of people with type 2 
diabetes in most cohorts are current cigarette smokers (rates similar or 
higher to that in the general population). Research is required into better 
methods of achieving behaviour modication.
Driving
European legislation on driving has had a major impact on people with 
diabetes. Legislation varies from country to country and so individuals 
should discuss with their diabetes health-care professional if their treat-
ment necessitates reporting to the licensing authority (Box 21.22). To 
drive a car or ride a motorcycle in the UK, people with diabetes who 
take insulin therapy must notify the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency 
(DVLA). They must have adequate awareness of hypoglycaemia, have 
had no more than one episode of level 3 hypoglycaemia in the preceding 
12 months, meet the standards for visual acuity and visual elds, and not 
be regarded as a likely risk to the public while driving. In addition, blood 
glucose testing is required to be performed no more than 2 hours before 
the start of a journey and every 2 hours while driving. Blood glucose lev-
els should be over 5.0 mmol/L (90 mg/dL) before driving; if they are below 
4.0 mmol/L (72 mg/dL) or there are symptoms of hypoglycaemia, the per-
son should not drive. CGM has been approved for monitoring glucose at 
times relevant for driving in the UK, provided the glucose level is above 
4.0 mmol/L, there are no symptoms of hypoglycaemia and the CGM 
device reading is consistent with symptoms experienced. Legislative 
21.21  Dietary management of diabetes
Food Standards Agency Eatwell recommendations 2020
 Eat at least 5 portions of a variety of fruit and vegetables every day
 Base meals on potatoes, bread, rice, pasta or other starchy carbohydrates; 
choosing wholegrain versions where possible
 Have some dairy or dairy alternatives (such as soya drinks), choosing lower fat 
and lower sugar options
 Eat some beans, pulses, sh, eggs, meat and other proteins (including 2 
portions of sh every week, one of which should be oily)
 Choose unsaturated oils and spreads and eat in small amounts
 Drink 6-8 cups/glasses of uid a day
 If consuming foods and drinks high in fat, salt or sugar have these less often 
and in small amounts
 Eat <6.0 g salt per day
Available from: https://www.food.gov.uk/sites/default/les/media/document/
eatwell-guide-master-digital.pdf

[[p785]]
Management of diabetes    733
requirements in the UK for people on insulin therapy who have Group 2 
licences to drive larger vehicles such as buses or lorries require, in addi-
tion, an annual examination by a diabetes specialist, along with review of 
3 months of glucose readings.
Ramadan
The Quran requires Muslims to fast from sunrise to sunset during the 
29 or 30 days of Ramadan, the ninth month of the Muslim calendar. 
While people with diabetes are a recognised exception to this and are 
not required to fast, many choose to do so. In this context, people with 
diabetes should schedule a visit with a diabetes health-care professional 
6–12 weeks before Ramadan. Prior to fasting the person should be 
counselled on their personal risk of fasting and an individualised man-
agement plan should be developed. This should include: structured edu-
cation around uids and meal planning, when to exercise, the role of 
increased frequency and/or timing of glucose monitoring (which does 
not invalidate the fast) and adjustment to the dose time and/or frequency 
of glucose-lowering agents. The majority of people with type 2 diabe-
tes can be supported to fast during Ramadan provided they are pre-
pared to stop the fast in the case of frequent hypo- or hypergly caemia 
or worsening of other related medical conditions. While people with 
type 1 diabetes are advised not to fast, this advice should be consid-
ered on a case-by-case basis. The highest risk of hypoglycaemia is in 
people who are managed with sulphonylureas and insulin (especially 
if they are older age, or have renal failure or advanced macrovascular 
complications); such individuals need careful blood glucose monitoring 
and, if necessary, their treatment regimens may need to be adjusted. 
Glucose-lowering therapies that do not cause hypoglycaemia are saf-
est during Ramadan, if glycaemic control permits. Dipeptidyl peptidase 
(DPP-4) inhibitors or glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists 
provided they are initiated at least 6–8 weeks before, may be especially 
useful because their effect on insulin secretion is glucose-dependent. 
Published guidance is available to help guide dose and timing adjust-
ments from the International Diabetes Federation and the Diabetes and 
Ramadan International Alliance (IDF-DAR).
Glucose-lowering agents
Type 1 diabetes is managed with insulin from the time of diagnosis. When 
glucose levels are above target in type 2 diabetes despite appropriate 
lifestyle advice, drug therapy will usually be initiated and subsequently 
increased (‘intensied’) with the aim of establishing or re-establishing 
adequate glucose control, abolishing osmotic symptoms and preventing 
microvascular complications. Some individuals require pharmacological 
therapy from the time of (or very soon after) diagnosis. Over the follow-
ing years and decades, the majority will require to take combinations of 
glucose-lowering drugs, oral or injectable, and some will also require 
insulin.
Seven main classes of glucose-lowering drugs are generally used to 
manage type 2 diabetes (Box 21.23). Four are oral agents: metformin 
(the only available biguanide), sulphonylureas, pioglitazone (the only 
available thiazolidinedione), DPP-4 inhibitors and sodium glucose trans-
porter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. GLP-1 receptor agonists are usually given 
by subcutaneous injection, but an oral preparation is available. Insulin 
is given by subcutaneous injection. The effects of these drugs are com-
pared in Box 21.23. Acarbose (an intestinal disaccharidase inhibitor that 
prevents dietary glucose absorption) and meglitinides (oral agents that 
stimulate endogenous insulin) are also available, but little used due to 
relatively low efcacy and, in the case of acarbose, frequent (gastrointes-
tinal) side effects. Other agents are in development.
To date, the totality of evidence conrms that any agent that reduces 
blood glucose will also reduce the long-term risk of microvascular com-
plications. Factors that determine which of these drugs should be pre-
scribed rst – and then which should subsequently be added in – include:
 individual prole (severity of initial symptoms, degree of obesity)
 glucose-lowering efcacy
 protective properties in relation to cardiovascular and renal compli-
cations (see below)
21.22  Diabetes and driving
The main risk is hypoglycaemia due to insulin treatment. Health professionals 
should be proactive in supporting people with diabetes on insulin therapy to drive 
safely within the regulations while following legislation designed to protect road-
users.
 Licensing regulations vary considerably between countries.
 In the UK, it is a legal requirement for people with diabetes requiring insulin 
therapy to notify the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA)
 Group 1 licences (car, motorcycle, van) are ‘period-restricted’ for insulin-
treated drivers, i.e. usually renewable every 3 years but with specic criteria: 
particularly no more than one episode of level 3 hypoglycaemia while awake in 
the preceding 12 months (the most recent episode more than 3 months ago)
 Group 2 licences (bus and lorry) may be granted for insulin-treated drivers: 
stricter criteria to be met – in particular no episode of level 3 hypoglycaemia 
(see  Box 21.14) within the last 12 months and full awareness of 
hypoglycaemia regardless of whether this occurred when asleep. The licence is 
renewable annually.
 Blood glucose must be monitored appropriately. Those with a Group 1 licence 
may use continuous glucose monitoring systems, but must conrm the reading 
using a capillary blood glucose reading in specic circumstances (e.g. glucose 
≤4.0 mmol/L)
 Insulin-treated drivers should:
Check blood glucose before driving and 2-hourly during long journeys
Keep an accessible supply of fast-acting carbohydrate in the vehicle
Take regular snacks or meals during long journeys
Stop driving if hypoglycaemia develops
Pull over and sit in the passenger seat
Wait 45 mins after correction of hypoglycaemia before resuming driving 
(delayed recovery of cognitive function)
Carry identication in case of injury
Note: Intermittently scanned monitoring (isCGM) is now approved in the UK for 
Group 1 licences provided the driver has the facility to check capillary blood 
glucose if symptoms of hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia are experienced.
See: Assessing tness to drive: a guide for medical professionals (ch.3). 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/le/866655/assessing-tness-to-drive-a-guide-for-medical-
professionals.pdf
21.23  Glucose-lowering agents in type 2 diabetes: additional information (see also Fig. 21.20)
Insulin
Sulphonylureas
Metformin
Thiazolidinediones 
(‘glitazones’)
DPP-4 inhibitors 
(‘gliptins’)
GLP-1 receptor 
agonists
SGLT2 inhibitors
Introduced
1922
1956
1957
1999
2006
2007
2013
Route of 
administration
SC injection
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
SC injection 
(oral)
Oral
Cost
High
Low
Very low
Low
Moderate
Very high
High
(DPP-4 = dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1; SC = subcutaneous; SGLT2 = sodium and glucose transporter 2)

[[p786]]
734    DIABETES MELLITUS
 adverse effect prole (hypoglycaemia, weight gain)
 renal function
 drug factors (mechanism of clearance/metabolism)
 ability or willingness to self-inject
 occupation (e.g. driving, working at heights)
 cost: important whether covered by a national health-care system, 
reimbursed by an insurance company, or paid for ‘out-of-pocket’.
Algorithms to guide prescribing decisions are available, e.g. consensus 
documents from the American Diabetes Association and the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (ADA/EASD; Fig. 21.20). These are 
frequently updated.
Metformin is often positioned as rst-line, with second-line treatment 
personalised for each patient according to the above factors. A third or 
even fourth oral agent may be added in over time, but injectable therapy 
(GLP-1 receptor agonists or insulin) should not be delayed while levels of 
glycaemia above target are sustained for months or years; this will almost 
inevitably result in severe complications years later.
Unlike microvascular complications, it cannot be assumed that all 
agents that lower glucose also reduce rates of macrovascular compli-
cations, i.e. myocardial infarction and stroke. Some newer agents clearly 
protect against cardiovascular disease (GLP-1 receptor agonists and 
SGLT2 inhibitors), but are more expensive. Others (metformin and thiazo-
lidinediones) provide some cardiovascular protection, but are cheaper, 
while others do not (sulphonlyureas, DPP-4 inhibitors and insulin). SGLT2 
inhibitors have additional protective properties in heart failure and dia-
betic kidney disease, while TZDs (thiazolidinediones) increase rates of 
heart failure. It is therefore likely that the protective (and adverse) effects 
of these different classes of glucose-lowering agents are via ‘off-target’ 
mechanisms, i.e. unrelated to glucose-lowering.
ASCVD
predominates
e.g. history of
myocardial
infarction
Consider
SGLT2i
HF or CKD
predominates
e.g. reduced
ejection fraction
or reduced
eGFR
Preferably
GLP-1 RA
If HbA1c
above
target
If HbA1c
above
target
If HbA1c
above
target
DPP-4i
No
Yes
GLP-1 RA
SGLT2i
SGLT2i
Compelling need to minimise
hypoglycaemia
Either/
or
Compelling need to
promote weight loss
Cost is a major
issue
SGLT2i
SGLT2i
GLP-1 RA
or
DPP-4i
Continue with the addition of
other agents as outlined above
Consider independently of baseline HbA1c or
individualised HbA1c target
If HbA1c above individualised target proceed as below
Indicators of high-risk or established ASCVD,
CKD or HF†
First-line therapy is metformin and comprehensive lifestyle
(including weight management and physical activity)
Glucose-lowering medication in type 2 diabetes: overall approach
Consider the addition of later
generation SU or basal insulin
with lower risk of hypoglycaemia
GLP-1 RA
with good
efficacy for
weight loss
GLP-1 RA
with good
efficacy for
weight loss
SU
To avoid
clinical inertia
reassess and
modify treatment
regularly
(3–6 months)
TZD
SGLT2i
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
If HbA1c above target
Consider
GLP-1 RA
Preferably
SGLT2i
SU
TZD
Add DPP-4i
(if not on GLP-1RA)
before other
options (e.g. SU)
 Insulin therapy
   basal insulin with
   lowest acquisition
   cost
or
 Consider DPP-4i or
   SGLT2i with lowest
   acquisition cost 
Fig. 21.20 Guidelines for glucose-lowering treatment in type 2 diabetes: adapted from ADA-EASD 2020. This pathway is illustrative – for treatment decisions please 
refer to the gure provided in the full guideline (https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-019-05039-w) and region-specic drug licensing information. (DPP-4i = dipeptidyl peptidase 4 
inhibitor; GLP-1 RA = glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; SGLT2i = sodium and glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor; TZD = thiazolidinedione; SU = sulphonylurea; eGFR, 
estimated glomerular ltration rate; ASCVD = atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD = chronic kidney disease; HF = heart failure; LVH = left ventricular hypertrophy) 
Adapted from: Buse JB, Wexler DJ, Tsapas A, et al. 2019 update to: Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia 2020; 63, 221–228.

[[p787]]
Management of diabetes    735
The adverse risk prole of each agent plays an important role in 
personalisation of second- and third-line therapy. For example, 
agents that cause hypoglycaemia should be avoided in those who 
drive for a living (particularly those holding Group 2 licences in the UK) 
or who work at heights.
There is little evidence to help the clinician and patient select the 
optimal second- or third-line treatment in advance, so a trial-and-
error approach is often used, i.e. stopping a drug that does not seem 
to be effective (or that causes side-effects) and trying another. It is 
hoped that biomarkers will in the future help predict who will respond 
better and/or experience fewer side-effects with one drug rather than 
another.
Biguanides
Metformin is the only biguanide available. Its long-term benets include 
not just reduction in rates of microvascular complications, but also 
reducing the risk of myocardial infarction, as shown in the UKPDS. It 
is widely used as rst-line therapy for type 2 diabetes. Approximately 
15% of individuals experience signicant gastrointestinal side-effects, 
including bloating, nausea, diarrhoea and abdominal pain, such that 
they are unable to tolerate metformin. Metformin monotherapy may 
not be sufcient to provide rapid relief from symptoms in individuals 
with marked osmotic symptoms and weight loss at diagnosis (see 
sulphonylureas below).
Mechanism of action
The mechanism of action of metformin has not been precisely dened. 
While classically considered an ‘insulin sensitiser’ because it tends to 
lower (rather than raise) insulin levels, its main effects are on fasting 
glucose. Metformin reduces hepatic glucose production, may also 
increase insulin-mediated glucose uptake, and has effects on gut glu-
cose uptake and utilisation. At the molecular level, metformin acts as 
a weak inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, which increases intra-
cellular adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and reduces adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). This has direct effects on the ux through gluconeo-
genesis and activates the intracellular energy sensor, AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK), leading to multiple benecial effects. However, 
although metformin has been available for more than 60 years, it is not 
yet clear whether other AMPK-independent mechanisms may be just 
as important.
Clinical use
Metformin causes modest sustained weight loss (on average 1–2 kg), 
does not cause hypoglycaemia and has established benets in micro-
vascular disease. It is prescribed rst-line therapy for the majority of 
people unless they do not tolerate it, and it is usually maintained when 
additional agents are required (see Fig. 21.20). Metformin is usually intro-
duced at low dose (500 mg twice daily) to minimise the risk of gastroin-
testinal side-effects. The usual maintenance dose is 1000 mg twice daily 
(maximum licensed dose 1000 mg three times daily). Modied-release 
formulations of metformin are better tolerated by some individuals with 
gastrointestinal side-effects on the regular preparation.
Due to inhibition of mitochondrial respiration, metformin can cause 
asymptomatic hyperlactataemia, which during acute illness can pres-
ent as lactic acidosis. However, this is much less common than previ-
ously thought and most instances of lactic acidosis that occur in the 
context of metformin prescription are due to other factors. As met-
formin is cleared by the kidneys, it can accumulate in renal impairment, 
so the dose should be halved when estimated glomerular ltration rate 
(eGFR) is below 45 mL/min/1.73m2, and it should not be used below 
an eGFR of 30 mL/min/1.73m2. It should be omitted temporarily during 
any acute illness potentially involving dehydration as acute kidney injury 
greatly increases the risk of lactic acidosis. Metformin is contraindi-
cated in the presence of signicantly impaired hepatic function and in 
those who drink alcohol to excess as they are more vulnerable to lactic 
acidosis.
Sulphonylureas
Sulphonylureas are ‘insulin secretagogues’, i.e. they promote pancre-
atic β-cell insulin secretion. Similar to metformin, the long-term benet 
of sulphonylureas in reducing rates of microvascular complications was 
established in the UKPDS.
Mechanism of action
Sulphonylureas act by closing the pancreatic β cell ATP-sensitive potas-
sium (KATP) channel, decreasing K+ efux, and triggering insulin secretion 
by a series of molecular events (see Fig. 21.3C).
Clinical use
Sulphonylureas are an effective therapy for lowering blood glucose. They may 
be used to relieve osmotic symptoms in individuals with newly diagnosed 
diabetes who have very high blood glucose, although insulin should also be 
considered in this context, particularly if a diagnosis of new-onset type 1 dia-
betes remains possible (as in this context they are dangerous because they are 
ineffective). They are more often used as an add-on to other glucose-lowering 
therapy when glycaemia is inadequately controlled (see Fig. 21.20) or in non-
obese people with type 2 diabetes (who likely have signicant β-cell dysfunc-
tion). Sulphonylureas are also particularly effective in some forms of monogenic 
and neonatal diabetes (see p. 719). The main adverse effects of sulphonylureas 
are weight gain and hypoglycaemia (as insulin secretion occurs irrespective 
of the prevailing blood glucose). A number of sulphonylureas are available: 
gliclazide is most commonly used in the UK and glibenclamide (known as 
glyburide) in the United States. Glibenclamide, however, is long-acting and 
prone to inducing hypoglycaemia, so should be avoided in older people. Other 
sulphonylureas include glimepiride and glipizide. The dose–response of all sul-
phonylureas is steepest at low doses, i.e. little additional benet is obtained 
when the dose is increased above half-maximal doses.
Thiazolidinediones
Mechanism of action
These drugs (also called TZDs, ‘glitazones’ or PPARγ agonists) bind and 
activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ, nuclear receptors 
present mainly in adipose tissue (similar to steroid and thyroid nuclear 
receptors), which regulate the expression of several genes involved in adi-
pocye differentiation. By promoting adipogenesis in subcutaneous depots, 
TZDs decrease circulating concentrations of free fatty acids, enhancing the 
actions of endogenous insulin. Therefore, they tend to increase body weight. 
They also alter release of ‘adipokines’, e.g. increasing levels of adiponectin 
improves insulin sensitivity in the liver. TZDs appear to be particularly effective 
at improving glycaemic control in women and people with a raised BMI.
Clinical use
TZDs were widely prescribed in the late 1990s and 2000s, but their use 
declined with the advent of other agents with fewer adverse effects and 
greater efcacy. One popular TZD, rosiglitazone, was withdrawn from the 
market in 2010 due to a subsequently disproven concern that it might 
increase rates of myocardial infarction. Pioglitazone, the other drug in 
this class, remains in use and may reduce hepatic steatosis and NASH 
(see Fig. 21.20) as well as providing protection from stroke. However, it 
exacerbates cardiac failure by causing uid retention and increases the 
risk of bone fracture (and possibly bladder cancer) with long-term use.
DPP-4 inhibitors
Mechanism of action
The incretin hormones (see Fig. 21.4) GLP-1 and GIP are gut hormones 
that potentiate post-prandial insulin secretion (see Fig. 21.3). GLP-1 and 
GIP are rapidly broken down by dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4). The 
‘gliptins’, or DPP-4 inhibitors, prevent physiological breakdown of endog-
enous GLP-1 and GIP and so enhance their circulating concentrations. 
Incretin-based therapies (DPP-4 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists) are ‘glu-
cose-dependent’, i.e. promote insulin secretion only when glucose is high 

[[p788]]
736    DIABETES MELLITUS
(Fig. 21.21). Thus, insulin secretion is not augmented when blood glucose 
is normal, i.e. there is minimal risk of hypoglycaemia when these therapies 
are used as monotherapy or in combination with other drugs that do not 
cause hypoglycaemia.
Clinical use
DPP-4 inhibitors include sitagliptin, linagliptin, alogliptin, vildagliptin and 
saxagliptin. All are well tolerated and have a neutral effect on weight, but 
are less potent than GLP-1 receptor agonists and provide only mod-
erate glucose-lowering activity (see Box 21.23). They are safe but do 
not improve cardiovascular outcomes. The DPP4 inhibitors are useful 
in combination with other drugs to get HbA1c to target when it is only 
modestly elevated and are commonly used in older people as they have 
few adverse effects. Linagliptin is the only DPP4 inhibitor that does not 
require dose reduction in renal impairment.
GLP-1 receptor agonists
Mechanism of action
The GLP-1 receptor agonists are peptide hormones that mimic the 
action of GLP-1; most require to be given by subcutaneous injection. 
Some have a high degree of structural homology to native GLP-1, but 
are modied at the sites usually cleaved by DPP-4 to prevent break-
down (liraglutide, semaglutide, dulaglutide). Others are synthetic forms 
of exendin-4, a 39 amino acid peptide originally isolated from the salivary 
secretions of the Gila monster, native to the Arizona desert (exenatide, 
lixisenatide). As incretin-based therapies, they potentiate release of insu-
lin, but with greater potency than DPP-4 inhibitors. However, they also 
have central actions, acting centrally on receptors in specic areas of 
the hypothalamus (including the arcuate nucleus); in addition they delay 
gastric emptying, giving a feeling of satiety after eating (see Fig. 21.21). 
GLP-1 receptor agonists therefore decrease appetite and feeding behav-
iour, resulting in weight loss of on average 3–5 kg. Modications of either 
the molecule or the formulation allow some agents within the class to 
be injected once weekly (semaglutide, dulaglutide, extended-release 
exenatide), rather than once daily (liraglutide) or twice daily (exenatide). 
An orally administered GLP-1 receptor agonist has now been approved 
(encapsulated semaglutide with an advanced gastrointestinal delivery 
system), although it must be taken once daily on an empty stomach 
with a sip of water and nothing should be consumed for 30 minutes 
afterwards.
Clinical use
The main side-effect of GLP-1 receptor agonists is nausea (and even 
vomiting) in the rst few days of use; this is prevented in many individu-
als by slowly uptitrating from a low starting dose to a therapeutic dose. 
Several of the GLP-1 receptor agonist class, particularly those with 
high structural homology to native GLP-1 (liraglutide, semaglutide and 
dulaglutide), have been shown in large cardiovascular outcome trials to 
reduce rates of major cardiovascular adverse events. These are now 
the most frequently prescribed drugs in the class, although as they are 
expensive compared with other agents, guidelines in the UK recommend 
that they should only be used third-line, as add-on therapy with other 
agents and only in those with a BMI of >30 kg/m2 (Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guideline Network, SIGN) or even 35 kg/m2 (National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence NICE). However, some international guidelines 
(e.g. European Society for Cardiology) now recommend they should be 
started earlier, even before metformin, in individuals at high risk of a car-
diovascular event.
Since their initial launch in 2007, GLP-1 receptor agonists have con-
tributed to a revolution in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. For several 
GLP-1
Body weight↓
Blood pressure↓
Plasma glucose↓
Plasma lipids↓
Gastric emptying↓
Liver fat↓
Inflammation↓
Insulin resistance↓
Appetite↓
Satiety↑
Sodium excretion↑
Diuresis↑
Endothelial function↑
Arterial stiffness↓
Inflammation↓
Insulin↑
Glucagon↓
Myocardial contractility↑
Glucose uptake↑
Ischaemic preconditioning↑
Fig. 21.21 Actions of incretin-based therapies. GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-RA) mediate all of the actions shown and have potent effects on blood glucose and weight. 
Many GLP-1 RAs are associated with a reduction in cardiovascular events. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP-4i) have less potent glucose-lowering ability and have a 
neutral effect on weight and cardiovascular disease. DPP-4is do not mediate all of the actions shown, e.g. do not reduce gastric emptying or have signicant effects on 
appetite. (GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1)

[[p789]]
Management of diabetes    737
years, there was a concern that they (and DPP4-inhibitors) might increase 
the risk of pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer, but meta-analysis of large 
clinical trials has demonstrated this is not the case. Even more potent 
‘dual agonist’ agents (with GIP agonist activity) are now in development.
SGLT2 inhibitors
Mechanism of action
Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are derived from 
apple tree bark and were rst licensed for type 2 diabetes in 2013. The 
best-known drugs in the class are dapagliozin, empagliozin and can-
agliozin. The mechanism by which they lower blood glucose exploits 
the handling of glucose in the kidneys. Glucose is ltered freely in the 
glomerulus and then completely reabsorbed in the proximal tubules 
with sodium (mainly via SGLT2) (Fig. 21.22). During hyperglycaemia, this 
response reaches saturation and glucose is lost in the urine. Glycosuria is 
a hallmark feature of type 2 diabetes, but in many cases there is a para-
doxical increase in reabsorption of glucose such that the threshold blood 
glucose value at which glucose is lost in the urine is higher than the usual 
physiological level; this may be due to increased expression of SGLT2.
SGLT2 inhibitors act by lowering the renal threshold for glucose excre-
tion, such that typically 25% of ltered glucose is not reabsorbed. As well 
as lowering blood glucose, a negative energy balance is created with 
200–300 kcal being lost each day (as glucose in the urine), resulting in 
signicant weight loss. As sodium is also lost in the urine (also known as 
natriuesis), blood pressure is also reduced.
SGLT2 inhibitors reduce rates of major adverse cardiovascular out-
comes, particularly heart failure, and also have a reno-protective effect, 
S1 segment
Proximal
tubule
Distal S2/S3
segment 
-90% reabsorption
90%
reabsorption
10%
reabsorption
Glucose
No glucose
Collecting
duct
SGLT2
-10% reabsorption
SGLT1
Glycosuria
Negative energy
balance
Cardiac and renal
protection
Weight loss
and ↓HbA1c
Blood
pressure
reduction
Natriuresis
Glucose reabsorption
blocked in proximal
tubule and/or distal
S2/S3 segment by
SGLT2 and/or SGLT1
inhibitor, respectively
A
S1 segment
Proximal
tubule
Distal S2/S3
segment 
B
Fig. 21.22 
SGLT1. SGLT2 inhibitors reduce net reabsorbed glucose by 25%. For a mean plasma glucose of 8 mmol/L (144 mg/dL) this results in a glucose loss of approximately 80 g per 
with improved glycaemia, blood pressure reduction and weight loss.

[[p790]]
738    DIABETES MELLITUS
i.e. reducing rates of death, dialysis and transplantation. These bene-
cial effects are at least in part due to blood pressure and weight lower-
ing but other more complex mechanisms are also of clinical relevance. 
Compensatory glucagon release from pancreatic α cells (in response 
to urinary loss of glucose) decreases the circulating ratio of insulin to 
glucagon, promoting lipolysis and even mild ketosis; however, because 
of weight loss this is not sufcient to exacerbate insulin resistance. The 
work of the myocardium is more efcient when it utilises free fatty acids 
(and ketones) for fuel than it is when metabolising glucose (as it does in 
heart failure). Renal benets of SGLT2 inhibitors are due to constriction 
of the afferent arteriole (as a reex response to increased renal tubular 
loss of sodium, termed ‘tubuloglomerular feedback’). This decreases 
intraglomerular pressure in a complementary manner to ACE inhibitors 
(p. 619), which cause relaxation of the efferent arteriole by opposing the 
action of angiotensin II.
Clinical use
SGLT2 inhibitors are effective oral glucose-lowering agents that are usu-
ally added in with other agents second-line after metformin. They help 
with body weight reduction and are associated with improvements in 
cardiovascular and renal outcomes that have substantially advanced 
the treatment of type 2 diabetes. They should now be prescribed for 
all individuals with type 2 diabetes and prior myocardial infarction, coro-
nary artery disease, stroke, unstable angina, occlusive peripheral arterial 
disease or cardiac failure. Dapagliozin is also licensed for use in type 
1 diabetes, but must be used with caution due to the increased risk of 
ketoacidosis (see below).
The main adverse effect (in 5%–10% of those who take these agents) 
is genital mycotic (fungal) infections usually with Candida albicans, i.e. 
vaginal ‘thrush’ and balanitis. Urine infection is also more common and, 
very rarely, severe genital infection (Fournier’s gangrene, see Ch. 13) can 
occur. It is essential for prescribers to mention these side-effects, to 
ensure that prompt measures can be taken to treat the infection; good 
genital hygiene is also necessary. Once blood glucose is under control, 
genital infections are much less likely to occur. Euglycaemic diabetic 
ketoacidosis (i.e. DKA not associated with marked hyperglycaemia) is a 
rare complication of this class of drugs, presumably driven by reduced 
insulin : glucagon ratio and consequent increased levels of circulating 
ketones. It can be minimised by education about ‘sick day rules’, i.e. 
interrupting therapy during acute illness (e.g. gastointestinal or respira-
tory), avoiding dehydration and seeking medical attention. The provision 
of a glucose meter with additional functionality for blood ketone monitor-
ing can also be useful as an early warning of DKA for individuals consid-
ered to be at higher risk (e.g. type 1 diabetes). 
Insulin therapy
Manufacture and formulations
Insulin was rst isolated in Toronto in 1921, transforming the previously 
short life expectancy of children and young adults with type 1 diabetes. It 
was obtained for therapeutic use by extraction and purication from pan-
creases of cows and pigs (bovine and porcine insulins), until the emer-
gence of recombinant DNA technology enabled large-scale production 
of human sequence insulin from the early 1980s. From the mid-1990s, 
‘analogue insulins’, gradually gained ground; these contain alterations to 
the amino acid sequence and/or additional molecules covalently added 
to confer desirable pharmacological proles. They have now largely 
replaced human sequence insulin.
The underlying principles of insulin pharmacology are simple, but the 
naming of the various available insulin preparations is complicated by 
trade names conferred on similar or equivalent products by different 
manufacturers. The time-action prole of an insulin describes its phar-
macodynamic properties as time to onset and peak action as well as 
its overall duration of action after subcutaneous injection. These prop-
erties are depicted using simplied graphs (see Fig. 21.24) as an edu-
cational tool for insulin users and health-care professionals. With only a 
few exceptions, insulin concentration is standardised internationally at 
100 U/mL, using a system based on the one developed by the team 
in Toronto. Expert advice should be sought before using more concen-
trated insulins and in the UK these are now provided via dedicated pen 
devices to avoid confusion and prevent prescribing errors.
Unmodied (‘soluble’ or ‘regular’) short-acting insulin is clear in 
appearance and has an onset of action within 30 minutes of injection, 
wearing off by 6–8 hours. Extending this duration of action was initially 
achieved in the 1930s by adding protamine and zinc at neutral pH to 
create Neutral Protamine Hagedorn insulin (known as ‘isophane’ or NPH 
insulin) – this has a cloudy appearance (and requires to be resuspended 
by shaking before use). It is now referred to as ‘intermediate-acting’ with 
onset of action at 60–90 minutes, peaking at 6 hours and wearing off by 
12–16 hours.
When insulin is injected into subcutaneous tissues, it aggregates 
into hexamers; these polymers of six insulin molecules must dissoci-
ate before systemic absorption can occur. The speed of dissociation 
can be altered by making small changes to the amino acid sequence 
(insulin analogues). For example, in insulin lispro, the penultimate lysine 
and proline residues on the C-terminal end of the B-chain are reversed 
(Fig.21.23). This prevents hexamer formation leading to a more rapid 
onset and shorter duration of action than soluble insulin (Box 21.24). 
Short-acting insulin analogues allow greater exibility as they can be 
injected closer to mealtimes (ideally 15–30 minutes before). Onset of 
action may be further hastened by the addition of excipients to the for-
mulation (e.g. nicotinamide and L-arginine to insulin aspart to create 
‘faster insulin aspart’).
Other changes to the insulin molecule have been engineered to pro-
duce long-acting analogue insulins. An example is insulin glargine, in 
which a substitution of glycine for asparagine in the A-chain and the 
addition of two additional arginine residues to the C-terminal end of the 
B-chain serves to prolong its duration of action to nearly 24 hours by 
increasing its isoelectric point from pH 5.4 to 6.7, i.e. making it less sol-
uble at a physiological pH (see Fig. 21.23). Other long-acting insulins 
include insulin detemir and degludec; their duration of action is extended 
by adding fatty acid side chains to the C-terminal end of the B-chain 
(Fig. 21.23). Following subcutaneous injection, insulin detemir and deglu-
dec bind to albumin in the blood, from which insulin slowly disassociates. 
The duration of action of insulin degludec is almost 48 hours as the fatty 
acid moiety also promotes subcutaneous formation of multi-hexamers 
of insulin (see Box 21.24). It is termed a second generation long-acting 
insulin. However, a comparable pharmacological prole can be achieved 
by using a triple concentrated form of insulin glargine (‘U300 glargine’); 
this can also be useful to decrease injection volume for individuals who 
require high doses to achieve glycaemic control. Modern long-acting 
insulins provide more consistent basal insulin levels during the day and 
night and are associated with lower rates of hypoglycaemia, particularly 
overnight. A long-acting insulin that requires injection only once weekly is 
currently in development.
Pre-mixed formulations containing short-acting and isophane insu-
lins in various proportions (‘biphasic’, see below) are also available and 
widely prescribed in some countries, particularly for individuals with type 
2 diabetes with regular mealtimes who wish to avoid injecting more than 
twice a day (see below).
Intermittent subcutaneous insulin injection therapy
Insulin is most commonly administered several times a day as an injection 
into the subcutaneous adipose tissue of the anterior abdominal wall, upper 
arms or outer thighs with the needle sited at a right-angle to the skin. Even 
with careful technique, the rate of absorption of insulin is inuenced by the 
site, depth and volume of injection, skin temperature (warming) and exer-
cise. Accidental intramuscular injection results in more rapid absorption 
and hypoglycaemia; it is more likely to occur in children and slim adults 
(with little subcutaneous adipose tissue) and can be minimised by using 
shorter needles (e.g. 4 mm rather than 8 mm). A clinically important reason 
for delayed absorption is lipohypertrophy, which can develop at over-used 
injection sites (see p. 738). This is due to the local trophic (growth factor) 

[[p791]]
Management of diabetes    739
action of insulin and results in greater variability in blood glucose. It can be 
avoided by not injecting into the same place and instead ‘rotating’ injec-
tions around (and within) the recommended sites.
Following absorption into blood, circulating insulin has a half-life of just 
a few minutes as it is cleared by the liver and kidneys. The total daily dose 
required may therefore diminish in individuals who develop liver disease 
or renal failure.
Traditional insulin syringes have largely been replaced by unobtru-
sive portable ‘pen’ devices, sufcient for multiple dosing and either dis-
posable or designed to accept insulin in cartridges. Insulin users are 
advised to keep their stock in a refrigerator (approximately 4°C), but 
to keep their current pen at room temperature (as cold insulin is more 
painful to inject). Insulin will denature and become inactive if accidentally 
frozen and thawed. The complications of insulin therapy include hypo-
glycaemia (p. 719), weight gain, peripheral oedema, insulin antibodies, 
local allergy (rare) and lipohypertrophy or lipoatrophy at injection sites. 
Fasting hyperglycaemia (referred to as the ‘Somogyi effect’) has in the 
past been attributed to a rebound driven by counter-regulatory hor-
mones (cortisol, growth hormone and catecholamines) following unde-
tected overnight hypoglycaemia. However, systematic investigation in 
the era of CGM has detected little supporting evidence for this as high 
blood glucose on rising is more often due to a combination of the cir-
cadian cycle (or ‘dawn phenomenon’) and inadequate overnight basal 
insulin dosing.
Intermittent subcutaneous insulin injection regimens
The choice of insulin injection regimen depends on the agreed target for 
glycaemic control (set using the principle of ‘shared decision-making’), 
need for exibility in lifestyle and whether an individual can safely and 
reliably learn to adjust insulin doses in response to counting the carbohy-
drate content of planned meals. Time–action proles for different insulin 
regimens are shown in Figure 21.24
In general, people with type 1 diabetes should be prescribed either 
multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) or continuous subcutaneous insulin 
infusion therapy (CSII). MDI or ‘basal-bolus’| therapy consists of four or 
ve daily injections: one or two ‘basal’ injections (with an intermediate- or 
long-acting insulin, respectively) and an injection of ‘bolus’ insulin (usu-
ally with a rapid-acting analogue) 15–30 minutes before each of three 
main meals. The purpose of bolus insulin is to limit the magnitude of 
the rise in blood glucose following a meal. The purpose of basal (‘back-
ground’) insulin is to ensure there are adequate amounts of insulin to 
reduce hepatic glucose output, both overnight and during periods of the 
daytime when there is little bolus insulin activity (i.e. if there is a long time-
gap between bolus injections). An MDI regimen allows greater freedom 
of meal timing as bolus insulin is simply administered before the meal.
21.24  Duration of action (in hours) of insulin preparations
Insulin
Onset
Peak
Duration
Rapid-acting
insulin analogues: 
lispro, aspart, 
glulisine, asp
<0.5
0.5–2.5
3–4.5
Short-acting
soluble (regular)
0.5–1
1–4
4–8
Intermediate-
acting isophane 
(NPH), lente
1–3
3–8
7–14
Long-acting
insulin analogues: 
glargine, detemir, 
degludec
1–2
None
18–26
Gly
S
S
S
S
S
S
Phe
Glu
30
29
25
25
29
20
15
10
5
1
1
5
10
15
20
Gly
Gly
Lys
Pro
Asp
Lys
Lys
Arg
Arg
Gly
Arg
Phe Phe Tyr Thr Pro
Lys
Fast-acting analogues
Lispro
Aspart
Glulisine
Glargine
Detemir/Degludec
Long-acting analogues
C-peptide
(31 amino acids)
B-chain
(30 amino acids)
A-chain
(21 amino acids)
Fig. 21.23 Schematic structure of insulin and insulin analogues. Insulin is created when C-peptide is cleaved from the A- and B-chains of proinsulin. The areas in the 
shaded colours show the modications made to the normal structure of insulin to create analogues. These are important in altering the pharmacokinetic properties of the 
analogues. Long-acting insulin analogues detemir and degludec are synthesised by adding specic fatty acid chains (shown) at position 29 (lysine) on the B-chain.

[[p792]]
740    DIABETES MELLITUS
The dose of bolus insulin administered at any one meal is primar-
ily determined by the carbohydrate content of the meal, the prevailing 
glucose level and the target glucose for the individual. Each patient is 
advised by health-care professionals of their ‘insulin to carbohydrate 
ratio’, i.e. the amount of insulin to take for each carbohydrate portion. 
In most people, this ratio is around 1:10 (i.e. 1 unit of insulin is taken for 
each 10 g carbohydrate portion in the meal to be consumed), but may 
be higher or lower depending on the individual’s insulin sensitivity. It may 
also vary between meals (e.g. breakfast vs evening meal). Patients are 
also advised of their ‘insulin sensitivity factor’ (or ‘correction factor’), i.e. 
the amount that 1 unit of insulin lowers blood glucose. In most people, 1 
unit of insulin lowers glucose by 3 or 4 mmol/l, although this again varies 
according to insulin sensitivity. Box 21.25 shows a worked example of 
how a person with diabetes may use this information to determine the 
dose of insulin to be administered with a meal. Additional adjustments to 
the nal dose also may need to take into account other variables, includ-
ing exercise and alcohol consumption. Thus, bolus insulin may need to 
be reduced to cover a meal taken 2 hours prior to vigorous exercise or if 
consuming large amounts of alcohol (see p. 732).
Basal insulin doses are determined with reference to fasting glucose 
levels and overnight proles. Thus, the dose may be decreased if there 
is overnight or fasting hypoglycaemia and increased if there is over-
night hyperglycaemia. Further renement of daytime basal insulin can 
be made with reference to daytime glucose proles following a series of 
carbohydrate-free meals (which do not require injection of bolus insulin) 
as the glucose levels in this context are mainly dependent on basal 
insulin.
The foregoing shows how the therapeutic use of insulin demands 
considerable attention to detail, with respect to a whole variety of fac-
tors, as well as signicant numeracy skills. Many people understand-
ably struggle to maintain the motivation required to monitor glucose 
regularly, count carbohydrate accurately, remember to take all their 
insulin injections and to leave an adequate gap between the bolus 
injection and the start of a meal.
In type 2 diabetes, insulin is usually initiated as a once-daily long-acting 
insulin, either alone or in combination with oral glucose-lowering agents. 
However, in time, more frequent insulin injections may be required. 
Recently, long-acting insulin analogues have been combined with GLP-1 
receptor agonists, enabling co-administration of insulin and GLP-1 
receptor agonists in a single daily injection.
Twice-daily administration of a short-acting and intermediate-act-
ing insulin (usually soluble and isophane insulins), given in combination 
before breakfast and the evening meal, is still commonly used in many 
countries. Initially, two-thirds of the total daily requirement of insulin is 
given in the morning in a xed ratio of short-acting to intermediate-acting 
preparation and the remaining third is given in the evening. Pre-mixed 
formulations are available that contain different proportions of soluble 
and isophane insulins (e.g. 30:70 and 50:50). These offer convenience in 
that only two injections per day are required (before breakfast and before 
the evening meal), but are inexible as the individual components can-
not be adjusted independently, i.e. a late meal or unexpected physical 
exercise can result in hypoglycaemia. Such regimens usually only provide 
optimal glycaemic control in individuals who prefer set meal-times with 
little dietary exibility and who take part in little moderate or vigorous 
physical exercise.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy  
(insulin pump)
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII), commonly known as 
insulin pump therapy, is a system of insulin delivery that uses a bat-
tery-operated medical device to deliver insulin continuously to people 
with type 1 diabetes. A variety of insulin pumps are available and the 
choice is often framed by cost, compatibility with CGM systems and the 
personal preference or circumstances of the person with diabetes. When 
using a traditional pump, rapid-acting insulin is infused from a disposable 
insulin cartridge/reservoir within the pump (which has controls, a pro-
cessing module and batteries). The disposable insulin cartridge/reservoir 
is attached to a tubing system that connects to a cannula, which is 
inserted subcutaneously (disposable infusion set) and secured by an 
adhesive dressing. The insulin infusion set and site should be changed 
every 3 days to avoid supercial infection of the site and compromise 
to the subcutaneous infusion of insulin. Patch pumps eliminate tubing 
from insulin infusion set as the cannula, cartridge/reservoir and batteries 
are located in a wearable disposable ‘pod’. The controls and process-
ing module are located in a handheld ‘personal diabetes manager’ that 
Plasma insulin
Soluble before meals, long-acting
insulin late evening
0600
0200
2200
1800
1400
1000
0600
Clock time (hrs)
Soluble before meals, isophane 
late evening
Soluble and isophane, twice daily
Injection of insulin
Soluble or
fast-acting
analogue
Isophane
Long -acting
analogue
Key
Fig. 21.24 Proles of plasma insulin associated with different insulin regimens.
These are theoretical patterns of plasma insulin and may differ considerably in 
magnitude and duration of action between individuals.
21.25  Example of bolus insulin dose calculation
You are about to eat a meal with 60 g carbohydrate
Your pre-meal blood glucose is 13.0 mmol/l
Your personalised diabetes data:
Insulin to carbohydrate ratio = 1:10
Insulin sensitivity factor        =  3, i.e.1 unit of insulin lowers blood glucose by 
3 mmol/L
Target blood glucose           = 7 mmol/L
Bolus dose calculation
 
1. Bolus dose of insulin to cover meal = 60 g ÷ 10 g
= 6 units
 
2. Blood glucose correction       = Actual glucose – target glucose
= 13.0 – 7.0 mmol/L
= 6.0 mmol/L
 
3.  Correction dose of insulin      = Blood glucose correction ÷ insulin 
sensitivity factor
= 6.0 ÷ 3
= 2 units
 
4. Total bolus dose of insulin               = Meal dose + correction dose
= 6 + 2 units
= 8 units

[[p793]]
Management of diabetes    741
communicates wirelessly to the pod, which is changed every 3 days, 
as with the traditional pump. Examples of a traditional pump and patch 
pump are shown in Figure 21.25
Basal insulin is delivered in the form of continuous infusion of rapid-act-
ing insulin, usually 40%–50% of total daily dose (TDD). The proportion of 
basal insulin to TDD can vary, particularly in people who consume low or 
high carbohydrate diets. The number of units per hour can be calculated 
simply by dividing the TDD by 24. The basal rate is adjusted by fasting for 
periods of at least 4 hours while periodically evaluating the blood glucose 
levels and adjusting the pump infusion rate to maintain glucose in the 
normal range. Adjustments are made by approximately 10% at a time, 
2 hours before a change in blood glucose is required, because of the 
kinetics of insulin absorption and time to reach steady state. One of the 
key advantages of CSII is that basal rates can be varied within a 24-hour 
period (this is in contrast to basal insulin in an MDI regimen, for which the 
dose can be altered, but the basal levels then remain relatively constant 
for the duration of action of that injection). This exibility to pre-program 
adjustments is especially useful overnight, e.g. when basal rates can be 
reduced to prevent low glucose and then increased pre-dawn to prevent 
high morning (fasting) glucose. In addition, temporary basal rates can be 
used to lessen the risk of hypoglycaemia with daily activity (e.g. commut-
ing, grocery shopping) or aerobic exercise (e.g. running, cycling).
Pre-meal boluses are administered 15–30 minutes before food via 
the insulin pump to limit post-prandial glucose excursions. As with MDI, 
bolus dosing is determined by the carbohydrate content of the meal, a 
personalised insulin to carbohydrate ratio and pre-meal glucose levels. 
Insulin pumps allow more exibility with bolus insulin infusions in both 
timing and shape (e.g. using an extended or dual-wave bolus when cov-
ering high-fat/protein meals such as pizza or steak, or when diabetes 
is complicated by gastroparesis). Additionally, insulin pumps have cal-
culators or ‘bolus wizards’ that calculate the ‘active insulin on board’, 
for precise calculation of pre-meal boluses and to allow safer ‘correc-
tion’ doses during periods of hyperglycaemia. This helps reduce the risk 
of hypoglycaemia from boluses given close together in time, an effect 
known as ‘insulin stacking’.
Overall, CSII reduces blood glucose variability in type 1 diabetes and 
in some people can help improve HbA1c. However, the benets of insulin 
pump therapy can only be fully realised with meticulous and attentive 
carbohydrate counting and glucose monitoring, and pro-active adjust-
ment of bolus and basal insulin in response to glucose levels. There 
are also risks to pump therapy that limit its suitability for some people. 
Pump failure leading to an interruption of the subcutaneous insulin infu-
sion can occur for a variety of reasons. Causes include detachment or 
kinking of the insulin infusion set cannula or malfunction due to expiry 
of the battery. As the pump delivers rapid-acting insulin and there is no 
depot of intermediate or long-acting insulin, pump failure can very quickly 
(within a matter of hours) lead to insulin deciency and DKA. Therefore, 
insulin pump users must regularly monitor glucose and promptly check 
for ketones and change the infusion set and cannula site if they have 
concerns about pump failure. ‘Back-up’ unexpired insulin pens should 
always be available. Individuals who are not prepared or able to mon-
itor glucose regularly are not suitable for CSII because of the risks of 
DKA. Cannula site infection is another recognised complication of pump 
therapy; this risk can be reduced by good hygiene and by ensuring the 
cannula is changed every three days.
Sensor-augmented CSII therapy
A further iteration in insulin pump therapy in recent years is communica-
tion with certain CGM devices via computerised algorithms (Fig. 21.26). 
Senor-augmented insulin pumps can use data from CGM and, with 
knowledge of the amount of ‘active insulin on board’, can adjust basal 
rates towards a target glucose. Rather than preset basal rate infusions, 
such ‘hybrid closed-loop’ systems (also known as an ‘articial pancreas’) 
automatically decide whether to infuse a small amount of basal insulin 
every 5 minutes, with decisions about pre-meal boluses still determined 
by the person with diabetes (Fig. 21.27). Features also include ‘low-glu-
cose suspend’ or ‘suspend before low’ functions, such that detection of 
hypoglycaemia or a glucose level falling below a pre-set threshold (e.g. 
5.0 mmol/L (90 mg/dL)) respectively, signal the pump to stop infusing 
insulin temporarily, leading to a substantial reduction in hypoglycaemia 
without rebound hyperglycaemia. Finally, bi-hormonal fully automated 
closed-loop systems (containing separate syringe drivers with insulin and 
glucagon), also known as the ‘bionic pancreas’, are now in clinical trials but 
not yet commercially available. The current systems are not perfect (e.g. 
recurrent low glucose sensor alarms can be irritating), but sensor-aug-
mented CSII technologies are rapidly improving and offer the real prospect 
of a ‘technological cure’ for type 1 diabetes, i.e. delivering near normal 
blood glucose, with little or no hypoglycaemia and with minimal input 
A
B
Electronic device containing a plastic
cartridge of insulin, battery and internal
computer to program insulin delivery
Insulin infusion set containing
flexible tubing and cannula
for insertion
Integrated (tubeless) pump
and infusion device
Control system which can
communicate wirelessly
with the pump
Fig. 21.25 Insulin pumps. An insulin pump is an alternative means of delivering 
device itself (with controls, processing module and batteries), a disposable reservoir 
for insulin (inside the pump) and a disposable infusion set (with tubing and a cannula 
disposable pumps without infusion tubing. Insulin pumps deliver rapid-acting insulin 
continuously and can be adjusted by the user, based on regular glucose monitoring 
and carbohydrate counting.
Sensor
Control alogorithm
on smart phone app
Insulin
pump
Fig. 21.26 Sensor-augmented insulin pump system. The articial pancreas (AP) 
can vary in its set up but, core to an AP system are: (1) a continuous glucose monitor 
(CGM) measuring interstitial glucose levels every 5–15 minutes; (2) a smartphone (or 
personal diabetes manager) with an app that uses the glucose information from the 
CGM, along with modications inserted by the user, to calculate how much insulin 
should be delivered. This is communicated wirelessly to (3) the insulin pump that 
delivers insulin subcutaneously as directed.

[[p794]]
742    DIABETES MELLITUS
required from the user. However, these technologies are expensive and 
widespread use may be limited by cost for some time to come. The 
use of do-it-yourself articial pancreas systems (DIY-APS), also known 
as ‘looping’, is increasing, particularly in high-income countries. DIY-APS 
are by denition not approved by regulatory bodies, but use existing 
insulin pumps and CGM devices with free open resource software to 
link the systems and provide much of the functionality described above.
Intravenous insulin therapy
Circulating insulin has a half-life of approximately 2.5 minutes (the longer 
duration of action of subcutaneous insulin is because of the time taken for 
insulin to be absorbed from subcutaneous sites to the blood). Therefore, 
direct infusion of insulin via the intravenous route gives maximum exibil-
ity in regulating blood glucose concentrations: an increase in the infusion 
rate will rapidly correct hyperglycaemia, while cessation of intravenous 
insulin will arrest a rapidly declining blood glucose. This inherent exibility 
makes intravenous insulin a powerful tool in the management of hyper-
glycaemic emergencies and in stabilising blood glucose in a periopera-
tive situation or in individuals who are unwell, e.g. with poor oral intake 
or delayed gastric emptying. Subcutaneous insulin does not lower blood 
glucose quickly enough for hyperglycaemic emergencies, particularly if 
skin perfusion is reduced during sepsis, while its duration of action may 
also be too long (i.e. result in hypoglycaemia) if given to an unwell patient 
who subsequently cannot eat or vomits. Intravenous insulin is, however, 
a dangerous therapy if not properly supervised and monitored. There are 
substantial risks of hypoglycaema, hypokalaemia and hyperglycaemia 
(including DKA) and so it must only be used in a setting where medi-
cal and nursing staff have the necessary experience and time to safely 
prescribe, prepare and administer the therapy. Standardised ward-level 
documentation and protocols are essential to support the clinical team.
Intravenous insulin is most commonly given via an electronic syringe driver 
(insulin injected directly into a bag of intravenous glucose and potassium is 
now rarely used). Usually, 50 units of soluble insulin (Actrapid® or Humulin 
S®) is diluted in 50 mL 0.9% sodium chloride, to provide an infusion of 1 
unit insulin/mL. In hyperglycaemic emergencies (especially DKA), it is usually 
given as a xed rate insulin infusion (FRII). This avoids the possibility of the 
infusion rate reducing to zero, as can occur with a variable rate insulin infu-
sion (VRII), which might cause a worsening of acidosis and ketosis.
In perioperative and medically unwell patients insulin is usually given 
as a VRII (formerly called an ‘insulin sliding scale’). Indications and prin-
ciples of using VRII in the hospital setting are outlined in Box. 21.26. An 
example of a VRII prescription chart is shown in Figure 21.28. Bedside 
capillary blood glucose monitoring should be performed on an hourly 
basis. Due to the short half-life of intravenous insulin, the insulin infu-
sion must be monitored regularly to ensure it is continuously running; 
if there is interruption to the infusion even for a relatively short period of 
time (e.g. a ‘tissued’ intravenous cannula, a kink in the infusion tube, a 
mechanical failure in the pump or the syringe simply running-out), signif-
icant hyper glycaemia can quickly ensue. With a VRII, intravenous glu-
cose (e.g. 0.45% sodium chloride + 5% glucose + 0.15% potassium 
chloride infused at 100 mL/hr) should be prescribed to provide some 
energy substrate and to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia and hypokala-
emia. Where possible, the glucose and insulin infusions should be given 
through a volumetric infusion device via the same intravenous cathe-
ter with a Y-connector, so that if the cannula blocks or ‘tissues’, then 
both infusions simultaneously cease, reducing the risk of hypoglycaemia 
from unopposed insulin. If additional uids or potassium replacement 
20
15
10
5
5
9.4
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Total basal 34%  10.6U
Total basal 66%  20.6U
TDD 31.2U
Sunday 21/02
13%
82%
5%
00
4
3
2
1
0
0.6
5
2.2
3.9
Glucose
(mmol/L)
Basal
(U/hr)
Bolus (U)
Carbs (g)
Blood glucose
Calibration
Auto-basal
Alerts
Bolus +
active insulin
TDD = total daily dose
U = units of insulin
Time in range
(mmol/L)
2.2
Time
1.6
10
1.1
9
3.7
30
1.2
10
7.5
60
1.2
10
3.7
30
9.5
3.7
5.9
7.5
2.8
3.9
10
13.9 22.2
Fig. 21.27 Download from a sensor-augmented insulin pump system. The user is required to enter the carbohydrate content of meals and snacks. Bolus doses of insulin 
are determined in part on this information (purple). Basal insulin administration is determined by an algorithm using glucose data and 'active insulin'. Note how the basal insulin 
infused (pink) varies substantially with time, such that basal insulin ceases when glucose levels are falling (especially if there is still active insulin present from a previous bolus 
dose). The user is also alerted when there are impending low or high glucose events. These functions facilitate excellent glycaemic control (especially overnight when there is no 
impact on glucose from food ingestion and exercise) and prevent or minimise low glucose events.
21.26  Variable rate insulin infusion (VRII)
Principles
 Desired glucose targets are achieved and maintained
 Avoidance of hypoglycaemia
 Avoidance of ketonaemia by providing adequate carbohydrate and insulin
 Maintenance of uid and electrolyte balance
Indications
 People with diabetes undergoing operations, e.g. fasting >24 hours, emergency 
surgery
 People with diabetes who have uncontrolled hyperglycaemia or who are 
unable to eat and drink due to prolonged fasting, nausea, vomiting or reduced 
consciousness
Do not use
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
 Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS)
Additional requirements
 Capillary blood glucose should be checked at least hourly
 The standard regimen for intravenous uid prescription is 0.45% sodium 
chloride + 5% glucose + 0.15% potassium chloride (pre-prepared infusion 
bags) run at 100 mL/hr through a volumetric pump only
 Potassium monitoring is required to maintain serum level between 4 and 
5 mmol/L
 Specialty input is required to guide uid replacement in special situations, such 
as cardiac failure, renal failure, following head injury and after neurosurgery
Considerations when stopping
 Continue long-acting insulin at usual time while on VRII to allow stopping at any time
 Pre-mixed insulin should not be administered on VRII – if stopping VRII give 
usual dose at breakfast/dinner and stop VRII after 2 hours (due to short half-life 
of intravenous insulin and risk of rebound hyperglycaemia)

[[p795]]
Management of diabetes    743
are required, depending on the volume and potassium status of the 
individual, they should be given via a separate infusion. Unused insulin 
should be discarded every 24 hours and a new infusion prepared. VRIIs 
should be reviewed at least every 24 hours to ensure that the infusion 
rates prescribed for a given blood sugar level have resulted in stable glu-
cose levels. If blood sugar levels have been very variable, with frequent 
adjustments to the infusion rate, this is usually a sign that the prescription 
needs to be modied (or that it is time for the VRII to be discontinued as 
the patient has begun to eat).
Transplantation
The goal of transplantation is to facilitate independence from insulin, 
reduce complications and improve quality of life.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) criteria for transplantation 
include three main types of pancreas transplantation:
 Simultaneous pancreas–kidney (SPK) transplant, when pan-
creas and kidney are transplanted simultaneously from the same 
deceased donor, or pancreas-after-kidney (PAK) transplant, 
when a cadaveric donor pancreas transplant is performed 
after a previous, and different, living or deceased donor kidney 
transplant
 Pancreas transplant alone (PTA)
 Islet transplantation
Whole pancreas transplantation is carried out in a relatively small 
number of people each year. SPK is the most commonly performed 
procedure. Most SPK and PAK are undertaken in people with diabe-
tes and end-stage kidney disease, in whom successful transplanta-
tion will improve glycaemia and may improve kidney survival. PTA is 
generally considered for people with progressive complications lead-
ing to signicant loss of quality of life (for example recurrent level 3 
hypoglycaemia). The principal complications occurring immediately 
after surgery include thrombosis, pancreatitis, infection, bleeding and 
rejection. Prognosis is improving: 1 year after transplantation >95% 
of all patients are still alive and 80%–85% of all pancreases are still 
functional. After transplantation, people will need life-long immuno-
suppression, which carries with it an increased risk of infection and 
skin cancer.
Variable Rate Insulin Infusion (VRII): prescription, administration and monitoring record (adults)
1. Prescription: insulin infusion details
Medicine
SOLUBLE INSULIN
(Actrapid® or Humulin S®)
50 units
Sodium chloride
0.9%
50 ml
1 unit /ml
IV
Total amount of
insulin in syringe
Name of diluent
Total volume
in syringe
Insulin
concentration
Route
Comments
2. Prescription: insulin dose variable rate
Insulin infusion rate (units/hour)
Alternative rate
Capillary blood
glucose (CBG)-
mmol/L
< 4
4–7
1
Date
Time
Initial
0 (if long-acting insulin given)
0.5 (if long-acting insulin not given)
7.1–9
9.1–11
11.1–14
14.1–17
17.1–20
>20
2
3
4
5
(check ketones if type 1 diabetes)
6
(check ketones if type 1 diabetes)
Seek senior medical advice
(check ketones)
Signature
of prescriber
Date
Recommended initial rate
Prescriber: tick below as appropriate
Alternative rate
Fig. 21.28 Example of a prescription document for a variable rate insulin infusion (VRII). The insulin infusion has a standard concentration of 1 unit/mL. The rate of 
insulin infusion is adjusted according to the prevailing blood glucose level. Adjustments are made to the infusion rates as capillary blood glucose falls and rises.

[[p796]]
744    DIABETES MELLITUS
Islet transplantation involves the transplantation of islets from a 
donor pancreas into a person with type 1 diabetes. The isolated pan-
creatic islets are usually infused into the patient's liver via the portal 
vein. This approach has now been successfully adopted in a number of 
centres around the world (Fig. 21.29). At present, islet transplantation is 
usually suitable only for people with unstable glycaemic control charac-
terised by severe intractable hypoglycaemia that cannot be corrected 
by structured education, modern insulin regimens and technology. 
Progress is being made towards meeting the needs of supply, puri-
cation and storage of islets, but problems remain relating to transplant 
rejection and destruction by the immune-mediated process against 
β cells that caused type 1 diabetes in the rst place. Nevertheless, the 
development of methods of inducing tolerance to transplanted islets 
and the potential use of stem cells mean that this may still prove a 
promising approach in the long term. Adoption of newer immunosup-
pressive protocols has resulted in far better outcomes and now nearly 
50% of people with diabetes transplanted will be insulin-independent at 
3 years post transplantation. This is an evolving therapy area with many 
new experimental techniques under development. There are no direct 
comparisons between whole pancreas and islet transplantation, but it 
appears that whole pancreas transplantation results in higher rates of 
insulin independence albeit with the greater morbidity of surgery.
Management of diabetes in special situations
Diabetes in pregnancy
The management of women with diabetes who are pregnant or 
who have developed diabetes during pregnancy (gestational diabe-
tes) is discussed in detail in Chapter 32. This is a highly specialised 
area and requires careful management, as elevated maternal blood 
glucose in pregnancy is associated with signicant maternal and fetal 
morbidity.
Children, adolescents and young adults with 
diabetes
Most type 1 diabetes is diagnosed in children below 18 years of age, with 
peak incidence rates between 5 and 7 years of age and at puberty. The 
management of diabetes in children and adolescents has important dif-
ferences to adults, which should be addressed in specialised clinics with 
multidisciplinary input (Box 21.27). Some of the unique aspects of child-
hood type 1 diabetes management include changing insulin sensitivity 
1
3
4
2
Fig. 21.29 Transplanting islet cells. (1) Pancreas obtained from suitable human donor. (2) Pancreatic islets containing insulin-producing β cells are isolated rst in a Ricordi 
chamber. (3) Islets, once separated and puried, are infused into the hepatic portal vein. (4) Once embedded in the liver, pancreatic islets secrete insulin in response to changes 
in portal vein glucose.
21.27  Diabetes in adolescence
 Type of diabetes: type 1 diabetes is predominant in children and adolescents, 
but type 2 diabetes is now presenting in unprecedented numbers of obese, 
inactive teenagers. Monogenic diabetes (MODY) should also be considered (see 
Box 21.8).
 Physiological changes: hormonal, physical and lifestyle changes in puberty 
affect dietary intake, exercise patterns and sensitivity to insulin, necessitating 
alterations in insulin regimen.
 Emotional changes: adolescence is a phase of transition into independence 
(principally from parental care). Periods of rebellion against parental control, 
experimentation (e.g. with alcohol and recreational drugs) and a more chaotic 
lifestyle are common, and often impact adversely on control of diabetes.
 Glycaemic control: a temporary deterioration in control is common, although 
not universal. It is sometimes more important to maintain contact and 
engagement with a young person than to insist on tight glycaemic control.
 Diabetic ketoacidosis: a few adolescents and young adults present with 
frequent episodes of DKA, often because of suboptimal adherence to insulin 
therapy. This is more common in females. Precipitating factors include desire 
for weight loss, personality and even manipulation of family or schooling 
circumstances.
 Adolescent diabetes clinics: these challenges are best tackled with support 
from a specialised multidisciplinary team, including paediatricians, physicians, 
nurses and psychologists. Support is required for the patient and parents.

[[p797]]
Management of diabetes    745
related to sexual maturity and physical growth, unique vulnerability to 
hypoglycaemia (especially in children below 6 years of age) and DKA. 
Family dynamics, child-care and schooling, developmental stages and 
ability to self-care all have to be considered in the personalised man-
agement plan. In older children and adolescents, there may be issues 
of body image, eating disorders and recreational drug and alcohol use. 
Innovative models of education such as digital comics and gamication 
are emerging. It is also notable that there is very limited clinical research 
in children with diabetes and so most recommendations are based 
on expert opinion. The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in those below 
20years of age is increasing and is estimated to increase 4-fold in the 
next 40 years.
Diabetes in hospital
People with diabetes account for around 20% of all hospital in-patients in 
the UK. The vast majority (around 9 out of 10) are admitted to hospital for 
a cause unrelated to diabetes or for a condition where diabetes may be a 
contributory factor (e.g. an acute cardiovascular event or elective surgery 
for cataract). Common causes for diabetes-specic admission include 
foot ulceration, DKA, HHS, newly diagnosed diabetes and hypergly-
caemia. Any person with diabetes presenting to hospital acutely unwell 
should have a blood glucose measurement.
People with diabetes often report unhappiness with how their dia-
betes was managed during a hospital admission. Clearly admission to 
hospital disturbs an individual’s usual daily routine, including the timings 
and types of meal being offered, and the amount of physical activity. 
Acute illness and surgery can cause blood glucose levels to rise and the 
individual may not be able to eat or drink for extended periods. Insulin 
and other glucose-lowering medication may be prescribed by relatively 
inexperienced trainees or non-specialists and some people with diabetes 
report a feeling of ‘loss of control’ in the management of their condition. 
When the prescribed dose of insulin is different from what is considered 
appropriate by the person with diabetes this should be discussed and 
handled sensitively with clear explanations for the rationale behind pre-
scribing decisions. Through lived experience, the person with diabetes 
may well know more about their condition than the doctor.
Errors in prescriptions of glucose-lowering therapies (especially insulin) 
are extremely common and may be due to lack of knowledge on the 
part of medical staff, inadvertent error due to time pressures or other 
human or system factors (see Chapter 1). It is important that medical 
staff are proactive in adjusting glucose-lowering therapy to avoid extreme 
glucose excursions. Hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia are unpleasant 
and potentially harmful; they are also associated with increased length 
of stay.
Hyperglycaemia in acute admissions to hospital
Hyperglycaemia is often found in patients who are admitted to hospital 
as an emergency. In most instances, this occurs in people with known 
diabetes, but it may also be due to undiagnosed diabetes or stress 
hyperglycaemia (see p. 719). An example of decision-making support 
around the management of hyperglycaemia on admission to hospital can 
be found in Figure 21.30
Acute intercurrent illness causes catabolic stress and secretion 
of counter-regulatory hormones (including catecholamines and cor-
tisol) in both normal and diabetic individuals. This results in increased 
Random glucose <7.8 mmol/l
No additional risk factors
Additional risk factors for
developing hyperglycaemia
 Aged >40 years old (>30 years in
   people of South Asian origin)
 Family history of diabetes
 Personal history of gestational
   diabetes
 Personal history of hypertension
 Personal history of dyslipidaemia
 Personal history of prediabetes
 Body Mass Index (BMI) >25 kg/m2
   (>23 kg/m2 in those of South Asian
   origin)
 Long-term glucocorticoid
   treatment
Random glucose ≥7.8 mmol/l
OR additional risk factors
Diagnostic features of
DKA or HHS
Eating and drinking
normally?
Treat appropriately
Well enough to eat and
drink normally?
No further capillary
glucose testing
necessary
Test capillary glucose
concentrations every
4–6 hours for 24 hours
Start here
Unwell person
Check capillary glucose
Known to have diabetes?
No
Test capillary
glucose
concentrations
every 4–6 hours
Start VRII
Yes
No
Start VRII
Yes
Fig. 21.30 Decision-making algorithm for an individual presenting to hospital with hyperglycaemia. The target glucose of individuals with established diabetes is 
6–10 mmol/L, but a range of 4–12 mmol/L is acceptable. (DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; HHS = hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state; VRII = variable rate insulin infusion) 
Adapted from Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care, Diabetes at the Front Door; 2021. https://abcd.care/joint-british-diabetes-societies-jbds-inpatient-care-group.

[[p798]]
746    DIABETES MELLITUS
glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, proteolysis and insulin resist-
ance. Starvation exacerbates this process by increasing lipolysis. In a 
person without diabetes, these metabolic effects lead to a secondary 
increase in the secretion of insulin, which exerts a controlling inuence. In 
people with untreated or poorly controlled diabetes, the uptake of met-
abolic substrate into tissues is signicantly reduced because of insulin 
deciency (relative or absolute), catabolism is increased and, ultimately, 
metabolic decompensation in the form of DKA or HHS may develop.
Hyperglycaemia on admission to hospital is associated with increased 
length of stay and increased mortality in a wide variety of acute medical 
emergencies, including acute myocardial infarction and acute stroke. 
This may be a direct consequence of hyperglycaemia (perhaps through 
volume depletion from osmotic diuresis, electrolye imbalance, a second-
ary pro-coagulant state, and/or negative effects on the immune system) 
or simply a consequence that more severe illness (with a worse progno-
sis) causes greater degrees of hyperglycaemia. Intuitively, intensive gly-
caemic control with intravenous insulin should improve outcomes during 
acute illness. However, studies to date have shown that strategies aiming 
for near-normal blood glucose levels in acutely ill patients are associated 
with either increased mortality or no overall benet. The reasons for the 
adverse outcomes are not established, but intensive glycaemic control is 
inevitably associated with an increased risk of hypoglycaemia, because 
of the inherent limitations of modern insulins, the limited frequency of 
glucose monitoring in a ward environment and the relative imprecision of 
near-patient blood glucose meters. Activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system and release of counter-regulatory hormones during acute hypo-
glycaemia likely has deleterious consequences for the acutely ill patient. 
Therefore, a target blood glucose of between 6 and 10 mmol/L (105 and 
180 mg/dL) with an acceptable range of 4–12 mmol/L (72–220 mg/dL) is 
recommended for in-patients with diabetes. VRII is sometimes used for 
uncontrolled hyperglycaemia in hospital.
Surgery and diabetes
People with diabetes are reported to have up to 50% higher periop-
erative mortality than people without diabetes. Surgery has the same 
metabolic consequences, described above, as acute intercurrent illness. 
In addition, hyperglycaemia impairs wound healing and innate immunity, 
leading to increased risk of infection. People with diabetes are also more 
likely to have underlying pre-operative morbidity, especially cardiovascu-
lar disease. Finally, glycaemic management errors may cause dangerous 
hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia. Careful pre-operative assessment 
and perioperative management are therefore essential, ideally with 
support from the diabetes specialist team.
Pre-operative assessment
Unless a surgical intervention is an emergency, people with diabetes 
should be assessed well in advance of surgery so that glycaemic control 
can be achieved and other risk factors can be addressed (Box 21.28). 
There is good evidence that a higher HbA1c is associated with adverse 
perioperative outcome. In general, the upper limit for an acceptable 
HbA1c in this context is 69 mmol/mol (8.5%). However, since optimisation 
of care may take weeks or months to achieve, the potential benets of 
improved glycaemia need to be weighed against the potential benets 
for early surgical intervention.
Perioperative management
Figure 21.31 outlines a general approach to perioperative management of 
diabetes, although this may need to be adapted according to the individual, 
the surgical procedure and local guidelines, i.e. there is no ‘one size ts all' 
approach. People with diabetes who are considered low-risk can attend 
as day cases or be admitted on the day of surgery. Occasionally, they may 
be admitted the night before surgery to ensure optimal management.
Postoperative management
People with diabetes who need to continue fasting after surgery should be 
maintained on a VRII until they are able to eat and drink. During this time, 
care must be taken with uid balance and electrolyte levels; the ideal glu-
cose range is 6–10 mmol/L (105–180  mg/dL), with an acceptable range 
21.28  Pre-operative assessment
 Consider delaying surgery and refer to the diabetes team if HbA1c >69 mmol/mol; 
this should be weighed against the need for surgery
 Establish an individualized diabetes management plan for the pre-admisision 
period (including optimization if required) and perioperative period (this will 
be determined by pre-operative glucose-lowering regimens – non-insulin and 
insulin therapies, glycaemic control and period of starvation (i.e. will the patient 
miss more than one meal?)
 Patients with high-risk feet (p. 751) should have suitable pressure relief 
provided during post-operative nursing
 Plan for the patient to be rst on the list. This minimises the starvation period 
and thereby the need for VRII and length of inpatient stay
 Insulin therapies
First on the list
Short starvation
i.e. <2 missed meals
and good glycaemic control (i.e 
HbA1c ≤ 69 mmol/mol)
Non-insulin therapies
Morning of surgery
      Omit sulphonlyurea
      Omit SGLT2 inhibitors
Take as normal
       Metformin
       Thiazolidinedione
       DPP-4 inhibitors
       GLP-1 receptor
         agonist
Omit non-insulin therapies
Omit insulin therapies except
long-acting insulin (continue
at 80% of normal dose)
VRII
Long starvation
i.e. ≥ 2 missed meals
and/or decompensated diabetes
(i.e. blood glucose > 12 mmol/L;
HbA1c > 69 mmol/mol)
Day before
Day of surgery
Once daily
evening
Once daily
morning
Twice daily
mixed insulin
Multiple daily
insulin
↓dose
20%
No dose
change
↓dose
20%
↓dose
20%
↓morning dose
50%
No dose
change
No dose
change
Omit short-
acting insulin
↓long-acting
  insulin 20%
Fig. 21.31 A suggested approach to the perioperative management of diabetes. Adapted from Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care, Management of adults 
with diabetes undergoing surgery and elective procedures: Improving standards. March 2016. 

[[p799]]
Complications of diabetes    747
of 4–12 mmol/L (72–220 mg/dL). Once usual glucose-lowering treatment 
has been reinstated, good blood glucose control should be maintained 
to optimise wound healing and recovery.
Diabetes footcare in hospital
Diabetes foot disease is discussed in detail on p. 751. Between 2% and 
3% of people with diabetes admitted to hospital develop a foot ulcer 
during the admission. Pressure ulceration (due to prolonged contact 
between part of the foot, such as the heel, and a rm surface, such 
as a mattress) can occur due to prolonged immobility in a hospital bed 
and is associated with peripheral vascular disease, poor glycaemic con-
trol, malnourishment and dehydration. Delirium, dementia and periph-
eral neuropathy all increase the risk of developing pressure ulceration, 
because the individual does not recognise the sensation of abnormal 
heel pressure. The feet of all people with diabetes should be examined 
on admission to hospital. Those with feet ‘vulnerable’ for ulceration must 
be given protection for their feet. Individuals who are bedbound should 
wear special ‘foot protectors’ – moulded plastic boots with padding that 
specically redistribute pressure and off-load the heel areas as these are 
particularly susceptible to pressure ulceration. Pressure relief pads are 
also available that can be tted to the end of a bed and are indicated 
for people with ‘at risk’ feet who are ambulant. If ulceration is identied 
on the initial foot assessment or occurs during admission (something 
that should be a ‘never event’), then the patient should be immediately 
referred to the multidisciplinary diabetes foot team.
Complications of diabetes
Chronic hyperglycaemia causes irreversible damage over time to a num-
ber of tissues: particularly the small blood vessels of the retina (retin-
opathy), the glomerulus (nephropathy) and peripheral nerves (peripheral 
neuropathy) (Box 21.29). These so-called microvascular complications 
are amongst the commonest causes of visual loss, end-stage renal failure 
(dialysis) and foot ulceration (amputation) in most global populations and 
have a major adverse impact on quality of life. They are strongly linked 
to hyperglycaemia and increased duration of diabetes. Hyperglycaemia 
causes tissue damage via four main biochemical pathways: the polyol 
pathway, the hexosamine pathway, accumulation of advanced glycation 
end products and activation of protein kinase C. Each of these leads to 
overproduction of reactive oxygen species by the mitochondrial electron 
transport chain, giving rise to oxidative stress. The histopathological hall-
mark of diabetic microangiopathy is thickening of the capillary basement 
membrane, with associated increased vascular permeability. This occurs 
throughout the body resulting in the characteristic microvascular compli-
cations and accelerated atherosclerosis.
In the 1990s over 20% of people with type 2 diabetes in the UK had 
evidence of microvascular complications at the time of diagnosis, but 
this rate has fallen dramatically in many countries (e.g. to as low as 1% 
in parts of Germany) with better awareness and screening in the com-
munity and consequently earlier diagnosis. Microvascular complications 
are strongly linked to long-term elevated blood glucose (usually manifest 
as an elevated HbA1c) and individuals with strict glycaemic control have a 
much lower risk of developing these complications.
Macrovascular complications are less closely linked to blood glu-
cose, particularly in type 2 diabetes. In type 2 diabetes, insulin resist-
ance is also directly and pathophysiologically linked with hypertension 
and dyslipidaemia (as part of the metabolic syndrome, each of which 
is also a risk factor for atherosclerosis. Thus, even individuals with 
impaired glucose tolerance (i.e. who do not have high enough blood 
glucose to be diagnosed with diabetes) already have an elevated risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Management of blood pressure and dyslipidae-
mia in diabetes are discussed briey on p. 729), while the investigation 
and management of cardiovascular disease are discussed in detail in 
Chapters 16 and 29
In addition to vascular complications, diabetes is associated with an 
increased susceptibility to infection and increased severity of infection. 
Glycation of soft tissues and periarticular structures can cause a variety 
of rheumatological disorders, including diabetic cheiroarthropathy and 
adhesive capsulitis. Glycation and subsequent osmotic changes in the 
lens of the eye can cause reversibly reduced visual acuity at presenta-
tion of diabetes and can predispose to cataracts. Type 2 diabetes is 
associated with a 2-fold increased risk of dementia with increased risk 
of both Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. The mechanisms 
underpinning this association are complex and may involve factors such 
as micro- and macrovascular disease, abnormalities in insulin action in 
the brain and glycosylation of neuronal tissue.
Life expectancy/mortality
The life expectancy of people with type 2 diabetes in the UK is similar 
to that of the general population for those of higher socioeconomic sta-
tus. However, those who are subject to social deprivation lose on aver-
age 4–5 years of life, even in countries where there is universal access 
to health care and free prescriptions. This gradient of life expectancy 
according to factors that are not classically ‘biomedical’ is more difcult 
21.29  Complications of diabetes
Microvascular/neuropathic
Retinopathy, cataract
 Common cause of visual loss
Nephropathy
 Renal failure, requirement for dialysis
Peripheral neuropathy (foot disease)
 Sensory loss
 Pain
 Ulceration
 Charcot neuroarthropathy
Autonomic neuropathy
 Postural hypotension
 Gastroparesis
 Sexual dysfunction
Macrovascular
Coronary circulation
 Angina
 Acute coronary syndrome/ myocardial infarction
Cerebral circulation
 Transient ischaemic attack
 Stroke
Peripheral circulation (foot disease)
 Claudication
 Ischaemia
 Ulceration
Infection
 Increased risk of certain infections, e.g. Candida spp., urine infection, fungal nail 
disease
 Increased risk of severe forms of infection, e.g. COVID-19, inuenza, 
tuberculosis
 Increased risk of opportunistic infections, e.g. emphysematous pyelonephritis
Rheumatological complications
 Cheiroarthropathy, limited joint movement
 Dupuytren’s contracture
 Adhesive capsulitis
 Trigger nger
Skin complications
 Diabetic dermopathy
 Necrobiosis lipoidica
 Xerosis

[[p800]]
748    DIABETES MELLITUS
to measure in countries that do not have universal health-care coverage, 
but is likely even steeper in those countries with an ‘uninsured’ section 
of the population.
Excess mortality in type 2 diabetes is caused mainly by cardiovascu-
lar disease, particularly myocardial infarction and stroke. There is also 
substantial morbidity from myocardial infarction, stroke, angina, cardiac 
failure and intermittent claudication. The pathological changes of ather-
osclerosis in type 2 diabetes are similar to those in non-diabetic individ-
uals, but occur earlier in life and are more extensive and severe with the 
effects of associated major cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, hyper-
tension and dyslipidaemia) amplied. Rates of mortality adjusted for age 
and socio-economic status are 38% higher in men and 49% higher in 
women with type 2 diabetes, mainly driven by cardiovascular disease. 
In the United States, hospitalisation rates for stroke are 1.5 times higher in 
adults with type 2 diabetes while 60% of non-traumatic amputations are 
in people with diabetes.
In type 1 diabetes, life expectancy is reduced on average by 11 years 
in men and 13 years in women. Under the age of 30 years, most deaths 
occur due to severe acute metabolic complications (DKA and hypogly-
caemia). Cardiovascular disease accounts for almost as many deaths 
aged 30–39 years and predominates after the age of 40 years. Death 
may also be a consequence of renal failure caused by diabetic nephro-
pathy. In addition, microvascular complications are responsible for sub-
stantial morbidity and disability: for example, blindness from diabetic 
retinopathy, lifestyle restrictions associated with renal dialysis, difculty 
in walking and chronic ulceration of the feet from peripheral neuropathy, 
and bowel and bladder dysfunction from autonomic neuropathy.
Infections and diabetes
People with diabetes are at increased risk of infection and when such 
infections occur they may be more severe. Hyperglycaemia affects the 
function of key aspects of the cellular innate immune system, notably 
the function of neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages, with reduced 
chemotaxis, phagocytosis and killing of pathogens. Abnormalities in 
humoral immunity are also seen, such as reduced levels of comple-
ment proteins and cytokines, but the signicance of this is less clear. 
Therefore, diabetes is in effect an immunocompromised state and, as a 
consequence, infections are more common and more likely to be caused 
by opportunistic pathogens, such as anaerobic organisms and fungi. In 
addition, microbes grow better in a high glucose environment and this 
may contribute to increased virulence. Finally, peripheral vascular dis-
ease and neuropathy, especially in the feet, predispose to skin ulceration. 
Breaks in the skin act as a portal for bacteria to enter the body and, if 
there is associated vascular disease, the reduced blood supply to the 
injured tissue impairs wound healing so there is reduced access for neu-
trophils and other components of the immune system to the damaged 
tissues. Individuals with glycaemic control above target (raised HbA1c) 
are at higher risk of infection and its consequences, including COVID-19 
(see below), although risk remains increased in all people with diabetes.
Urogenital, skin and soft tissue infections
As already noted, one of the commonest sites of infection in people 
with diabetes is the urogenital system. Genital infections, especially from 
yeasts such as Candida species, causing balanitis in men and vulvovag-
initis in women are common at diagnosis of diabetes, in those taking 
SGLT2 inhibitors and in individuals with poor glycaemic control. Urine 
infections, including pyelonephritis, are also more common in people 
with diabetes and may progress to sepsis and acute kidney injury; rarely, 
even more serious forms of pyelonephritis can occur in which gas is 
formed in the renal parenchyma (emphysematous pyelonephritis).
Fungal nail infections and infections of skin and soft tissues are 
also more prevalent in people with diabetes. Skin and soft tissue 
infections, e.g. cellulitis, abscesses and boils, are usually caused by 
Staphylococcus aureus or β-haemolytic streptococci, as in non-diabetic 
patients. However, people with diabetes are more likely to experience 
polymicrobial and anaerobic infections, such as necrotising fasciitis, gas 
gangrene and synergistic gangrene (including Fournier gangrene of geni-
tal and perineal skin), presumably because of the combination of relative 
immunosuppression and poor tissue perfusion (p. 271).
Bone and joint infection
Approximately 30% of all cases of osteomyelitis are associated with dia-
betes (see Ch. 26). The most commonly affected sites are the bones of 
the feet, because of the strong association with peripheral neuropathy, 
peripheral vascular disease and foot ulceration. Osteomyelitis may occur 
as a primary consequence of a puncture injury (which has introduced 
microbes into the wound) or secondary to a long-term skin ulcer or 
other breach in the skin. Approximately 90% of cases of diabetic foot 
osteomyelitis occur in the forefoot, with approximately 5% of cases in the 
mid- and hindfoot, respectively. Osteomyelitis results in destruction of the 
bone and potentially adjacent joints. It can present as an acute infection, 
but more commonly is a chronic, insidious infection that progressively 
worsens.
The clinical features of osteomyelitis in people with diabetes often 
appear non-severe and may be more suggestive of a soft tissue infection 
than bone infection. The diagnosis may, therefore, be delayed unless 
clinicians have a low threshold for suspecting osteomyelitis and car-
rying out appropriate investigations. Larger ulcers (>2 cm) and deeper 
ulcers (>3 mm) are associated with an increased risk of osteomyelitis, 
as is the presence of visible bone in the wound or bone that can be 
probed. However, none of these signs are diagnostic for osteomyelitis. 
Plain X-rays are insensitive, especially in milder infections, only showing 
features of osteomyelitis if more than 30%–50% of bone is lost. MRI 
and bone scintigraphy have higher sensitivity. Although Staphylococcus 
aureus is most commonly involved, Gram-negative and anaerobic organ-
isms can also be detected. Wound swabs are usually unhelpful, because 
of contamination from organisms on the skin that are not involved in the 
bone infection; the most useful microbiological data comes if a bone frag-
ment can be obtained for culture. Osteomyelitis is particularly difcult to 
treat because many antibiotics do not reach adequate concentrations in 
bone. Primary antibiotic therapy can be used in milder infections, though 
often a prolonged course of antibiotics (of many weeks and months) is 
required. Surgical débridement of infected soft tissue and bone is often 
required and can reduce the need for amputation. However, osteomyeli-
tis, particularly in the hindfoot, is associated with a poor prognosis and a 
very high risk of below-knee amputation (~50%).
Septic arthritis and discitis are also more common in people with 
diabetes, either as a consequence of a direct puncture injury, haema-
togenous spread from an infection elsewhere or direct spread from an 
adjacent area of osteomyelitis. Staphylococcus aureus is the most com-
monly implicated organism in both instances: investigation and manage-
ment are discussed on pages 1025 and 1026.
COVID-19
Severe infection with SARS-CoV-2, i.e. that resulting in death and/or 
admission to a critical care unit, is much more common in people with 
diabetes. Precise estimates of the increased risk vary, but people with 
type 1 diabetes are at approximately 2.5–3.5 times increased risk, while 
people with type 2 diabetes are at 1.5–2.0 times increased risk. There is 
a strong association with glycaemic control, such that those individuals 
with chronically elevated blood glucose are at the highest risk.
SARS-CoV-2 infection, in turn, appears to have an adverse impact on 
diabetes itself. There are many reports of people with COVID-19, with or 
without a previous diagnosis of diabetes, presenting with severe hyper-
glycaemia and DKA. The mechanisms underlying this remain unclear. 
It may in part be a consequence of worsening insulin resistance pre-
cipitated by severe intercurrent illness (see p. 745). However, SARS-
CoV-2 gains entry to cells via the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 
(ACE2) receptor; this is highly expressed in β cells in the pancreas. Thus, 
tropism of SARS-CoV-2 for β cells could trigger damage that impairs 

[[p801]]
Complications of diabetes    749
insulin secretion, resulting in hyperglycaemia and DKA. It has been sug-
gested that SARS-Co-V-2 may act as a trigger for type 1 diabetes, as 
some paediatric diabetes centres reported increased incidence during 
the pandemic; however, this association has not consistently been 
demonstrated.
Diabetic eye disease
Diabetic retinopathy and diabetic maculopathy are together the most 
common causes of visual impairment and loss in many countries. The 
pathogenesis, clinical features and management of diabetic retinopathy 
and other eye conditions (including cataract) relevant to diabetes are 
described in Chapter 30
Diabetic kidney disease
Diabetes is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease globally, 
and approximately 40% of people requiring renal replacement therapy 
(i.e. dialysis or transplantation) have diabetes. In people with type 1 dia-
betes, kidney disease is most often caused by diabetic nephropathy (see 
below), but in people with type 2 diabetes it may also be caused by other 
conditions to which people with hyperglycaemia are predisposed (e.g. 
recurrent sepsis and acute kidney injury as a result of urinary tract infec-
tion, hypertension and renal vascular disease). Forty per cent of people 
with type 2 diabetes have chronic kidney disease (CKD) and usually it is 
multifactorial in aetiology.
About 30% of individuals with type 1 diabetes develop diabetic 
nephropathy from 10–20 years after diagnosis, but the incidence after 
this time falls to less than 1% per year. The risk of nephropathy in popula-
tions of European descent with type 2 diabetes is similar to that with type 
1 diabetes, but the rate of progression may be exacerbated by concomi-
tant obesity and other risk factors. It is much higher in some ethnic groups 
(e.g. African Caribbeans, South Asians and Japanese), with epigenetic 
and genetic factors thought to inuence this increased risk. It should be 
noted that some individuals with long-standing hyperglycaemia do not 
develop nephropathy, suggesting the presence of as-yet-undiscovered 
protective (potentially genetic) factors. With improved standards of care 
focusing on glycaemic control and more widespread use of blood pres-
sure-lowering medication targeting the renin-angiotensin system, the 
proportion of people with diabetes and CKD is reducing. However, due 
to the global rise in the incidence of type 2 diabetes, the absolute num-
ber of people with diabetes and end-stage renal failure continues to rise.
The pathophysiology underlying diabetic nephropathy is not fully 
understood. A key molecule is transforming growth factor β, which upreg-
ulates ux of glucose into renal cells and activates the renin–angiotensin 
system leading to renal inammation and brosis. The classical pattern 
of progression of renal abnormalities in diabetes is shown schematically 
in Figure 21.32. Initially there is hyperltration in the glomeruli, then onset 
of microalbuminuria due to damage (and thickening) of the glomerular 
basement membrane causing leaking of protein, which can then pro-
gress to frank (dipstick-positive) proteinuria. Matrix material also accu-
mulates in the mesangium and, as disease advances, nodular deposits 
form in the glomeruli (‘focal’ glomerulosclerosis; Fig. 21.33). As glomeruli 
are progressively lost, renal function deteriorates, which manifests as a 
declining glomerular ltration rate.
Diagnosis and screening
Urine should be tested for microalbuminuria and a blood test sent for 
estimated glomerular ltration rate (eGFR) on an annual basis in all adults 
with diabetes. CKD in diabetes is dened using criteria listed in Box 18.3. 
Microalbuminuria is the presence in the urine of small amounts of albu-
min at a concentration below that detectable using a standard urine 
dipstick. As the measurement is physiologically variable, a single meas-
urement is not considered informative: it should be conrmed as present 
in at least two of three ‘rst-morning’ specimens taken on separate days 
(Box 21.30). Microalbuminuria is usually reported as a proportion of the 
concentration or weight of creatinine present in the sample (mg/mmol 
or mg/g) to reduce variability, with the threshold for diagnosis higher in 
women (see Box 18.9). Overt nephropathy is the presence of macroalb-
uminuria equivalent to the level of protein detectable on a standard urine 
dipstick. Microalbuminuria is a good predictor of progression to nephrop-
athy in type 1 diabetes and an indication for ACE inhibitor or angiotensin 
II receptor blocker therapy to protect the kidneys. It is also a risk marker 
for macrovascular disease, especially in type 2 diabetes.
Management
Establishing the presence of microalbuminuria should prompt vigorous 
efforts to reduce the risk of progression to nephropathy (and to protect 
against cardiovascular disease) by:
Microalbuminuria
Sustained proteinuria
Nephrotic range proteinuria
10
5
120
0
10
20
GFR
(mL / min)
Proteinuria
(g / 24 hrs)
Years
Hyperfiltration
Hypertension
Renal
failure
Fig. 21.32 Natural history of diabetic nephropathy. In the rst few years of type 
1 diabetes mellitus, there is hyperltration; thereafter glomerular ltration rate declines 
fairly steadily to return to a normal value at approximately 10 years (blue line). In 
susceptible patients (about 30%), there is sustained proteinuria after about 10 years 
and by approximately 14 years this has reached the nephrotic range (red line).
Fig. 21.33 Nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis. There is thickening of basement 
membranes, mesangial expansion and a Kimmelstiel–Wilson nodule (arrow), which is 
pathognomonic of diabetic kidney disease.
21.30  Screening for microalbuminuria
 Early morning urine is measured for the albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR)
 Microalbuminuria is present if:
Male: ACR 2.5–30 mg/mmol creatinine or 25–300 mg/g
Female: ACR 3.5–30 mg/mmol creatinine or 35–300 mg/g
 An elevated ACR should be followed by a repeat test:
There is established microalbuminuria if 2 out of 3 tests are positive
 Proteinuria (overt or dipstick-postive nephropathy) is likely to be present if ACR 
> 30 mg/mmol
 This is conrmed by a protein: creatinine ratio (PCR) of >45 mg/mmol
 Nephrotic range proteinuria is present when PCR >300 mg/mmol

[[p802]]
750    DIABETES MELLITUS
 control of blood pressure
 reduction of cardiovascular risk factors
 optimisation of glycaemic control.
Blockade of the renin–angiotensin system using either ACE inhibitors 
or angiotensin 2 receptor blockers (ARBs) has been shown to have an 
additional benet over similar levels of blood pressure control achieved 
with other antihypertensive agents and is recommended as rst-line 
therapy. This relieves angiotensin II-mediated vasoconstriction of efferent 
arterioles downstream from the glomerular capillary tuft (see Fig. 18.1D), 
decreasing glomerular ltration pressure and, therefore, hyperltration 
and protein leak. Electrolytes and renal function should be checked after 
initiation or dose increase of these agents as they can cause a marked 
deterioration in renal function if there is occult stenosis of the main renal 
artery, i.e. when adequate intraglomerular pressure is critically dependent 
on efferent arteriolar tone. There is no additional benet of combining 
agents from these two classes. However, addition of other antihyper-
tensive agents is required to achieve target BP control in many cases, 
e.g. calcium channel blockers, diuretics and α-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(α-blockers).
Halving the amount of albuminuria with an ACE inhibitor or ARB results 
in a nearly 50% reduction in long-term risk of progression to end-stage 
renal disease and requirement for renal replacement therapy, often in 
the form of haemodialysis (p. 593). SGLT2 inhibitor therapy in people 
with type 2 diabetes, overt proteinuria (>300 mg/day) and eGFR >30 ml/
min/1.73m2 reduces the risk of progression to end-stage kidney disease 
by approximately 30%. SGLT2 inhibitor therapy also reduces cardiovas-
cular events in people with CKD and is rapidly becoming a standard of 
care as an add-on to ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy.
Individuals with CKD stages 3–5, but no proteinuria, may have CKD 
due to other factors, e.g. hypertension rather than diabetic nephropa-
thy, and it is not yet clear if SGLT2 inhibitors slow progression of CKD 
in this group.
Renal transplantation is indicated for people with end-stage kidney 
disease, who are t enough to undergo the procedure; it dramatically 
improves lives of organ recipients (see Ch. 18). Simultaneous pancreas 
transplantation should be performed, where possible, in people with type 
1 diabetes. Anti-rejection immunosuppression carries risks and requires 
careful monitoring. Recurrence of diabetic nephropathy in the transplanted 
organ (allograft) is usually too slow to be a serious problem, although other 
complications may continue to progress.
Diabetic neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy causes substantial morbidity, particularly due to 
foot ulceration. It is diagnosed on the basis of symptoms and signs after 
the exclusion of other causes of neuropathy (see Ch. 28). It is more 
common with increased duration of either type 1 or 2 diabetes. The most 
common type is a ‘polyneuropathy’ (i.e. evidence that more than one 
type of nerve bre is affected). About 25%–30% of adults have evidence 
of neuropathy 10–15 years on from diagnosis and about half of these 
have painful diabetic neuropathy (PDN). Like retinopathy, neuropathy 
occurs secondary to hyperglycaemia and is related to duration of dia-
betes. Motor, sensory and autonomic nerves may be involved in varying 
combinations.
Pathological features can occur in any peripheral nerves. They include 
axonal degeneration of both myelinated and unmyelinated bres, with 
thickening of the Schwann cell basal lamina, patchy segmental demye-
lination and abnormal intraneural capillaries (with basement membrane 
thickening and microthrombi).
Clinical features
Symmetrical sensory polyneuropathy
This is the commonest type of diabetic neuropathy and is a diffuse, 
small-bre neuropathy that is, at least initially, frequently asympto-
matic. There is impairment, in a ‘glove and stocking’ distribution, of all 
modalities of sensation including diminished vibration sensation (Fig. 
21.34). Symptoms may include paraesthesiae in the feet, sharp pain in 
the lower limbs (worse at night and felt mainly on the anterior aspect 
of the legs), burning sensations in the soles of the feet and cutaneous 
hyperaesthesia. As the condition advances, weakness and atrophy of 
the interosseous muscles may develop leading to structural changes in 
the foot with loss of lateral and transverse arches, clawing of the toes 
and exposure of the metatarsal heads. This results in increased pressure 
on the plantar aspects of the metatarsal heads, with hard ‘callus’ skin at 
these and other pressure points, leading to ulceration and even Charcot 
neuroarthropathy (see below).
In practice, loss of sensation to a 10 g monolament provides evidence 
of increased risk and requirement for increased foot care (e.g. regular foot 
inspection, care from podiatry, attention to appropriate footwear). When 
diagnosis is uncertain, formal electrophysiological tests (p. 1132) may be 
performed demonstrating slowing of both motor and sensory conduction 
as well as abnormal vibration sensitivity and thermal thresholds.
Asymmetrical motor diabetic neuropathy (diabetic amyotrophy)
This is much less common; it presents as severe, progressive weakness 
and wasting of the proximal muscles of the lower limbs. It is accompanied 
by severe pain, felt mainly on the anterior aspect of the leg, hyperaesthesia 
and paraesthesiae. This condition is thought to involve acute infarction of 
the lower motor neurons of the lumbosacral plexus. Partial recovery usually 
occurs within 12 months; management is supportive.
Mononeuropathy
Mononeuropathies of a single sensory or motor, peripheral or cranial 
nerve are rare, but more often affect people with diabetes. The nerves 
most likely to be affected are the 6th and 3rd cranial nerves (resulting in 
diplopia), the 7th cranial nerve (resulting in Bell’s palsy) and the femoral 
and sciatic nerves. The mononeuropathy is usually severe and of rapid 
onset, but eventually recovers. Nerve compression palsies are more 
common in diabetes, e.g. the median nerve, resulting in carpal tunnel 
syndrome, and less commonly, the ulnar nerve. Compression palsies 
may be a consequence of glycation and thickening of connective tissue 
and/or diabetic microangiopathy.
Autonomic neuropathy
This may occur independently of other types of neuropathy. It is less 
clearly associated with glycaemic control and improving control does not 
usually relieve the symptoms. Parasympathetic or sympathetic nerves 
may be predominantly affected. Common symptoms include dizziness, 
nausea and vomiting, post-gustatory sweating, difculty with micturition, 
and diarrhoea/faecal incontinence. A postural drop may be detected on 
lying and standing BP measurement with a resting tachycardia. Pupils 
may be pinpoint.
Formal testing is rarely performed but involves the ‘Ewing tests’, 
which screen for evidence of lack of heart rate variability in response to 
manoeuvres designed to alter the activity of the autonomic nerve system 
(Valsalva manoeuvre, deep breathing, sustained handgrip).
Support stockings and udrocortisone therapy may be helpful for 
symptoms of postural hypotension. Due to the risk of sudden cardio-
respiratory arrest, there is only 50%–70% survival within 10 years of 
developing overt autonomic neuropathy. Fortunately, severe cases are 
infrequent.
Gastroparesis This is one of the most disabling complications of diabe-
tes. It usually affects people with type 1 diabetes. Following exclusion of 
mechanical forms of obstruction (by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy), 
delayed gastric emptying is demonstrated using scintigraphy following a 
99m-technetium-labelled standard meal. Gastroparesis is a prominent fea-
ture of severe autonomic neuropathy, but can also occur secondary to 
a co-existent primary eating disorder. The main symptoms (the severity 
of which tend to wax and wane) are nausea and vomiting (especially of 
undigested food), abdominal pain and a feeling of fullness/early satiety. It 
can contribute to increased variability in blood glucose, as there can be 

[[p803]]
Complications of diabetes    751
a mismatch between the delayed rise in post-prandial glucose and the 
time-action prole of injected insulin.
Improving quality of life and achieving glycaemic control is difcult. 
Low-bre and low-residue diets may be tried, as well as eating smaller 
amounts more frequently. Prokinetic dopamine antagonist anti-emet-
ics (metoclopramide, domperidone) are often prescribed in an effort to 
accelerate gastric emptying, but are not recommended for long-term use 
due to adverse effects. For individuals on MDI, rapid-acting insulin may 
be better taken after rather than before a meal and CSII is benecial for 
some. There may be frequent hospital admissions during ‘are-ups.’ A 
‘gastric pacemaker’ device is of benet in some cases; others may ben-
et from endoscopic injection of botulinum toxin into the gastric pylorus 
(to increase gastric emptying). Enteral nutrition is rarely required unless 
gastroparesis is very severe.
Sexual dysfunction Men with type 2 diabetes are 30% more likely than 
non-diabetic men to have erectile dysfunction, rising to 70% with more 
than 20 years’ duration of diabetes. In type 1 diabetes, the risk of erec-
tile dysfunction is elevated threefold. This is mainly due to autonomic 
neuropathy and vascular disease (cavernosal microangiopathy). The 
approach to treatment options is as for non-diabetic men (for further 
information, see page 612). Women with diabetes also have higher 
rates of sexual dysfunction, including vaginal dryness, dyspareunia and 
increased susceptibility to urinary tract infections.
Management
Tricyclic antidepressants (low dose amitryptiline, duloxetine) and anticon-
vulsants (pregabalin, gabapentin) – combined if necessary with opiate 
Glove and
stocking
neuropathy
Clawing of toes
Digital gangrene
Neuropathic
ulcer
Dry, cracked skin
Callus
Loss of leg hair
Peripheral neuropathy
Charcot foot
Proximal arterial
occlusion
Absent pulses
Cold feet
Fig. 21.34 Diabetic foot disease. Patients with diabetes can have neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease or both. Clawing of the toes is thought to be caused by intrinsic 
muscle atrophy and subsequent imbalance of muscle function, and causes greater pressure on the metatarsal heads and pressure on exed toes, leading to increased callus 
and risk of ulceration. A Charcot foot occurs only in the presence of neuropathy, and results in bony destruction and ultimately deformity (this X-ray shows a resulting ‘rocker 
bottom foot’). The angiogram reveals disease of the supercial femoral arteries (occlusion of the left and stenosis of the right). Insets (Proximal arterial occlusion) From http://
emedicine.medscape.com/article/460178-overview#a0104; (Toe clawing) Bowker JH, Pfeifer MA. Levin and O’Neal's The diabetic foot, 7th edn. Philadelphia: Mosby, Elsevier 
Inc.; 2008; (Neuropathic foot ulcer) Levy MJ, Valabhji J. Vascular II: The diabetic foot. Surgery 2008; 26:25–28; (Digital gangrene) Swartz MH. Textbook of physical diagnosis, 
5th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2006
analgesia (tramadol, oxycodone) – can improve quality of life in PDN. 
Management of other forms of neuropathy is shown in Box 21.31
Diabetic foot disease
The feet are especially vulnerable in diabetes as there may be loss of pro-
tective sensation (due to neuropathy), inadequate blood supply (due to small 
and large blood vessel disease) or both. For this reason foot care is particu-
larly important. Foot ulceration and associated complications are the most 
common reasons for prolonged hospital admission for people with diabetes.
Aetiology
In a vulnerable foot, ulceration is initiated by (often minor) trauma (p. 340 and 
Fig. 21.34). Disruption of the protective epidermis then permits infection, 
particularly in the presence of hyperglycaemia. Most ulcers develop at the 
site of a plaque of callus skin, which has developed on a ‘pressure point’ typ-
ically on the plantar aspect of the foot, on the metatarsal heads or the tips of 
clawed toes. The majority of foot ulcers are neuropathic or neuroischaemic. 
Neuroischaemic ulcers classically occur on the margins of the foot as they 
are often precipitated by compression of the foot by ill-tting shoes. Hence, 
they are seen over the medial aspect of the rst metatarsophalangeal joint, 
the styloid process of the 5th metatarsal and the tips of the toes.
Management
Systematic annual screening to estimate and record risk of foot ulcera-
tion in order to ensure appropriate access to podiatry has been shown 
to reduce rates of ulceration and amputation. Two simple tests are 

[[p804]]
752    DIABETES MELLITUS
required to grade risk according to a ‘trafc light’ system (Fig. 21.35): 
a 10 g monolament should be used to assess sensation at ve points 
on each foot and foot pulses should be palpated (dorsalis pedis and/or 
posterior tibial).
 Green: People with normal protective sensation and palpable pulses 
are at ‘low risk’ and can be educated and reassured regarding foot 
care until next screening (Box 21.32).
 Amber: Those who have reduction or loss of sensation to monola-
ment, or in whom no pulse can be palpated in at least one foot, are 
at ‘moderate’ risk. A assessment and development of a care plan by 
a trained podiatrist is recommended when rst identied and annual 
screening thereafter. Regular support with foot care may be offered. 
Well-tting footwear is essential.
 Red: As for amber, but there is both reduced sensation and absent 
pulses in at least one foot or callus/structural foot deformity in the 
presence of either reduced sensation or absent pulses. Assessment 
and treatment by a specialist podiatrist is required. Orthotic footwear 
may be recommended.
People with diabetes and their relatives or carers can easily learn to 
use the Ipswich Touch Test to screen for neuropathy: this involves lightly 
and briey (for 1–2 seconds) touching the tips of the rst, third and fth 
toes of both feet with the index nger: an abnormal result is when touch 
cannot be felt on two or more toes.
Foot ulceration
People with a foot ulcer require urgent assessment by a multidisciplinary 
foot team, involving a diabetes specialist, a podiatrist, a vascular surgeon 
and an orthotist.
Management involves:
 Débridement of necrotic tissue
 Antibiotic therapy (may be prolonged as infection can accelerate 
tissue necrosis and lead to gangrene)
 Pressure relief (depending on site, severity and stage of healing): 
customised insoles, specialised orthotic footwear, total contact plas-
ter cast, irremovable aircast boot.
Ulcers that do not heal promptly may progress to osteomyelitis (infec-
tion of the underlying bone). If an ulcer is neuroischaemic, a vascular 
assessment is often carried out by ultrasound or angiography, as revas-
cularisation by angioplasty or surgery may be required to allow the ulcer 
to heal. In cases of severe secondary infection or gangrene, amputation 
of the affected toe or of the limb (below or above knee) may be required 
depending on the severity.
Charcot neuroarthropathy
This is a rare but severe complication of neuropathy affecting the bones 
and joints of the foot characterised by early inammation and then joint 
dislocation, subluxation and pathological fractures of the foot. It was 
originally described as a complication of neurosyphilis, but now that this 
is near eradicated it is almost exclusively seen in diabetes. The patho-
physiological mechanisms remain poorly understood.
Charcot neuroarthropathy presents in a structurally abnormal foot 
with localised swelling, erythema and increased temperature (>2°C 
compared with the contralateral foot). Early diagnosis can prevent 
progressive and debilitating deformity (see Fig. 21.34) and sepsis. 
The initial X-ray may show bony destruction but is often normal. As 
about 40% of patients with a Charcot joint also have a foot ulcer, it 
can be difcult to differentiate from osteomyelitis. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) of the foot is a sensitive diagnostic test. Management 
21.31  Management options for peripheral sensorimotor and 
autonomic neuropathies
Pain and paraesthesiae from peripheral somatic neuropathies
 Insulin therapy (intensive glycaemic control)
 Anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin)
 Tricyclic antidepressants (low-dose amitriptyline, imipramine)
 Other antidepressants (duloxetine)
 Substance P depleter (capsaicin – topical)
 Opiates (tramadol, oxycodone)
 Antioxidant α-lipoic acid
Postural hypotension
 Support stockings
 Fludrocortisone
 Midodrine
Gastroparesis
 Dopamine antagonists (metoclopramide, domperidone)*
 Erythromycin
 Botulinum toxin (endoscopic injection into pylorus)
 Gastric pacemaker; percutaneous enteral (jejunal) feeding (see Fig. 22.11)
Diarrhoea (p. Ch. 23)
 Loperamide
 Rifaxamin (for suspected bacterial overgrowth)
Constipation
 Stimulant laxatives (senna)
Excessive sweating
 Anticholinergic drugs (propantheline, poldine, oxybutinin)
 Clonidine
 Topical antimuscarinic agent (glycopyrrolate cream)
Erectile dysfunction (p. Ch. 18)
 Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (sildenal, vardenal, tadalal) – oral
 Dopamine agonist (apomorphine) – sublingual
 Prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil) – injected into corpus cavernosum or intra-urethral 
administration of pellets
 Vacuum tumescence devices
 Implanted penile prosthesis
 Psychological counselling; psychosexual therapy
*Not licensed for long-term use due to risk of dystonia.
21.32  Care of the feet in diabetes
Advice aimed at prevention of ulceration
Low risk (as per general population)
 Wash feet every day
 Cut or le toenails regularly
 Change socks or stockings every day
 Moisturise skin if dry
 Cover minor cuts with sterile dressings
 Treat fungal skin and nail infections promptly
 Do not burst blisters
Moderate and high risk
 Inspect feet every day
 Avoid walking barefoot
 Wear well-tting shoes (e.g. trainers)
 Avoid over-the-counter corn/callus remedies
 Do not attempt corn removal
 Check footwear for foreign bodies
 Avoid high and low temperatures
Podiatry
 Access should be available appropriate to level of risk (see Fig. 21.35)
 Access to a multidisciplinary foot team including a specialised podiatrist should 
be available for urgent referrals and care of active foot ulcers
Orthotic footwear
 Specially manufactured and tted orthotic footwear is required to prevent 
recurrence of ulceration and to protect the feet of patients with Charcot 
neuroarthropathy

[[p805]]
Further information    753
involves pressure relief and immobilisation (with a plaster cast or 
inatable ‘aircast’ boot) and treating infection. This may take 3–6 
months and sometimes longer.
Skin and rheumatological complications of 
diabetes
Glycation of collagen in skin, subcutaneous and periarticular tissues, 
perhaps supplemented by an effect of tissue ischaemia from micro-
angiopathy, can cause thickening of the skin, leading to a painless 
limited mobility of the joints of the hands and feet (cheiroarthropathy 
or ‘diabetic stiff hand syndrome’) and a waxy, tight feel to the skin. 
In the most severe cases it can resemble scleroderma. The inability 
to extend to 180° the metacarpophalangeal or interphalangeal joints 
of at least one nger bilaterally can be demonstrated in the ‘prayer 
sign’. Adhesive capsulitis (e.g. causing frozen shoulder), Dupuytren’s 
contracture and trigger nger are all more common in people with 
diabetes.
Diabetic dermopathy manifests as rounded red papules in the 
pre-tibial area that become pigmented with time. It is commoner 
in men and is associated with other complications of diabetes. 
Necrobiosis lipoidica is a rare granulomatous disorder that occurs 
predominantly in women with type 1 diabetes and is characterised by 
reddened plaques, with a yellowish central area that has atrophic skin 
and telangiectasia (see pages 704 and 1113). Xerosis (or abnormal 
dryness of the skin) may be a cutaneous manifestation of autonomic 
neuropathy and can lead to cracks in the skin that act as a portal for 
infection.
Further information
Journal articles
Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, etal. 10-year follow-up of intensive glucose 
control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359(15):1577–1589.
Nathan DM, for the DCCT/EDIC Research Group  The Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications 
Study at 30 Years: Overview. Diabetes Care 2014;37(1):9–16.
Books
Jörgens V, Porta M (eds). Unveiling diabetes  - historical milestones in diabetology. 
Frontiers in Diabetes, vol. 29. Basle: Karger; 2020. Insights into the history of 
diabetes and its treatment
Websites
sign.ac.uk/media/1090/sign154.pdf Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network 
(SIGN) evidence-based guideline (2017) on ‘Pharmacological management of 
glycaemia’ in type 2 diabetes
care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/suppl/2019/12/20/43.Supplement_1.
DC1/Standards_of_Care_2020.pdf American Diabetes Association (ADA) 
Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes (2020) – updated at least annually
diabetes.org.uk/ Diabetes UK. Includes information for healthcare professionals 
and for people with diabetes
idf.org/ International Diabetes Federation. ‘E-library’ contains consensus 
statements and guidelines
elearning.mydiabetesmyway.scot.nhs.uk/ An interactive diabetes website 
including practical learning modules for people living with diabetes
diabetes.org.uk/resources-s3/2018-09/language-matters_language%20and%20
diabetes.pdf An NHS England document about why language matters in 
diabetes care
revolvecomics.com/read-diabetes-type-1-comics/ Open access digital comics for 
people and families with type 1 diabetes
Moderate
Low
In
remission
High
Definition
Definition
Definition
Action
Action
Action
Definition
Action
Active
Diabetic foot risk stratification and triage
 Rapid referral to, and management by, a member
   of the multidisciplinary diabetes foot team or
   directly to vascular surgery when appropriate
 Management by a specialist podiatrist aimed at
   preventing ulceration
 Annual review of treatment plan (as opposed to
   annual screening)
 Provision and regular review of footwear (orthotics)
 Assessment by a podiatrist and implementation
   of a management plan when first identified as
   moderate risk
 Annual screening (as opposed to every 2 years)
 Consider provision of footwear (orthotics)
 Screening every two years by a trained healthcare
   worker and outcome recorded 
 Agree personal self-care management plan 
 Review footwear
Presence of active ulceration,
infection, with or without ischaemia,
gangrene or unexplained hot, red,
swollen foot with or without the
presence of pain.
Previous ulceration, amputation or
consolidated Charcot.
More than one risk factor present,
e.g. a combination of loss of
sensation, signs of peripheral arterial
disease, callus or deformity, unable
to or has no help to self-care, or an
eGFR < 30.
One risk factor present, e.g. loss
of sensation, signs of peripheral
arterial disease, unable to or has no
help to self care or an eGFR < 30.
No risk factors present, e.g. normal
sensation, pulses present, no callus,
no deformity, able to self-care and
eGFR > 30.
All people with diabetes should have written information on how to access podiatry (urgent or otherwise), 
cardiovascular risk reduction and access to a smoking cessation programme
Fig. 21.35 Risk assessment and management of foot problems in diabetes. Reproduced with permission of the Scottish Diabetes Foot Action Group.

[[p806]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p807]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 21.1.  A 53-year-old woman with type 1 diabetes is currently an 
inpatient recovering from an elective hernia repair and is now 
eating and drinking and back on her usual subcutaneous insulin  
(Novorapid 1 unit for 10 g CHO and Levemir 4 units am, 16 units 
pm). Morning insulin is due to be prescribed and the pre-breakfast 
meal capillary glucose is 2.9 mmol/L (3.5–5.5). This has been a 
consistent pattern. The patient is conscious, orientated and is 
able to swallow. What is it most appropriate to give the patient?
 A. 100  mL IV 20% glucose
 B. Give breakfast
 C. 2 tubes of buccal Glucogel
 D. 4–6 Glucotabs
 E. 1 mg glucagon IM
Answer: D.
The patient has mild hypoglycaemia. The most appropriate treatment is 
15–20 g of fast-acting CHO orally. Other examples are 5–7 Dextrosol tabs. 
It is important to treat hypoglycaemia rst with fast-acting CHO and then 
repeat glucose in 15 minutes rather than just eating breakfast. If the next 
meal is not due then advise 20 g of slower-acting CHO (1 slice of bread, 
2 biscuits) to prevent recurrence of hypoglycaemia. If an insulin bolus is 
due then it should be administered after correction of hypoglycaemia, in a 
dose appropriate for the CHO content of the meal, but it is important not to 
take further insulin for the CHO used to correct hypoglycaemia.
 21.2.  A 35-year-old man with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) has now 
stepped down to your ward from Medical HDU on the DKA 
Care Pathway following admission early this morning. He 
normally takes Novorapid (1 unit for 10 g) and had Lantus 20 
units at bedtime last night. ECG is normal. On examination he 
is well and had lunch and is about to have his evening meal. 
Investigations:
Haemoglobin A1c134 mmol/mol (target 53 mmol/mol)
Sodium 138 mmol/L (137–144)
Potassium 4.8 mmol/L (3.5–4.9)
Urea 5.2 mmol/L (2.5–7.0)
Creatinine 64 µmol/L (60–110)
Glucose 8.4 mmol/L (3.5–5.5)
Bicarbonate 23 mmol/L (20–28)
Amylase 172 U/L (60–180)
C-reactive protein 5 mg/L (<10)
Capillary ketones 0.3 mmol/L (<0.6)
What is the most likely precipitant of his DKA episode?
 A. Myocardial infarction
 B. Issue with insulin administration
 C. Acute pancreatitis
 D. Sepsis
 E. A carbohydrate counting error
Answer: B.
HbA1c is very elevated, suggesting patient has a chronic deciency of 
insulin. One carbohydrate counting error should not result in DKA. There 
is no evidence of sepsis, myocardial infarction or acute pancreatitis and 
the patient has made a swift recovery. The patient should be referred to 
the diabetes team the following morning before discharge to check insu-
lin administration (omissions, equipment, injection technique and sites), 
with further education required.
 21.3.  A 56-year-old woman with bowel carcinoma and type 2 diabetes 
(HbA1c is 90 mmol/mol) treated with Humalog Mix 25 twice daily 
(20 units am, 16 units pm) attends the surgical outpatient clinic. 
You are arranging for the patient to attend for urgent abdominal 
surgery. The patient is likely to miss more than one meal in theatre 
and post-operative recovery. What is the next management step?
 A. Advise her to take 75% of the usual insulin on the morning
 B. Admit the day before surgery for a variable rate insulin infusion
 C. Advise her to take 50% of the usual dose of insulin on the morning
 D. Advise her to take 25% of the usual dose of insulin on the morning
 E. Withhold her morning insulin until after the procedure
Answer: B.
This is urgent major surgery in a patient with sub-optimal control who 
will miss more than one meal. Admission pre-operatively for VRII is there-
fore required.
 21.4.  After surgery a 68-year-old man undergoing a colectomy is 
recovering post-operatively. He has a history of type 2 diabetes 
treated with Humalog Mix 25 twice daily (42 units am, 42 units 
pm). Subcutaneous insulin was commenced 15 minutes before a 
normal breakfast. The nurses ask you to review the glucose chart 
at lunchtime as the patient required treatment for a moderate 
hypoglycaemic episode at 11am:
Before breakfast
Before dinner
Date
Blood 
sugar
Insulin
Dose 
(Units)
Blood 
sugar
Insulin
Dose 
(Units)
1/4
8.9
Humalog
25
What was the most likely cause of the hypoglycaemic episode?
 A. Wrong insulin and wrong dose
 B. Wrong dose of insulin
 C. Wrong insulin
 D. Wrong time of insulin
 E. Wrong time of insulin and wrong dose
Answer: A.
Humalog Mix 25 (Lispro 25%, Lispro Protamine 75%): onset 10–20 
minutes, duration 16–20 hours, peak 1–6.5 hours. Humalog (Lispro): onset 
10–20 minutes, peak 1–3 hours, duration 2–4 hours. Humalog has been 
given instead of Humalog Mix 25. ‘25’ refers to the proportion of short-acting 
insulin in the Humalog Mix 25 preparation; it has been wrongly prescribed as 
a dose of short-acting Humalog insulin. ‘Insulin’ should have been written as 
‘Humalog Mix 25’ and ‘Dose’ should have been written as ‘42 units’. Blood 
glucose chart should have dose in units and not written ‘as charted’. Ideal 
time to administer Humalog Mix 25 is 15 minutes before breakfast.
 21.5.  A 65-year-old man with type 1 diabetes is admitted and requires 
emergency surgery. You are asked to prescribe a variable rate 
insulin infusion. His insulin regimen is normally Novomix 30 twice 
daily. He had breakfast 2 hours ago and his current capillary 
blood glucose is 10.5 mmol/L. Post-operative recovery is swift. 
What is the next management step?
 A. Give usual s/c insulin dose with lunch, stop intravenous insulin 
30 minutes later
 B. Give usual s/c insulin dose with lunch and stop intravenous 
insulin immediately

[[p808]]
 C. Give usual s/c insulin dose with evening meal, stop intravenous 
insulin 30 minutes later
 D. Give usual s/c insulin dose now and stop intravenous insulin 
immediately
 E. Give usual s/c insulin dose now and stop intravenous insulin 
30 minutes later
Answer: E.
Novomix 30: biphasic insulin Aspart 30%/Aspart Protamine 70%; onset 
10–20 minutes, duration up to 16–20 hours, peak action 2.4 hours. 
Patients can be converted back onto their usual subcutaneous insulin 
once eating normally and serum U&Es are at baseline and bicarbonate is 
normal (>18 mmol/L). This should be done at the next convenient meal. 
This patient is on twice-daily mixed insulin and so this will be the patient’s 
evening meal. Once the IV insulin is stopped the patient will have no 
endogenous insulin (IV insulin half life = 2.5 mins) on board and so it 
should always be continued for 30 minutes after the subcutaneous insu-
lin has been administered.

[[p809]]
Nutritional factors in disease
22
AG Shand
MEJ Lean
Clinical examination in nutritional disorders 756
Clinical assessment and investigation of nutritional status 757
Nutritional factors and disease 758
Physiology of nutrition 758
Disorders of altered energy balance 762
Obesity 762
Under-nutrition 766
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases 773
Vitamins 773
Inorganic micronutrients 778

[[p810]]
756    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Clinical examination in nutritional disorders 
Eyes
Sunken eyes
Pallor
Jaundice
Bitot spots (vitamin A;
see Fig. 22.13)
Hands
Muscle wasting (dorsal interossei,
thenar eminences)
Finger clubbing
Leukonychia (low albumin)
Koilonychia (iron deficiency)
Simple anthropometrics
(see right)
Body mass index
Triceps skin fold thickness
Waist circumference
Legs
Pitting oedema
Ulcers
Bruising (vitamin K)
Affect
Fatigue
Depression
Dementia
Mouth
Pallor
Angular stomatitis (B12, folate,
iron)
Glossitis (B12, folate, iron)
Gingivitis, bleeding gums
(vitamin C; see Fig. 22.15)
Poorly fitting dentures
Corkscrew hairs
Gingivitis
Koilonychia
Scaphoid abdomen
Clinical effects of short bowel
syndrome after multiple
resection in Crohn’s disease 
5
4
6
7
8
3
2
1
3
2
5
6
8
Skin
Dry, flaky skin or dermatitis (see
Fig. 22.14)
Hair loss
Specific abnormalities:
  Petechiae, corkscrew hairs
  (vitamin C)
  Dermatitis of pellegra (niacin)
7
Observation
Signs of weight loss:
  Prominent ribs
  Muscle wasting
Skin turgor
1
Insets (Scaphoid abdomen) From Chandra A, Quinones-Baldrich WJ. Chronic mesenteric ischemia: How to select patients for invasive treatment. Sem Vasc Surg 2010;23:
21–28; (Koilonychia) Habif TP. Clinical dermatology, 6th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2016; (Gingivitis) Newman MG, Takei H, Klokkevold PR, et al. Carranza's Clinical 
periodontology, 12th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2015; (Corkscrew hairs) Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Schaffer JV, et al. Dermatology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
Elsevier Inc.; 2012.

[[p811]]
22
The inter-related components that 
dene nutritional status
What we eat – diet composition
 Self-reported intake (retrospective)
 Objectively observed food consumption
 Estimated or measured nutrient consumption
What we are – body composition
 Water content, chemical composition
 2-compartment (fat/lean tissue), imaging
 Bone mass/specic tissue composition
What we (can) do – functions
 Metabolic, cellular
 Organ/whole-body function
 Physical, mental and social activities
Important elements of the 
diet history
Ask about weight
 Current weight
 Weight 2 weeks, 1 month and 6 months ago
 Assessment of degree of change: clothes, 
loose skin, muscle, stretch marks
Ask about current food intake
 Quantity of food and if any change
 Quality of food taken
 Whether normal food is being eaten
 Avoidance of specic food types (e.g. solids)
 Any nutritional supplements
 Reliance on supplements/tube feeding
 Any change in appetite or interest in food
 Any taste disturbance
Ask about symptoms that interfere with eating
 Oral ulcers or oral pain
 Difculties swallowing
 Nausea/vomiting
 Early satiety
 Alteration in bowel habit
 Abdominal (or other) pain
Ask about activity levels/performance status
 Normal activity
 Slightly reduced activity
 Inactive < 50% of the time
 Inactive most of the time 
Clinical assessment and investigation of nutritional status     757
Clinical assessment and investigation of nutritional status 
Nutritional status is a conceptual term, with no 
simple measurement test. It incorporates three 
interrelated components (see Box below), all 
needed to perform all the functions required in 
health and to respond to stresses. (1) ‘What we 
eat’ – diet composition, reecting both availability 
and supply of nutrients; (2) ‘What we are’ – body 
composition, overall size and amounts of comp
onents (e.g. body fat, muscle mass, micronu
trients, haemoglobin, etc); (3) ‘What we can 
do’ – our functional capacity, for physical, men
tal, metabolic and social functions.
Grasping the circular complexity of nutri
tional status is important for understanding any 
disease and to optimise management. It is not 
sufcient to consider just one or two of the three 
components in isolation. While certain elements 
within each of the three components can be 
measured, and they may point towards a nutri
tional problem, it is not possible to ‘measure’ 
nutritional status with any simple test. Its assess
ment requires clinical skills and experience.
While body compositional measures are 
valuable, biochemistry has limited value in 
assessing nutritional status. Many micronu
trient assays are heavily affected by acute
phase responses during illness, so do not 
reect whole body status. Moreover, functional 
micronutrient deciencies can occur despite 
body stores being adequate; for example, vita
min A deciency can occur during illness if its 
transport to tissues is frustrated by a decline in 
retinolbinding protein.
Undernutrition can go unnoticed in patients 
with multiple comorbidities. Simple, validated 
tools (e.g. MUST) are available to screen patients 
for nutritional problems. It is vital to be aware of 
undernutrition as a possible contributor to any 
acute medical presentation. Early nutritional 
assessment is crucial: past medical and surgi
cal history (e.g. intestinal surgery), drug history 
and specic diet history about eating habits and 
food preferences (ideally by a trained dietitian). 
Evidence of recent weight loss and muscle wast
ing should be sought. Body composition can be 
assessed by clinical anthropomorphic measure
ments, or more sophisticated methods if required.
BMI
wt kg
ht m
=
(
)
(
)2
Example: an adult of 70 kg with a height of 
1.75  m has a BMI 
of 70/1.752 =  22.9  kg/m2
 BMI is a useful way of identifying under- or 
over-nutrition but cannot discriminate 
between high lean body or muscle mass and 
fat mass (e.g. boxers have low fat mass but 
high BMI)
 Fat mass is also subject to ethnic variation; 
for the same BMI, South Asians tend to have 
more body fat than Europeans
 If height cannot be determined (e.g. in 
older people or those unable to stand), 
measurement of the femoral length or ‘knee 
height’ is a good surrogate
Measurement of knee height.
nutritional status
Body composition
 Anthropometry (see below)
 Bioelectrical impedance
 Dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Muscle function and global nutritional status
 Hand grip strength (dynamometer test) – poor grip 
associated with increased mortality
Obesity and fat distribution (android vs 
gynoid)
 Waist circumference (useful up to BMI 35 kg/m2)  
measured midway between superior iliac crest and 
lower border of rib cage
Body fat content and muscle mass
 Triceps skinfold thickness (when combined with mid-/
upper arm circumference estimates muscle mass)
Triceps skinfold thickness. Lean patients 6–12  mm; 
obese patients 40–50  mm. 
2
2

[[p812]]
758    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Nutritional factors and disease 
Obtaining adequate nutrition is a fundamental requirement for optimal 
growth, function and health of every cell, and every organ, determin
ing the health, and ultimately survival, of every individual and even 
species.
Nutritional adequacy can be threatened by natural supply, by compe
tition, and by ignorance or trickery. The politics of human food provision 
constitute a prominent factor in wars, natural disasters and the protdriven 
global economy. In recent decades, stable plentiful nutrition unknown to 
previous generations has led to a pandemic of obesity and its health con
sequences in postindustrial countries. However, shockingly, famine and 
undernutrition still dominate illhealth in lowerincome countries until they 
transition suddenly into Westernised overnutrition. Quality, or nutritional 
balance, of food consumption, and thus the food supply, also inuences 
health (Fig. 22.1). Nutrients are classied into ‘macronutrients’, which con
tribute energy (measured as calories or kilojoules), and are eaten in relatively 
large amounts, and ‘micronutrients’ (vitamins and minerals), which do not 
contribute to energy balance but are required in small amounts because 
they are not synthesised in the body. The fact that we cannot synthesise 
them tells us that they were plentiful in traditional human diets. When they 
are lacking, or poorly absorbed, classical deciency diseases develop, 
such as anaemia from folate or iron deciency, or blindness from vitamin A 
deciency, which still occur in current medical practice, even with obesity. 
Foods may contain bioactive compounds, such as caffeine, and toxins, 
but modern diets cause much more illheath by contributing to chronic dis
eases – type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease and some major cancers.
All doctors must be alert to the three roles of nutrition. In every case, 
consider if nutrition (1) might contribute to the cause of disease, thus a 
means of prevention; (2) might be impaired as a result of disease; and 
(3) might contribute to recovery. A clear understanding of nutrition is 
thus essential to deal with the needs of individual patients and inform 
public policy.
Physiology of nutrition 
There are some 27 essential nutrients required by every cell, which 
must be provided through the bloodstream continuously but at vari
able rates determined by the changing activities of different cell types 
(Fig. 22.2). These nutrients come from foods, of different types which are 
Fruit and
vegetables
Food and
drinks high in
fat and/or sugar
Milk and
dairy foods
Bread, rice,
potatoes, pasta
and other starchy
foods
Meat, fish,
eggs, beans
and other non-dairy
sources of protein
Fig. 22.1 Proportion of key food groups recommended for a healthy, well-
balanced diet. Crown copyright. Department of Health in association with the Welsh 
Government, the Scottish Government and the Food Standards Agency in Northern Ireland.
Carbohydrate (-C(H2O)-)n
Fat (-CH2)n
Water
The elements of nutrition – ‘building blocks’
O
H
+
C
+
N
+
Na, K
+
P, Ca, Mg, F
S, Se
I, (Co)
Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, Al
Vitamins
 Water soluble
 Fat soluble
   ‘Essential’ fatty acids
+
+
+
   ‘Essential’ amino acids
+
Protein
Electrolytes in fluid compartments
Structural and functions, neural
Co-factors for functional enzymes
and structural proteins
B1, B2, B6, B12, folate, C
A, D, E, K
Fig. 22.2 The 18 essential chemical elements in our bodies, required to be 
absorbed after digestion of our foods, are used in a variety of ways by human 
metabolism to build the compounds needed to grow, function in health and 
respond to stresses. The essential vitamins, aminoacids and fatty acids must be 
consumed ‘ready-made’ in foods.
consumed intermittently and sometimes only occasionally. The physiol
ogy and language of nutrition is therefore similar to economics, involving 
intermittent supply, losses at different rates, storage, obligatory costs, 
impacts on function, and mitigation of impacts by alterations in the inter
nal economy.
Energy balance 
The laws of thermodynamics dictate that energy intake = energy 
expenditure ± changes in energy storage (Fig. 22.3). The largest 
component of 24  hour energy expenditure is basal metabolic rate 
(BMR) – obligatory energy expenditure required to maintain metabolic 
functions of tissues at rest. It is closely predicted by body weight, 
and lower in females and older or inactive people (Fig. 22.3B). Extra 
energy is needed for growth, pregnancy and lactation and for phys
ical activity, which varies considerably with occupation and life
style. Physical activity levels are usually dened as multiples of BMR 
(Fig. 22.3C). The energy required to digest food (generating heat as 
‘dietinduced thermogenesis’ Fig. 22.3D) accounts for approximately 
10% of total energy expenditure, protein requiring more energy than 
other macronutrients.

[[p813]]
Nutritional factors and disease     759
22
Energy intake is determined by the ‘macronutrients’. Carbohydrate, 
fat, protein and alcohol provide fuel for mitochondrial oxidation to gener
ate energy (as adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The energy provided, and 
the amounts that can be stored in the body, differs:
 fat — 37 kJ/g (9 kcal/g) Stored as body fat, usually sufcient for  
>40 days
 alcohol — 29  kJ/g (7  kcal/g) Not stored: toxic, must be metabolised 
immediately
 protein — 17  kJ/g (4  kcal/g) Not stored, but can be oxidised in 
extreme starvation
 carbohydrate — 16  kJ/g (3.75  kcal/g) Stored as glycogen in liver 
and muscle, sufcient for 12–24 hours
Regulation of energy balance 
Energy intake and expenditure are highly regulated (Fig. 22.4). In gen
eral, appetite matches requirement very closely: even when body weight 
is doubled by obesity, the mismatch between intake and expenditure 
is usually under 1%. Food shortage, with loss of weight, is the main 
threat to survival faced by any organism, and negative energy balance 
immediately signals a range of physiological messages. Energy is con
served by dropping core temperature, and by reducing BMR and phys
ical activity acutely. Chronic food shortage, or micronutrient deciency, 
prevents growth and blocks reproductive function, delaying maturation 
and halting ovulation. Thus pregnancy is most likely to occur during 
times of nutritional plenty, when both mother and baby have a better 
chance of survival. Anorexia nervosa and excessive exercise, as well as 
Immobile
Sedentary work
Standing work
Active leisure/
sport*
Strenuous work
Soldier
Athlete
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Physical activity level (PAL)
Total energy expenditure
   Basal metabolic rate
Male
Female
Energy expenditure =
B  Basal metabolic rate
D  Diet-induced thermogenesis
C  Physical activity
A  Dietary intake =   foods    +   drinks
17%
Protein
35%
Fat
48%
Carbohydrate
10%
Protein
15%
Fat
75%
Carbohydrate
17%
Protein
33%
Fat
50%
Carbohydrate
UK target food intakes
Current average food intake
as % contribution to 
total diet energy
Energy intake
Energy expenditure
India
UK
1 megajoule (MJ)
= 239 kilocalorie (kcal)
= energy stored in ~ 34 g fat
18 – 29
30 – 39
40 – 64
Age (years)
 Higher with greater fat-free mass
 Lower with ageing
 Increases with cold, heat, fever
 Higher in smokers
0
5
10
Energy expenditure 
(MJ/day)
=
Fig. 22.3 Determinants of energy balance.
obscuring substantial regional variations). The targets are recommendations as a percentage of food energy only. (For WHO targets, see Box 22.4.) In the UK, it is assumed 
activity increases PAL by ~0.3 for each 30–60 minutes of moderate exercise performed 4–5 times per week. The UK population median for PAL is 1.6, with estimates of 
1.5 for the ‘less active’ and 1.8 for the ‘more active’. (A) Source: Department of Health.

[[p814]]
760    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Eating behaviour
Habit
Hedonic
response
to food
Satiety
Muscle
Adipose tissue
Energy expenditure/storage
Fertility
Neuro-endocrine responses
(growth hormone, cortisol, thyroxine)
Autonomic nervous system
Reproductive
hormones
Adipose tissue
Hypothalamus
Stomach
Pancreas
Small bowel
Ghrelin
Leptin
Insulin
Peptide YY
Oxyntomodulin
Glucagon-like peptide-1
Pancreatic polypeptide
Fig. 22.4 Regulation of energy balance and its link with reproduction. ⊕ indicates factors that are stimulated by eating and induce satiety. ⊝ indicates factors that are 
suppressed by eating and inhibit satiety.
weight loss through illness, can cause amenorrhoea. Improved nutrition 
is thought to be the reason for the increasingly early onset of puberty in 
many societies. At the other extreme, obesity is also a common cause 
of amenorrhoea.
Energy balance is coordinated in the hypothalamus, which receives 
afferent signals that indicate nutritional status in the short term (e.g. the 
stomach hormone ghrelin, which falls immediately after eating and rises 
gradually thereafter, to suppress satiety and signal that it is time for the 
next meal) and the long term (e.g. the adipose hormone leptin, which 
increases with growing fat mass and also links fat mass to reproductive 
function). The hypothalamus responds with changes in many local neu
rotransmitters that alter activity in pathways that inuence energy bal
ance (see Fig. 22.3), including hormones acting on the pituitary gland 
(see Fig. 20.2), and neural control circuits that connect with the cerebral 
cortex and autonomic nervous system.
Responses to under- and over-nutrition 
These complex regulatory pathways allow adaptation to variations in 
nutrition. In response to starvation, reproductive function is suppressed, 
BMR is reduced, and there are profound psychological effects, including 
energy conservation through lethargy. These adjustments can ‘defend’ 
body weight within certain limits. In the lowinsulin state of starvation (see 
Fig. 21.6), however, fuels are liberated from stores, initially from glycogen 
(in liver and muscle), then from triglyceride (lipolysis in adipose tissue, 
with excess free fatty acid supply to the liver leading to ketosis) and nally 
in protein (proteolysis in muscle). In neonates and in women who are 
pregnant or breastfeeding, with high glucose requirements, starvation 
can result in ketoacidosis with normal or low blood glucose.
In response to overnutrition, BMR rises, and extra energy is required 
to carry increased body weight, so the original body weight is again 
‘defended’ within certain limits. In the highinsulin state of overnutri
tion, excess energy is stored principally as fat in adipose tissue but in 
individuals predisposed to ‘metabolic syndrome’ and type 2 diabetes 
it may also accumulate and damage organ function in liver (nonalco
holic fatty liver disease), pancreas and skeletal muscle. If hypothalamic 
function is abnormal (e.g. in those with craniopharyngioma) or in rare 
patients with mutations (e.g. in leptin or melanocortin4 receptors), loss 
of response to satiety signals, together with loss of adaptive changes in 
energy expenditure, result in relentless weight gain.
Macronutrients (energy-yielding nutrients) 
Carbohydrates 
Types of carbohydrate and their dietary sources are listed in 
Box 22.1. The ‘available’ carbohydrates (starches and sugars) are 
broken down to monosaccharides for absorption from the gut and 
supply about half the energy in a wellbalanced healthful diet (see 
Fig. 22.3A). Carbohydrates can be synthesised de novo in small 
amounts from glycerol or protein. If the available carbohydrate intake 
is less than 100 g per day, increased lipolysis and fat oxidation leads to 
dietary ketosis (see Fig. 21.9).
There is much public and media confusion arising from equating car
bohydrates with sugars, and a belief that sugars (the product of photo
synthesis, on which all life depends) are hazardous. Dietary guidelines 
do correctly restrict the intake of ‘nonmilk extrinsic’, added, sugars 
(sucrose, maltose, fructose), which promote dental caries when there 
is uoride insufciency, and may lead to greater energy consumption 
by children. However, sugars in fruits and milk, or generated by starch 
hydrolysis in the gut, present no hazard in their natural wholefood matrix. 
Starches in cereal foods, root foods and legumes provide the largest 
proportion of energy in most diets around the world, and a high carbohy
drate intake in traditional diets is associated with freedom from noncom
municable diseases. Starches are polymers of glucose, linked by the 
same 1–4 glycosidic linkages. Some starches are digested promptly by 

[[p815]]
Nutritional factors and disease     761
22
22.1  Dietary carbohydrates
Class
Components
Examples
Source
Free sugars
Monosaccharides
Disaccharides
Glucose, fructose 
Sucrose, lactose, maltose, galactose
Intrinsic: fruits, milks, vegetables 
Extrinsic (extracted, rened): beet or cane sucrose,  
high-fructose corn syrup
Short-chain carbohydrates
Oligosaccharides
Maltodextrins, fructo-oligosaccharides
Starch polysaccharides
Rapidly digestible
Slowly digestible
Cereals (wheat, rice), root vegetables (potato), legumes 
(lentils, beans, peas)
Resistant starch
Not digested
Starch altered by cooking
Cooked and cooled potato, pasta
Some lactose from milk in infancy
Non-starch polysaccharides 
(NSPs; dietary bre)
Fibrous
Viscous
Cellulose
Hemicellulose
Pectins
Gums
Many plant foods
Pulses
Sugar alcohols
Sorbitol, xylitol
Sorbitol: stone fruits (apples, peaches, prunes)
Xylitol: maize, berry fruits
Both used as low-calorie sugar alternatives
salivary and then pancreatic amylase, however, producing rapid delivery 
of glucose to the blood. Other starches are digested more slowly, either 
because they are protected in the structure of the food, or because the 
molecule is unbranched (amylose). The area under the curve of blood 
glucose concentration over 2 hours after eating 50 g carbohydrate in a 
food, expressed as a percentage of the response to 50 g carbohydrate 
as glucose or white bread, is termed the ‘glycaemic index’ of that food. 
High consumption of highglycaemicindex foods is weakly associated 
with type 2 diabetes, but it should be noted that table sugar (sucrose) 
has a relatively low glycaemic index, being only 50% glucose. Sugar 
alcohols (e.g. sorbitol), sweeteners that are not absorbed from the gut 
cause diarrhoea if eaten in large amounts. The main sugar in milk is lac
tose, a vital energy source for infants, hydrolysed by intestinal lactase for 
absorption. Some older people, especially East and South East Asians, 
produce much less lactase, so must limit unfermented milk products. 
Temporary lactose intolerance is common after any gastroenteritis, but 
lactase production can be restored by cautious lactose reintroduction.
Dietary bre 
Dietary bre is carbohydrate that is not digested and absorbed in the 
small intestine, so passes into the large bowel as the main nutrient for 
the gut microbiota. Most dietary bre is ‘nonstarch polysaccharides’ 
(NSPs) (see Box 22.1), plus some ‘resistant’ dietary starch, altered by 
cooking to escape hydrolysis in the small intestine. The many bacterial 
species which make up the colonic microbiota digest bre to produce 
shortchain fatty acids, which are absorbed as fuel for the colonic epi
thelium and contribute to bowel health and also bioactive, stimulating 
hormones like glucagonlike peptide (GLP1) from colon ‘H’ cells. In 
infancy, some lactose in milk is not absorbed, and serves the same 
functions.
Some types of NSP, notably the hemicellulose of wheat, increase 
the waterholding capacity of the colonic contents and the bulk of 
faeces. They relieve simple constipation, appear to prevent diverticu
losis and may reduce the risk of colon cancer. Viscous dietary bres, 
like pectin and guar gum, delay glucose absorption and thus reduce 
glycaemic index, and reduce bile salt absorption hence plasma chol
esterol concentration.
Fats 
Fat is the highestenergy density macronutrient, and incurs minimal 
energy costs for absorption and storage. Highly prized in ancient times, 
it is now cheap and carries avours, so is commercially important by 
providing ‘addedvalue’ for manufactured foods. Quite minor excess 
consumption is an insidious cause of obesity (see Fig. 22.3A).
Free fatty acids are absorbed, reassembled in chylomicrons (see 
Fig. 23.5), to enter the circulation directly or via the lymph. Fatty acid 
structures are shown in Figure 22.5. The principal polyunsaturated fatty 
acids (PUFA) in plant seed oils, linoleic acid (18:2 ω6) and αlinolenic acid 
(18:3 ω3) are the ‘essential’ fatty acids, which humans cannot synthesise 
de novo. They undergo further desaturation and elongation, to produce, 
for example, γlinolenic acid (18:3 ω6) and arachidonic acid (20:4 ω6). 
These are precursors of prostaglandins and eicosanoids, and form part 
of the structure of lipid membranes in all cells. Pellagic (shoaling) sh and 
sh oils are rich in ω3 PUFA (e.g. eicosapentaenoic (20:5 ω3) and doco
sahexaenoic (22:6 ω3), which promote the antiinammatory cascade of 
prostaglandin production and occur in the lipids of the human brain and 
retina. They also reduce blood pressure, improve glucose tolerance and 
inhibit thrombosis by competitively antagonising thromboxane A2 forma
tion. Saturated fats have high melting points, mostly coming from warm
blooded animal sources: those with shorter chain lengths, from dairy 
foods, appear relatively safe, but those with long chain lengths, found 
particularly in animal fat and manufactured meat products, elevate LDL 
cholesterol and promote cardiovascular disease. Replacing them with 
PUFAs may help prevent coronary heart disease, provided the PUFAs are 
protected by their natural antioxidants. High intakes of trans fatty acids 
(TFAs; isomers of the natural cis fatty acids) reect the use of oils that have 
been partially hydrogenated in the food industry to raise their melting point 
for use in manufactured foods. They behave like the longchain saturated 
fats to promote cardiovascular disease, so it is recommended that TFAs 
are limited to <2% of dietary fat intake. Changes in industrial practice in 
the UK and United States have brought most people’s TFA intakes below 
1%, with the residual amount coming from ruminant digestion in milk.
CH3
COOH
Polyunsaturated fatty acid, e.g. linoleic acid (18:2 ω6)
CH3
COOH
Monounsaturated fatty acid, e.g. oleic acid (18:1 ω9)
CH3
COOH
Saturated fatty acid, e.g. myristic acid (14:0 )
18
1
CH2
CH
Fig. 22.5 Schematic representation of fatty acids. Standard nomenclature 
species the number of carbon atoms and indicates the number and position of the 
double bond(s) relative to the methyl (−CH3, ω) end of the molecule after a colon.

[[p816]]
762    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
(obesity, type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, diverticulosis, cancers). 
The requirements during and after illness may be different, and preterm 
infants have particular needs.
Disorders of altered energy balance 
Obesity 
Obesity is regarded as a global pandemic, or ‘syndemic’ as it entails 
potentially disastrous consequences for human health. In 2020, almost 
30% of adults in the UK were obese (i.e. BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) compared 
with 7% in 1980 and 16% in 1995. Moreover, almost 66% of the total 
UK adult population is overweight (BMI ≥25 kg/m2). The proportion with 
a normal weight (BMI 18.5–25 kg/m2) falls to only about 11% by age 
65, presenting a problem for interpreting disease associations because 
those 11% include very t people, but also a relatively high proportion 
who have remained or become thinner through illness.
In low and middleincome countries, average obesity rates are 
lower, but these gures may disguise high rates of obesity and 
noncommunicable diseases emerging in urban communities.
Complications 
Obesity affects both mortality and morbidity (Fig. 22.6). Changes in mor
tality are difcult to analyse due to the confounding effects of lower body 
weight in cigarette smokers and those with other illnesses (such as can
cer). The lowest mortality rates in Europeans are still in the BMI range 
18.5–25 kg/m2 (and at lower BMI in Southeast Asians), but there is only 
a minor rise until BMI is above 30 kg/m2. A BMI above 35 kg/m2 at age 40 
years reduces life expectancy by up to 7 years for nonsmokers and by 
13 years for smokers, and if type 2 diabetes develops, almost always 
with moderate overweight, life expectancy is reduced by about 7 years 
at any BMI. Coronary heart disease (Fig. 22.7) is the major cause of 
death but cancer rates are also increased in the overweight, especially 
colorectal cancer in males and cancer of the gallbladder, biliary tract, 
breast, endometrium and cervix in females. Obesity has little effect on life 
expectancy above 70 years of age, but the severely obese often spend 
much of their life disabled, physically, mentally and socially. Although an 
increased body weight results in greater bone density through increased 
mechanical stress, this does not translate into a lower incidence of 
osteoporotic fractures. Obesity may have profound psychological con
sequences, compounded by stigmatisation and victim blaming, rather 
than offering sympathetic support for effective treatment.
22.4  WHO recommended population macronutrient goals
Nutrient
Target limits for population average 
intakes (% of total energy unless 
indicated)
Lower
Upper
Protein
10
Total fat
15
30
Saturated fatty acids
0
10
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
6
10
Trans fatty acids
0
1
Dietary cholesterol (mg/day)
0
300
Total carbohydrate
55
75
Free (added) sugars
0
10
Complex carbohydrate
50
70
Dietary bre (g/day)
As non-starch polysaccharides
>20
As total dietary bre
>25
Total fruit and vegetables
>400
Cholesterol is also absorbed from food in chylomicrons and is an 
important substrate for steroid and sterol synthesis, but not an important 
source of energy, nor a major contributor to plasma cholesterol concen
tration as it is also synthesised in the liver.
Proteins 
Proteins, with all their complexity for structural and metabolic/enzymic func
tions, are made up of some 20 different amino acids. Nine are ‘essential’ 
(Box 22.2), i.e. they cannot be synthesised by healthy humans, but are 
required for synthesis of important proteins, so must always be provided 
by the diet. While amino acids are well preserved by recycling, there are no 
stores, so a regular supply is needed to replace losses. Five other amino 
acids are ‘conditionally essential’: they can usually be synthesised from other 
amino acids, but synthesis may be insufcient, demanding a greater dietary 
supply under certain conditions (e.g. poor diet, pregnancy, growth, illness). 
The remaining necessary amino acids can be synthesised in the body by 
transamination, provided there is a sufcient supply of amino groups.
Dietary proteins of animal origin contain a mix of amino acids well 
matched to human needs, so have greater biological value than proteins 
of vegetable origin, which are low in one or more of the essential amino 
acids. However, when different vegetable proteins are eaten together, 
classically a cereal and a legume, their amino acid contents are comple
mentary and produce an adequate mix, a key feature of most surviving 
traditional diets, and an important principle for vegan diets.
Dietary recommendations for macronutrients 
Recommendations for energy intake (Box 22.3) and proportions of 
macronutrients (Box 22.4) in the general population have been devel
oped from detailed analyses, and quality assessment, of the totality of 
the scientic evidence and have changed little over the last 50 years. 
Recommended ranges or limits aim to provide sufcient essential nutri
ents for the great majority of healthy people at different lifestages, 
and also to minimise the risks of chronic noncommunicable diseases 
22.2  Amino acids
Essential amino acids
 Tryptophan
 Histidine
 Methionine
 Threonine
 Isoleucine
 Valine
 Phenylalanine
 Lysine
 Leucine
Conditionally essential amino acids and their precursors
 Cysteine: methionine, serine
 Tyrosine: phenylalanine
 Arginine: glutamine/glutamate, aspartate
 Proline: glutamate
 Glycine: serine, choline
22.3  Daily adult energy requirements in health
Circumstances
Daily requirements*
Females
Males
At rest (basal 
metabolic rate)
5.4 MJ (1300 kcal)
6.7 MJ (1600 kcal)
Less active
8.0 MJ (1900 kcal)
9.9 MJ (2400 kcal)
Population median
8.8 MJ (2100 kcal)
10.8 MJ (2600 kcal)
More active
9.6 MJ (2300 kcal)
11.8 MJ (2800 kcal)
*These are based on a healthy target body mass index (BMI) of 22.5 kg/m 2. For a female, 
height is 162 cm and weight 59.0 kg; for a male, height is 175 cm and weight 68.8 kg. 
Previous average recommendations of 8.1 MJ (1950 kcal, usually rounded up to 2000 kcal) 
for females and 10.7 MJ (2500 kcal) for males should continue to be used, as these fall within 
experimental error.

[[p817]]
Disorders of altered energy balance     763
22
Body fat distribution 
For some complications of obesity, the distribution rather than the 
absolute amount of excess adipose tissue appears to be important. 
Increased intraabdominal fat causes a ‘central’ (‘abdominal’, ‘visceral’, 
‘android’ or ‘appleshaped’) shape, which contrasts with subcutaneous 
fat accumulation causing ‘generalised’ (‘gynoid’ or ‘pearshaped’) obe
sity. The former, more common in men, incurs ectopic fat accumulation 
with impaired functions in liver, pancreas, skeletal and cardiac muscle, 
promoting type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular dis
ease (see Fig. 22.6). The intraabdominal fat drains into the portal vein 
and thence directly to the liver, thus many factors released from adipose 
tissue (including free fatty acids; ‘adipokines’, such as tumour necrosis 
factor alpha, adiponectin and resistin) are at higher concentration in the 
liver and muscle, inducing insulin resistance and promoting type 2 dia
betes. The key to remission of type 2 diabetes, with restoration of the 
rstphase insulin response to glucose appears to be loss of ectopic fat 
in liver and pancreas.
Aetiology 
Accumulation of fat results from a discrepancy between energy con
sumption and energy expenditure that is too large to be defended by 
the hypothalamic regulation of BMR. A continued small daily positive 
energy balance of only 0.1 MJ (50 kcal; ~2% of intake) would lead to 
weight gain of ~25 kg over 10 years. With habituation to a subtle energy 
excess, body fat content shows ‘tracking’ with age within obesogenic 
environments, such that children of obese families usually become obese 
adults. If physical activity decreases with age, which is now common, 
but food consumption is more driven by habit and marketing than phys
iology, BMR tends to fall and weight increases throughout adult life (see 
Fig. 22.3).
The obesity pandemic reects dramatic changes over the last 
40–50 years in both energy intake and expenditure (Box 22.5), although 
both are difcult to measure reliably. The estimated average global daily 
supply of food energy per person increased from approximately 9.8 MJ 
(2350 kcal) in the 1960s to approximately 11.7 MJ (2800 kcal) in the 
1990s, but its delivery is unequal. For example, in India it is estimated that 
5% of the population receives 40% of the available food energy, leading to 
obesity in the urban population in parallel with undernutrition in some rural 
Pulmonary
Exercise intolerance
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Asthma
Gastrointestinal
Gallstones
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Colon cancer
Renal
Glomerulosclerosis
Renal cancer
Musculoskeletal
Ankle sprains
Flat feet
Tibia vara
Osteoarthritis
Back pain
Psychosocial
Eating disorders
Poor self-esteem
Body image disorder
Social isolation and stigmatisation
Depression
Neurological
Pseudotumour cerebri
(idiopathic intracranial
hypertension)
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Dyslipidaemia
Coagulopathy
Chronic inflammation
Endothelial dysfunction
Endocrine
Insulin resistance
Impaired fasting glucose
or glucose intolerance
Type 2 diabetes
Precocious puberty
Menstrual irregularities
Polycystic ovary
syndrome (females)
Hormone-related cancers
(breast, endometrium, prostate)
Fig. 22.6 Complications of obesity.
0
1
2
3
4
Relative risk for
cardiovascular disease
< 21
21– 22.9 23– 24.9
25– 28.9
> 29
0
Relative risk for
type 2 diabetes
< 25
25 – 30
> 30
Normal weight
Overweight
Obese
Body mass index (kg/m2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Fig. 22.7 Risks of diabetes and cardiovascular disease in overweight and obese 
women. Data are from the Nurses' Health Study in the United States and mostly relate 
to women of predominantly European descent. In some ethnic groups (e.g. South 
Asians, Indigenous Americans) and in people with higher waist circumference, the 
metabolic complications are even more severe at a given level of body mass index.

[[p818]]
764    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
communities. In afuent societies, a signicant proportion of this food sup
ply is discarded. In the United States, men's average daily energy intake 
reportedly rose from 10.2 MJ (2450 kcal) in 1971 to 11.0 MJ (2618 kcal) 
in 2000. Portion sizes, particularly of energydense foods such as drinks 
with highly rened sugar content and salty snacks, have increased, and 
the ‘food disappearance’ rate (i.e. production and sales) has increased for 
all food groups, with greater consumption of catered meals and less food 
waste. Obesity is correlated positively with the number of hours spent 
watching screens, inversely with sleep time, and inversely with levels of 
physical activity. Laboursaving devices play a part and minor activities 
such as dgeting, termed nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), 
may contribute to energy expenditure and protect against obesity.
Susceptibility to obesity 
Susceptibility to obesity varies between individuals. Obese subjects do 
not have a ‘slow metabolism’: their BMR is higher than that of lean sub
jects. Twin and adoption studies conrm a familial inuence on obesity, 
but both environment and genes contribute to ‘heritability’. The pattern of 
inheritance suggests a polygenic disorder, with small contributions from 
a number of different genes, together accounting for 25%–70% of varia
tion in weight. Genomewide association studies of polymorphisms have 
identied a handful of genes, some of which encode proteins known to be 
involved in the control of appetite or metabolism function. However, these 
account for less than 5% of variation in body weight. Genes also inuence 
fat distribution and therefore risk of metabolic consequences of obesity.
A few rare singlegene disorders have been identied that lead to 
severe childhood obesity. These include mutations of the melanocor
tin4 receptor (MC4R), which account for approximately 5% of severe 
earlyonset obesity; defects in the enzymes processing propiomelano
cortin (POMC, the precursor for adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)) 
in the hypothalamus; and mutations in the leptin gene (see Fig. 22.4). The 
latter can be treated by leptin injections. Additional genetic conditions in 
which obesity is a feature include Prader–Willi and Lawrence–Moon–Biedl 
syndromes.
Clinical features and investigations 
 In assessing an individual presenting with obesity, the aims are to: 
exclude an underlying cause,
 identify complications,
 quantify the current and potential problems and
 agree a management plan with the individual, based on evidence, 
proportionate to the problem and optimally supported.
Measuring waist circumference is useful with BMI under 35 kg/m2: 
above this level, it is unnecessary and becomes unreliable as the waist 
descends under gravity. Risks of metabolic and cardiovascular compli
cations are worse with a high waist circumference; lower cutoffs of BMI 
and waist circumference indicate higher risk in South Asians (Box 22.6).
A very general history of dietary patterns and preferences may be 
helpful in guiding dietary advice but substantial underreporting of food 
consumption is almost universal among overweight people. Pathological 
eating behaviours such as binge eating, nocturnal eating or bulimia 
demand specic management. Alcohol is rarely a major source of energy 
intake but should be considered as a possible obstacle to effective treat
ment. Many commonly prescribed drugs cause weight gain, and impede 
effective weight loss (Box 22.7). If possible these should be withdrawn 
or doses minimised.
In a small minority of patients presenting with a short history of 
marked change in adult weight gain trajectory, specic causal factors 
such as hypothyroidism or Cushing’s syndrome can be identied and 
treated (see Box 22.7). All obese patients should have thyroid function 
tests performed, and an overnight dexamethasone suppression test or 
24hour urine free cortisol if Cushing’s syndrome is suspected clinically. 
Monogenic causes of obesity are relevant only in children presenting with 
severe obesity, but ‘syndromic’ obesity commonly accompanies condi
tions with learning and behavioural difculties such as Down syndrome, 
where the goodwill of carers may contribute.
Assessment of the multiple complications and impacts on life and work 
of obesity (see Fig. 22.6) requires a full history, and limited examination 
and screening investigations. Blood pressure should be measured with a 
large cuff, if required. Associated type 2 diabetes and dyslipidaemia are 
detected by measurement of HbA1c and a serum lipid prole, respec
tively, ideally in a fasting morning sample. Elevated serum transaminases 
occur in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Management 
The health risks of obesity are often reversible if identied and treated 
early. Effective modest weight loss (5–10 kg) ameliorates all the cardio
metabolic risk factors and reduces the incidence of type 2 diabetes. 
22.5  Some reasons for the increasing prevalence 
of obesity – the ‘obesogenic’ environment
Increasing energy intake
 ↑ Portion sizes
 ↑ Snacking, grazing and loss of 
regular meals
 ↑ Energy-dense ‘added-value’ food 
(fat and sugars)
 ↑ Afuence
 Effective marketing
Decreasing energy expenditure
 ↑ Car ownership
 ↓ Walking to school/work
 ↑ Automation/domestic 
labour-saving
 ↓ Manual labour in occupations
 ↓ Sports in schools
 ↑ Time spent on computer games and 
watching TV
 ↑ Central heating, washing machines
22.6  Quantifying obesity with BMI and waist circumference for risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease1
BMI (weight in kg/height in m2)
Classication2
Waist circumference3
Men < 94 cm
Women < 80 cm
Men 94–102 cm
Women 80–88 cm
Men >102 cm
Women > 88 cm
18.5–24.9
Reference range
Low
Increased
Severe
25.0–29.9
Overweight
Low
Moderate
Very severe
>30.0
Obese
30.0–34.9
Class I
Moderate
Severe
Very severe
35.0–39.9
Class II
(not possible)
Very severe
Very severe
>40.0
Class III
(not possible)
Very severe
Very severe
1Lower cut-offs apply for people of South Asian ancestry, see note 2. High waist circumference is the more potent risk indicator, reecting increase intra-abdominal and ectopic fat accumulation in vital 
organs. 2Classication of the World Health Organization (WHO) and International Obesity Task Force. The Western Pacic Region Ofce of WHO recommends that, among South Asians, BMI > 23.0 
is overweight and > 25.0 is obese. Lower cut-offs for waist circumference have also been proposed for South Asians but have not been validated. 3When BMI is > 35 kg/m2, waist circumference is 
difcult to measure because the waist descends under gravity, so does not add to the increased risk.

[[p819]]
Disorders of altered energy balance     765
22
22.7  Secondary causes of weight gain
Endocrine factors
 Hypothyroidism
 Cushing’s syndrome
 Insulinoma
 Hypothalamic tumours or injury
Drug treatments (worse in combination)
 Atypical antipsychotics  
(e.g. olanzapine)
 Antidepressants (e.g. 
amitryptyline, mirtazepine)
 Gabapentin, pregabalin
 Sulphonylureas, thiazolidinediones, 
insulin
 Pizotifen
 Glucocorticoids
 Sodium valproate
 β-blockers
Exercise
Eating behaviour modification
Treat cardiovascular risk factors
Supervised low-calorie diet
Drugs
Surgery
BMI cut-offs
in absence of
comorbidity
40
30
25
35
27
25
BMI cut-offs
in presence of
comorbidity
Fig. 22.8 Therapeutic options for obesity. Relevant comorbidities include 
type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, sleep apnoea, and waist 
circumference of >102 cm in men or 88 cm in women. This is an approximate 
consensus of the numerous national guidelines, which vary slightly in their 
recommendations and are revised every few years. (BMI = body masss index).
More substantial weight loss (10–15 kg or more) is needed to gain 
remission of established type diabetes, or of sleep apneoa. Sustaining 
substantial weight loss is notoriously hard, so population strategies to 
prevent and reverse obesity are high on public health priority agendas. 
Many initiatives have evidence for limited success while the initiative is in 
place, including promoting ‘healthy eating’ in schools, enhancing walking 
and cycling options for commuters, and liaising with the food industry to 
reduce energy, sugar and fat content and to label foods appropriately. 
Unfortunately these measures tend most to benet those better edu
cated who already suffer less from overweight and obesity. Taxes on 
highsugar drinks have been introduced in some countries, with some 
evidence for shortterm changes in consumption but not in effect on 
body weights, probably because articially sweetened alternatives still 
stimulate an appetite for more energydense foods. Unfortunately, many 
heavily promoted ‘lowfat’ foods are often still energydense.
Most patients seeking assistance with obesity appear motivated to 
lose weight and have often done so previously, without longterm suc
cess. These patients may hold inaccurate perceptions of their energy 
intake and expenditure, and an unrealistic view of the target weight that 
they would regard as a ‘success’. An empathetic explanation of energy 
balance, which recognises that some individuals are more susceptible to 
obesity than others, and nd it more difcult to lose body weight and sus
tain this loss, is important. Reassurance that there is no underlying endo
crine or metabolic problem can be helpful, especially for family members 
or carers. Appropriate goals for weight loss should be agreed, recognis
ing that a given amount of weight loss achieves greater risk reduction at 
higher levels of BMI, but accommodating the perceptions of the patient. 
An initial reasonable goal for most patients with BMI up to 30 kg/m2 is 
to lose 5%–10% of body weight using conventional diet and lifestyle 
modications. With BMI above 30 kg/m2, or if type 2 diabetes or other 
serious complications are present, greater weight loss of over 10–15 kg 
is recommended, and more intensive intervention is indicated, with sep
arate strategies for inducing and for maintaining weight loss of this order 
(Fig. 22.8). Modern adjunctive drug treatment can be very effective (e.g. 
GLP1 agonists), but mainly to sustain major weight losses for those who 
alter their diet substantially.
Lifestyle advice 
Behavioural modication to avoid or mitigate some effects of the ‘obe
sogenic’ environment (see Box 22.5) is the cornerstone of longterm 
control of weight. Adopting more disciplined eating patterns, and pre
planned meals, is advised. Advising modest extra activity to increase 
physical activity level (PAL) ratios (see Fig. 22.3C), may be successful for 
younger people, but this must be sustainable and regular as a daily rou
tine (e.g. walking rather than driving to work): older patients, and those 
with arthritis or type 2 diabetes nd increasing physical activity very hard. 
Regular support, and positive strategic encouragement when problems 
arise, from a dietitian or weight loss group is very valuable.
Weight loss diets 
The general lifestyle advice above, with medical encouragement, may 
gradually induce weight loss and a grateful patient. However, regain is a 
huge problem, as people slip back to their ‘normal’ diets and lifestyles, 
especially when lifeevents step in. Contrary to much previous teaching, 
the evidence is now consistent that more rapid and greater early weight 
loss tends to result in better quality of life, and to better longterm main
tenance. More rapid weight loss may also be required to prepare for 
surgery.
Verylowenergy diets (VLEDs, under 800 kcal/day) or low energy 
diets of 800–1000 kcal/day are similarly effective for rapid weight loss of 
1.5–2.5 kg/week, compared to 0.5 kg/week on conventional regi
mens. Both are safe if provided as a nutritionally complete formula 
diet, and most successful with encouragement from an experienced 
and supportive physician or nutritionist. A minimum content of 
40–50 g protein daily minimises muscle degradation, over 20 g of fat 
helps to avoid gallstone formation, with sufcient magnesium to avoid 
constipation, and uid intake of at least 2.5 L/day to avoid dehydra
tion which can cause orthostatic hypotension, headache, constipa
tion and nausea. Medical supervision is needed for patients whose 
glucoselowering and antihypertensive medications need withdrawal 
or reduction with rapid weight loss.
Drugs 
The obesity pandemic has stimulated huge investment by the phar
maceutical industry in nding drugs for obesity, unfortunately hitherto 
directed and licensed only for ‘weight loss’ although the greater problem 
for patients is in fact longterm maintenance of a lower weight. There is 
no role for diuretics, or for thyroxine. Metformin does generate an aver
age weight loss of about 2 kg, but is not licensed or effective for weight 
management. Drug therapy should only be used as an adjunct to opti
mal, evidencebased, lifestyle advice and support, which should be con
tinued throughout treatment.
Orlistat inhibits pancreatic and gastric lipases. The standard dose 
of 120 mg taken with each of the three main meals reduces dietary 
fat absorption by about 30%. It is not absorbed, and adverse effects 
relate to fat malabsorption if the diet still contains too much fat: loose 
oily stools, faecal urgency, atus and malabsorption of fatsoluble vita
mins. Its efcacy is partly explained because patients taking orlistat 
adhere better to lowfat diets in order to avoid unpleasant gastrointes
tinal sideeffects, but it is favoured by few patients. The combination of 
lowdose phentermine and topiramate extended release, approved in 
the United States, results in weight loss of ~6% greater than placebo. 
Concerns over teratogenicity of topiramate and cardiovascular effects of 

[[p820]]
766    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
both phentermine and topiramate (albeit at higher doses) have blocked 
its approval in Europe. The combination of the opioid antagonist naltrex
one and the noradrenaline (norepinephrine)/dopamine reuptake inhibitor 
bupropion is similarly effective, and approved in both the United States 
and Europe. Its main adverse effects are dry mouth and constipation.
The most effective medications for obesity treatment are the gluca
gonlike peptide1 (GLP1) receptor agonists, usually at higher doses 
than are used to treat type diabetes. These drugs are remarkably safe, 
their main drawback being high cost. Their main sideeffects are gas
trointestinal and avoided if the dose is very low to start, and then slowly 
increased. Patients are very willing to accept subcutaneous administra
tion for effective treatment. Liraglutide is approved for obesity treatment 
in Europe and the United States, and for highrisk obese patients, at 
a daily subcutaneous dose up to 3 mg. The mean weight loss in ran
domised trials was about 10 kg, including trials of people with type 2 
diabetes. Even better results can be achieved in routine practice if it 
is stopped early when it proves ineffective. It is recommended to stop 
liraglutide if 3 mg/day for 3 months fails to generate >5% weight loss 
(usually indicating poor dietary compliance). Another GLP1 agonist, 
semaglutide, also already licensed for type 2 diabetes, is under con
sideration in both the United States and Europe for approval at a dose 
of 2.4 mg/day subcutaneously. It generates even greater weight losses 
than liraglutide, with similar safety, and weekly injection and an oral 
form are in trials.
Drug therapy is usually reserved for patients with high risk of com
plications from obesity (see Fig. 22.8). All licensed drugs do reduce the 
cardiovascular and diabetes risks and weight loss of >10% is associ
ated with reduced cardiac events. However, approvals are currently for 
weight loss, not maintenance, so duration of drug treatment is controver
sial. Withdrawing an effective drug means it no longer works, so weight 
regain is usual. Although lifelong therapy is advocated on the basis of 
shortterm research trials for many drugs that reduce risks (e.g. drugs 
for hypertension and osteoporosis), this is not yet widely accepted for 
obesity treatment. Weight regain despite continued drug treatment gen
erally reects reduction in professional support and relaxation of dietary 
control, for which reinforcement and new lifestyle measures are needed. 
Patients who demonstrate early weight loss (e.g. > 5% after 12 weeks 
on the optimum dose) achieve greater and longerterm weight loss. 
Treatment can be stopped in nonresponders at this point and alternative 
treatments considered.
Surgery 
‘Bariatric’ surgery is the most effective treatment for obesity, in terms 
of amount and duration of weight loss (see Fig. 22.8 and Box 22.8), 
and associated with improvements in all obesityrelated risk factors and 
reduced mortality. Bariatric surgery should be contemplated in moti
vated patients who have very high risks of complications of obesity, 
when optimal dietary and drug therapy has been insufciently effective. 
It is usually reserved for those with severe obesity (BMI > 40 kg/m2), 
or those with a BMI >35 kg/m2 and signicant complications, such 
as type 2 diabetes or obstructive sleep apnoea, although some evi
dencebased guidelines now suggest surgery can be considered at a 
lower weight with recentonset diabetes and a BMI > 30 kg/m2. Only 
experienced specialist surgeons should undertake these procedures, in 
collaboration with a multidisciplinary team and plans for lifelong followup. 
Several approaches are used (Fig. 22.9) and all can be performed lapa
roscopically. The mechanism of weight loss, and its maintenance, after 
bariatric surgery is controversial. It may not simply relate to limiting the 
stomach size, or absorptive capacity, but also in disrupting release of 
ghrelin from the stomach or promoting release of other peptides from 
the small bowel, thereby enhancing satiety signalling in the hypothala
mus. Diabetes usually improves rapidly after surgery, particularly after 
gastric bypass, but this is mainly attributable to severe energy restriction 
in the perioperative period. Increased release of incretin hormones such 
as GLP1 may contribute to improved glucose control.
Bariatric surgery has taught us a lot about the pathogenesis of obesity 
and the health improvements possible with substantial weight loss, but it 
is not a ‘onestep solution’. Complications of one kind or another, often 
multiple and some serious, affect almost all patients after bariatric sur
gery, depending on the approach. Perioperative mortality is now under 
1% in experienced centres, but postoperative respiratory problems, 
wound infection and dehiscence, staple leaks, stomal stenosis, marginal 
ulcers and venous thrombosis may occur. Additional problems may arise 
at a later stage, such as pouch and distal oesophageal dilatation with 
loss of effectiveness, persistent vomiting, hypoglycaemic or hypotensive 
‘dumping’ syndromes, hypoglycaemia and micronutrient deciencies, 
particularly of folate, vitamin B12 and iron, which are of special concern 
to women contemplating pregnancy; this should be delayed for at least 
2 years following surgery.
Cosmetic surgical procedures may be needed for a full physical and 
mental recovery after major weight loss. Apronectomy is a major oper
ation to remove an overhang of unsightly, infected or ulcerated abdom
inal skin, a common problem in obese women after the menopause. 
This operation is not without risks, and of no value for longterm weight 
reduction if food intake remains unrestricted.
Treatment of additional risk factors 
Obesity must not be treated in isolation. Other risk factors must be 
addressed, including smoking, excess alcohol consumption, diabetes, 
hyperlipidaemia, hypertension and obstructive sleep apnoea.
Under-nutrition 
Starvation and famine 
There remain regions of the world, particularly rural Africa, where 
undernutrition due to famine is endemic, where up to 20% of adults have 
BMI <18.5 kg/m2 (Box 22.9), and stunting due to undernutrition affects 
50% of children. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that 
chronic undernutrition is responsible for more than half of all childhood 
deaths worldwide. Starvation is manifest as marasmus (malnutrition with 
marked muscle wasting) or, when added complications such multiple 
infections and oxidative stress come into play, kwashiorkor (malnutrition 
with oedema). Growth retardation is due to deciencies of key nutrients 
(protein, zinc, potassium, phosphate and sulphur). Treatment of these 
childhood conditions is not discussed in this adult medical textbook. In 
adults, starvation is the result of chronic sustained negative energy (cal
orie) balance, commonly with coexisting micronutrient deciencies and 
many possible causes (Box 22.10).
22.8  Effectiveness and adverse effects of laparoscopic 
bariatric surgical procedures*
Procedure
Expected 2-year 
weight loss (kg)
Adverse effects
Gastric 
banding
19–25
Band slippage, erosion, stricture
Port site infection
Mortality <0.2% in experienced centres
Sleeve 
gastrectomy
20–30
Iron deciency
Vitamin B12 deciency
Mortality <0.2% in experienced centres
Roux-en-Y 
gastric 
bypass
20–40
Internal hernia
Stomal ulcer
Dumping syndrome
Hypoglycaemia
Iron deciency
Vitamin B12 deciency
Vitamin D deciency
Mortality 0.5%
*Weight regain is a frequent problem beyond 5 years after all bariatric surgery, particularly 
banding and sleeve gastrectomy.

[[p821]]
Disorders of altered energy balance     767
22
A
B
C
Access
port
Oesophagus
Gastric band
Gastric sleeve
Pylorus
Resected
stomach
The small
intestine is
connected to
the stomach
pouch
Unused portion
of the
small intestine
Fig. 22.9 Bariatric surgical procedures.
22.9  Classication of under-nutrition in adults by body mass 
index (weight/height2)
BMI (kg/m2)
Classication
>20
Adequate nutrition
18.5–20
Marginal
<18.5
Under-nutrition
17–18.4
Mild
16–17
Moderate
<16
Severe
22.10  Causes of under-nutrition and weight loss in adults
Decreased energy intake
 Famine
 Persistent regurgitation or vomiting
 True anorexia from depression
 True anorexia from drug side-effects
 Eating disorders (e.g. anorexia nervosa https://we.tl/t-KFTRESkTDA)
 Malabsorption (e.g. small intestinal disease)
 Maldigestion (e.g. pancreatic exocrine insufciency)
Increased energy expenditure
 Increased basal metabolic rate (thyrotoxicosis, trauma, fever, cancer cachexia, 
anxiety)
 Excessive physical activity (e.g. marathon runners)
 Energy loss (e.g. glycosuria in diabetes)
 Impaired energy storage (e.g. Addison disease, phaeochromocytoma)
Clinical features 
In starvation, the severity of malnutrition can be assessed by anthropo
metric measurements, such as BMI (see p. 757 and Box 22.9). Demispan 
and midarm circumference measurements are most useful in monitoring 
progress during treatment. The clinical features of severe undernutrition 
in adults are listed in Box 22.11
Undernutrition often includes vitamin deciencies, especially of thi
amin, folate and vitamin C (see below). Diarrhoea can lead to depletion 
of sodium, potassium and magnesium. The high mortality rate in fam
ine situations is often due to outbreaks of infection, such as gastroen
teritis, typhus or cholera (Box 22.12), but the usual signs of infection 
(e.g. fever, tachycardia) may not be apparent. In advanced starvation, 
patients shut down nonessential metabolism, with hypothermia and 
bradycardia, and become physically inactive in a exed, fetal position, 
22.11  Clinical features of severe under-nutrition in adults
 Weight loss
 Thirst, craving for food, weakness and feeling cold
 Nocturia, amenorrhoea or impotence
 Lax, pale, dry skin with loss of turgor and, occasionally, pigmented patches
 Cold and cyanosed extremities, pressure sores
 Hair thinning or loss (except in adolescents)
 Muscle-wasting, best demonstrated by the loss of the temporalis and 
periscapular muscles and reduced mid-arm circumference
 Loss of subcutaneous fat, reected in reduced skinfold thickness and mid-arm 
circumference
 Hypothermia, bradycardia, hypotension and small heart
 Oedema, which may be present without hypoalbuminaemia (‘famine oedema’)
 Distended abdomen with diarrhoea
 Diminished tendon jerks
 Apathy, loss of initiative, depression, introversion, aggression if food is nearby
 Susceptibility to infections (see Box 22.12)
minimising heat loss. In the last stage of starvation, death comes quietly 
and often quite suddenly, commonly through asymptomatic pneumonia 
or primary arrhythmia. The very old are most vulnerable: younger people 
may be able to adapt to prolonged undernutrition. At necropsy all organs 
are atrophied, except the brain, which tends to maintain its weight.
Investigations 
In a famine, laboratory investigations may be impractical but will show 
that plasma free fatty acids are increased and there is ketosis and a mild 
metabolic acidosis. Plasma glucose is low but albumin concentration 
is often maintained because the liver still functions reasonably normally. 
Insulin secretion is diminished, glucagon and cortisol tend to increase, 
and reverse T3 replaces normal triiodothyronine. The resting metabolic 
rate falls, partly because of falling lean body mass, and partly because 
of hypothalamic compensation (see Fig. 22.3). The urine has a xed 
specic gravity and creatinine excretion becomes low. There may be 
22.12  Infections associated with starvation
 Gastroenteritis and Gram-negative sepsis
 Respiratory infections, especially bronchopneumonia
 Certain viral diseases, especially measles and herpes simplex
 Tuberculosis
 Streptococcal and staphylococcal skin infections
 Helminthic infestations

[[p822]]
768    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
22.13 Recognition and management of refeeding syndrome
 Refeeding after undernutrition is essential, but:
 Refeeding without correcting K/Mg/PO4 is a common cause of death
 Refeeding without correcting subclinical thiamine deciency causes 
permanent brain injury (Korsakoff psychosis). Always give IV thiamine 
before commencing refeeding – do not wait for biochemical conrmation 
of deciency
 Classical patients at risk: kwashiorkor/marasmus, chronic malnutrition, 
alcoholism
 Others risk factors: BMI <16 kg/m2; unintentional weight loss >15% in 3–6 
months; little/no oral intake for >10 days; low K+, Mg++, PO4 before feeding
 Can occur with lesser degrees of weight loss and higher BMI levels; also in 
‘sarcopoenic obesity’
 Refeeding leads to: uptake of glucose, K+, Mg++ and PO4 into cells, and 
reduced plasma levels; thiamine utilisation and depletion; and retention of  
Na+ and water
 General treatment measures: careful monitoring, daily weights, cautious 
rehydration, cardiac monitoring if ECG changes, e.g. prolonged QTc interval
 Give repeated IV infusions of small doses of PO4 (10–20 mmol)
 IV correction of hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia
 Energy: start at 10–20 kcal/kg daily increasing to meet energy needs over  
5–7 days
(BMI – body mass index; ECG = electrocardiogram; IV = intravenous)
22.14  WHO recommended diets for refeeding
Nutrient (per 100 mL)
F-75 diet1
F-100 diet2
Energy
315 kJ (75 kcal)
420 kJ (100 kcal)
Protein (g)
0.9
2.9
Lactose (g)
1.3
4.2
Potassium (mmol)
3.6
5.9
Sodium (mmol)
0.9
1.9
Magnesium (mmol)
0.43
0.73
Zinc (mg)
2.0
2.3
Copper (mg)
0.25
0.25
Percentage of energy from:
Protein
5
12
Fat
32
53
Osmolality (mOsmol/kg)
333
419
Dose
170 kJ/kg 
(40 kcal/kg)
630–920 kJ/kg 
(150–220 kcal/kg)
Rate of feeding by mouth
2.2 (mL/kg/hr)
Gradual increase 
in volume, 6 times 
daily
1F-75 is prepared from milk powder (25 g), sugar (70 g), cereal our (35 g), vegetable oil (27 g) 
and vitamin and mineral supplements, made up to 1 L with water. 2F-100 (1 L) contains milk 
powder (80 g), sugar (50 g), vegetable oil (60 g) and vitamin and mineral supplements (no 
cereal).
mild pancytopenia. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is normal 
unless there is infection. Tests of delayed skin hypersensitivity, e.g. to 
tuberculin, become falsely negative. The electrocardiogram shows sinus 
bradycardia and low voltage.
Management 
Undernutrition in a famine, or with anorexia nervosa, tends to preserve 
muscle mass, while with prolonged infections and inammation, muscle 
tends to be lost more rapidly, reected in lower mid upper arm circum
ference (MUAC). Undernutrition represents the only emergency in clinical 
nutrition. Starvation kills, but usually slowly: an average man or woman 
has enough body fat to live on for about 40 days, provided uids are still 
consumed but illguided attempts at treating undernutrition can rapidly 
kill an otherwise healthy patient.
The severity of undernutrition is graded according to BMI (see 
Box 22.9). People with mild starvation are not in great danger; those 
with moderate starvation need extra feeding; and those who are severely 
underweight need hospital care, particularly to avoid death from ‘refeed
ing syndrome’ (Box 22.13). Correcting uids and electrolytes rst, and 
their careful monitoring for at least 7 days of refeeding, is vital as there is 
often marked depletion of potassium, phosphate and magnesium after 
starvation. If insulin is stimulated by food without correcting these, their 
sudden movement into cells can cause a sudden arrhythmic death.
It is also essential to give thiamine to all severely undernourished 
patients (initially parenterally to be sure of absorption) to correct possible 
deciency before food is administered, in order to avoid precipitating beri 
beri. Thiamine should be given on suspicion, without waiting for con
rmatory blood tests, and without waiting for clinical signs of beri beri to 
emerge: a delay could be catastrophic, with permanent sequelae.
When food becomes available, and can be taken, it should be given by 
mouth in small, frequent amounts at rst, using a suitable formula prepa
ration (Box 22.14). Gastrointestinal involution often causes a degree of 
malabsorption, and diarrhoea, initially. Secondary lactose intolerance is 
common so milkbased foods are inappropriate. Individual energy require
ments can vary by 30%, but minor overfeeding is more hazardous, caus
ing fatty liver, than modest underfeeding, so rapid refeeding should be 
avoided. During rehabilitation, more concentrated formula can be given 
with additional more palatable foods similar to the usual staple meal. Salt 
should be restricted and micronutrient supplements (e.g. potassium, 
magnesium, zinc and multivitamins) may be essential. Between 6.3 and 
8.4 MJ/day (1500–2000 kcal/day) will arrest progressive undernutrition but 
additional energy may be required for regain of weight. During refeeding, 
a weight gain of 5% body weight per month indicates satisfactory pro
gress. Other care is supportive and includes attention to the skin, ade
quate hydration, treatment of infections and careful monitoring of body 
temperature, since thermoregulation may be impaired.
Circumstances and resources are different in every famine but many 
problems are nonmedical and concern organisation, infrastructure, liai
son, politics, procurement, security and ensuring that food is distributed 
on the basis of need. Lastly, plans must be made for the future for pre
vention and/or earlier intervention if similar circumstances prevail.
Under-nutrition in hospital 
It is a worry that undernutrition remains a serious issue in many sectors 
of highincome countries, particularly for older people and those who are 
less independent. In the UK, 30% of people requiring acute admission to 
hospital show evidence of undernutrition and 65% of those admitted will 
lose an average of 5% of their total body weight during that admission. 
In the older population, levels of undernutrition and vitamin deciencies 
parallel levels of independent living. In Scotland, 33% of those aged over 
65 who are living in their own home are decient in folic acid and 10% are 
decient in vitamin C. The prevalence of vitamin deciencies rises further 
in less independent groups in residential homes.
Undernutrition is poorly recognised and poorly documented in hos
pital admissions and discharges, with potentially serious medical and 
medicolegal consequences. Physical effects include impaired immunity, 
muscle weakness, which in turn affects cardiac and respiratory function, 
osteomalacia, and delayed wound healing with increased risks of sec
ondary infection. The undernourished patient is often withdrawn and 
this may be mistaken for depressive illness. Engagement with treatment 
and rehabilitation can be adversely affected. Much of this can be avoided 
through better awareness of undernutrition, prompt nutritional assess
ment and monitoring with appropriate intervention. Screening systems, 
such as the Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) (Fig. 22.10), 
raise awareness across multidisciplinary teams, and encourage staff to 
assess and monitor food intake and weigh patients regularly.

[[p823]]
Disorders of altered energy balance     769
22
Causes are often complex (see Box 22.10). Social issues impact on 
food choices and may cause or exacerbate disease. Social isolation, low 
levels of disposable income and a lack of knowledge or interest in healthy 
eating may increase reliance on caloriedense convenience foods of 
poor nutritional quality. The nonspecic effects of chronic inammation, 
infection or malignancy, as well as specic gastrointestinal disorders, 
may adversely affect appetite, reducing food intake.
Loss of appetite is common with gastrointestinal diseases, but occurs 
as a nonspecic response to myriad other conditions or their treat
ments. The most frequent sideeffects of many prescription drugs are 
nausea and gastrointestinal disturbance. Surgical resection of the gas
trointestinal tract can have major nutritional sequelae in the years fol
lowing, ranging from intolerance of normal volumes of food, or specic 
nutrient malabsorption, to intestinal failure (where there is partial or com
plete failure of the intestine to perform its vital functions). This is espe
cially so after partial or total gastrectomy, extensive small bowel surgery 
or pancreatic (Whipple’s) resection. It helps to consider systematically 
where the problem(s) might lie (Box 22.15).
An approach to assisted nutrition in hospital patients 
All patients in hospital or a care home should be screened periodically 
for possible malnutrition using the MUST tool (Fig. 22.10), and formally 
assessed if indicated. Poor appetite, immobility, poor dentition or even 
being kept ‘nil by mouth’ for hospital procedures all contribute to weight 
loss. A decision to intervene to tackle and reverse nutritional difculties 
may involve simply ensuring that adequate supplies of suitable food are 
delivered accessibly (it is difcult to eat lying down) or that dentures t 
properly, but may require an assessment of a patient's swallow or of the 
intestine's ability to digest foods. Whenever possible, it is best to use 
the most physiological means of feeding, i.e. by mouth, reserving more 
invasive interventions for when swallowing and digestion are impaired or 
absent. Enteral feeding is always preferred to parenteral, with its multiple 
hazards, provided the intestine is accessible and functioning.
Oral nutritional supplements 
Where swallow and intestinal function remain intact, the simplest form 
of assisted nutrition is the use of oral nutritional supplements, starting 
with attractive foods. Most branded supplement products are nutrition
ally complete (fortied with the daily requirements of vitamins, minerals 
and trace elements) and come in various formulations and textures, 
including ‘shakes’ and ‘puddings’ with a thicker consistency. They are 
expensive, but can be costeffective and useful for people who may 
require just a small number of additional calories each day to maintain 
or gain weight in the short or longer term. However, they should not be 
used to replace normal meals or snacks. And their use and effect must 
be monitored. In spite of their nutritional value, small volume and range 
of avours, many people nd them unpalatable or difcult to tolerate, in 
which case they will be ineffective, but patients may not volunteer this 
information.
Weight loss score
Unplanned loss in 6 months
< 5%
5 – 10%
> 10%
= 0
= 1
= 2
BMI score
> 20
18.5 – 20
< 18.5
= 0
= 1
= 2
Acute disease score
Acute illness with no
nutritional intake
for 5 days  = 2
Total = 1 – Medium risk
Total  = 0 – Low risk
Total  2 – High risk
Total score
 Routine clinical care
 Repeat screen weekly
 Document dietary intake for 3 days
 Repeat screen weekly
 Refer to dietitian/nutrition support team
 Review plan weekly
Fig. 22.10 Screening hospitalised patients for risk of malnutrition. Acute illnesses include decompensated liver disease, cancer cachexia or being kept ‘nil by mouth’. 
Adapted from the British Association of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (www.bapen.org.uk).
22.15  Factors affecting adequacy of nutritional intake in 
hospitalised patients
Factors affecting appetite
 Unfamiliar or ill-prepared food
 Altered taste or smell
 Anxiety (social, cultural, nancial, general and mental health issues may all be 
relevant, individually or in combination)
 Nausea and/or vomiting
 Non-specic effects of illness and/or drugs
Issues of quantity
 Insufcient food on the plate?
 Reliance on 3 meals a day without the normal 4th meal or snacks
Getting the food from the plate to the mouth
 Generalised reduced mobility
 Reduced manual dexterity
 Horizontal posture, bedrest
 Loss of upper limb or hand function
Difculties chewing food and initiating swallow
 Tooth loss
 Poorly tting dentures
 Pain in the mouth, tongue or jaws
 Respiratory failure
Specic problems with the oesophagus and gastrointestinal tract
 Obstruction (intrinsic or extrinsic)
 Ischaemia
 Inammation
 Malabsorption
Cultural issues
 Is the food provided appropriate to the patient's beliefs?
More general evidence of self-neglect
 Evidence of chronic coexisting illness
 Evidence of mental health problems – low mood may be ‘cause’ or ‘effect’ in 
under-nutrition
Enteral feeding 
Where swallowing or food ingestion is impaired but intestinal function 
remains intact enteral tube feeding is the next choice (nasoenteral, 
gastrostomy or jejunostomy feeding). There are a number of theoretical 
advantages to enteral feeding, as opposed to parenteral, with uncertain 
evidence. These include:
 preservation of intestinal mucosal architecture, gutassociated 
lymphoid tissue and hepatic and pulmonary immune function
 reduced levels of systemic inammation and hyperglycaemia
 interference with pathogenicity of gut microorganisms.

[[p824]]
770    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
However, the areas in which advantage has been consistently 
proven are:
 fewer episodes of infection
 lower cost
 earlier return to intestinal function
 shorter length of hospital stay.
The risks of enteral feeding are those related to tube insertion 
(Box 22.16) and diarrhoea (Box 22.17).
Nasogastric tube feeding 
This is simple, readily available, comparatively lowcost and most suit
able for shortterm feeding (up to 4 weeks). Insertion of a nasogastric 
tube requires care and training (see Box 23.40 and Box 22.16). Patients 
with reduced conscious level may pull at tubes and displace them: a 
nasal ‘bridle’ device can help by xing the tube around the nasal septum, 
unless forcible tugging is likely.
Gastrostomy feeding 
Gastrostomy is a more invasive insertion technique, but easier to man
age when longerterm feeding (>4 weeks) is required. Gastrostomies are 
less liable to displacement than nasogastric tubes and allow for fewer 
feed interruptions, so more of the prescribed feeds can be administered. 
An endoscopic, minimally invasive, technique is usual. Both endoscopic 
and radiological gastrostomy insertion involve inating the stomach, 
thus opposing it to the anterior abdominal wall. The stomach is then 
punctured percutaneously and a suitable tube placed (Fig. 22.11) with 
an internal retainer device (plastic ‘bumper’ or balloon) that sits snugly 
against the gastric mucosa, and an external retainer to limit movement. 
These retainers hold the gastric wall against the abdominal wall, effec
tively creating a controlled gastrocutaneous (‘Eck’) stula that matures 
over 2–4 weeks. Patient assessment and selection prior to gastrostomy 
placement should be done by a multidisciplinary nutrition support team, 
to weigh benets against risks, recognising the need for stoma care 
(Box 22.18 and see Box 22.26).
Post-pyloric feeding 
In patients with a high risk of pulmonary aspiration or gastroparesis, 
it may be preferable to feed into the jejunum (via a nasojejunal tube, 
gastrostomy with jejunal extension or direct placement into jejunum by 
radiological, endoscopic or surgical means).
Parenteral nutrition 
This is strictly reserved for clinical situations where the absorptive func
tioning of the intestine is severely impaired, usually by resection, and 
will remain so indenitely. Nutrition is delivered directly into a largedi
ameter systemic vein, completely bypassing the intestine and portal 
22.16  Complications of nasogastric tube feeding
 Tube misplacement, e.g. tracheal or bronchial placement (rarely, intracranial 
placement)
 Reux of gastric contents and pulmonary aspiration
 Interrupted feeding or inadequate feed volumes
 Refeeding syndrome
22.17  Diarrhoea related to enteral feeding
Factors contributing to diarrhoea
 Fibre-free feed may reduce short-chain fatty acid production in colon
 Fat malabsorption
 Inappropriate osmotic load
 Pre-existing primary gut problem (e.g. lactose intolerance)
 Infection
Management
 Often responds well to a bre-containing feed or a switch to an alternative feed
 Simple antidiarrhoeal agents (e.g. loperamide) can be very effective
A
B
C
D
Fig. 22.11 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement.
insertion of a cannula through the anterior abdominal wall into the stomach, a guidewire is threaded through the cannula and grasped by the endoscopic forceps or snare. 
mouth, oesophagus and stomach to exit on the anterior abdominal wall, and the endoscope is repassed to conrm the site of placement of the retention device. The latter 
closely abuts the gastric mucosa; its position is maintained by an external xation device (see inset). It is also possible to place PEG tubes using uoroscopic guidance when 
endoscopy is difcult (radiologically inserted gastrostomy).
22.18  Complications of gastrostomy tube feeding
 Reux of gastric contents and pulmonary aspiration (same as nasogastric tube)
 Risks of insertion (pain, damage to intra-abdominal structures, intestinal 
perforation, pulmonary aspiration, infection, death)
 Risk of tumour ‘seeding’ if an endoscopic ‘pull-through’ technique is used in 
head and neck or oesophageal cancer patients
 Refeeding syndrome

[[p825]]
Disorders of altered energy balance     771
22
venous system. As well as being more invasive, more expensive and less 
physiological than the enteral route, parenteral nutrition has many more 
complications (Box 22.19), mainly infective and metabolic (disturbances 
of electrolytes, hyperglycaemia). Strict adherence to aseptic practice 
in handling catheters and careful monitoring of clinical (pulse, blood 
pressure and temperature) and biochemical (urea, electrolytes, glu
cose and liver function tests) parameters are necessary to minimise risk 
(Box 22.20). Overfeeding is a particular hazard, causing fatty liver and 
potentially liver failure and death: accurate estimation of energy require
ment is needed, preferably measurement using a metabolic cart.
The parenteral route is most often required in acutely ill patients with 
multiorgan failure, in severely undernourished patients undergoing sur
gery which cannot be delayed, and with short bowel syndrome following 
resection. One by one, previous indications for parenteral feeding, e.g. 
thoracic duct rupture, have been found responsive to enteral feeding. 
There are major ethical issues around starting, and stopping, parenteral 
feeding, particularly if the patient lacks capacity.
Intestinal failure (‘short bowel syndrome’) 
Intestinal failure (IF) is dened as a reduction in gut function to below 
the minimum necessary for both adequate absorption of macronutri
ents and/or water and electrolytes. Intravenous supplementation is then 
required to support health and/or growth.
IF can be classied according to its onset, metabolic consequences 
and expected outcome.
 Type 1 IF: a common acuteonset, usually selflimiting condition with 
few longterm sequelae. It is most often seen following abdominal 
surgery or in the context of critical illness. Intravenous uid and  
electrolyte support may be required for a few days to weeks.
 Type 2 IF: far less common, following an acute intraabdominal 
event (ischaemia, volvulus, trauma or perioperative complication) 
often with septic and metabolic problems, creating complex  
nutritional issues, requiring support for weeks to months with  
multidisciplinary input (nursing, dietetic, medical, biochemical,  
surgical, radiological and microbiological).
 Type 3 IF: a chronic condition in which patients are metabolically 
stable but require full intravenous nutrition support over months to 
years. It may or may not be reversible.
Management 
IF is a complex clinical problem with profound and wideranging physiolog
ical and psychological effects, which is best cared for by a dedicated multi
disciplinary team. Most IF results from short bowel syndrome (Box 22.21), 
with chronic intestinal dysmotility and chronic intestinal pseudoobstruc
tion accounting for most of the remainder. The severity of the physiological 
upset correlates well with how much functioning intestine remains (rather 
than how much has been removed). Measuring the remaining small bowel 
(from the duodenojejunal exure) at the time of surgery is essential to plan 
future therapy (Box 22.22). The aims of treatment are to:
 provide nutrition, water and electrolytes to maintain health with nor
mal body weight (and allow normal growth in affected children)
 utilise the enteral or oral routes as much as possible
 minimise the burden of complications of the underlying disease, as 
well as the IF and its treatment
 allow a good quality of life.
If the ileum and especially the ileum and colon remain intact, longterm 
nutritional support can usually be avoided. Unlike the jejunum, the ileum 
can adapt to increase absorption of water and electrolytes over time. The 
presence of the colon (part or wholly intact) further improves uid absorp
tion, and can contribute energy from absorption of bacterially produced 
shortchain fatty acids.
Jejunum–colon patients 
Those with an anastomosis between jejunum and residual colon (jeju
num–colon patients) may look well in the days or initial weeks following 
the acute insult but develop proteinenergy malnutrition and signicant 
weight loss, becoming seriously undernourished over weeks to months.
Stool volume is determined by oral intake, with higher intakes causing 
more diarrhoea and the potential for dehydration, sodium and magne
sium depletion and acute renal failure. The absence of the ileum leads 
to deciencies of vitamin B12 and fatsoluble vitamins. The absorption of 
various drugs, including thyroxine, digoxin and warfarin, can be reduced. 
Approximately 45% of patients will develop gallstones due to disruption 
of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids, and 25% develop calcium 
oxalate renal stones due to increased colonic absorption of oxalate (see 
Fig. 23.44).
22.19  Complications of parenteral nutrition
Intravenous catheter complications
 Insertion (pneumothorax, haemothorax, arterial puncture)
 Catheter infection (sepsis, discitis, pulmonary or cerebral abscess)
 Central venous thrombosis
Metabolic complications
 Refeeding syndrome
 Electrolyte imbalance
 Hyperglycaemia
 Hyperalimentation
 Fluid overload
 Hepatic steatosis/brosis/cirrhosis
22.20  Parameters for monitoring parenteral nutrition 
in hospital
Parameter
Monitoring requirement
Electrolytes (sodium, potassium, 
magnesium)
Bone prole (calcium, phosphate)
Liver function tests (bilirubin, 
alanine aminotransferase, alkaline 
phosphatase, γ-glutamyl transferase)
Markers of inammation
(C-reactive protein, leucocyte count)
Daily until stable and then 2–3 times 
per week
Blood glucose
At least twice daily until stable and 
then daily
Cholesterol and triglycerides
Weekly initially, reducing to every  
3 months when stable
22.21  Causes of short bowel syndrome in adults
 Mesenteric ischaemia
 Post-operative complications
 Crohn's disease
 Trauma
 Neoplasia
 Radiation enteritis
22.22  Likely requirements for support according to length 
of intact residual small bowel
Residual 
length of 
jejunum (cm)
Oral uid 
restriction
Oral glucose/
electrolyte 
solution
Intravenous 
uids
Parenteral 
nutrition
<200
Yes
Yes
May avoid
May avoid
<100
Yes
Yes
Yes
May avoid
<75
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

[[p826]]
772    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Jejunostomy patients 
Patients left with a stoma (usually a jejunostomy) behave very differently, 
although stool volumes are again determined by oral intake. The jejunum 
is intrinsically highly permeable, and in the absence of the ileum and its 
net absorptive role, high losses of uid, sodium and magnesium dom
inate the clinical picture from the outset. Dehydration, hyponatraemia, 
hypomagnesaemia and acute renal failure are the most immediate prob
lems but proteinenergy malnutrition will also develop. The jejunum has 
no real potential for adaptation in terms of absorption, so it is essential to 
recognise and address dehydration and electrolyte disturbance early as 
it is likely to be permanent (Box 22.23).
Small bowel and multivisceral transplantation 
Longterm intravenous nutritional support is the mainstay of therapy 
for chronic IF but has its own morbidity and mortality. The 10year sur
vival for patients on longterm home parenteral nutrition is approxi
mately 90%. Most deaths are due to the underlying disease process but 
5%–11% will die from direct complications of parenteral nutrition itself 
(especially catheterrelated sepsvis). A minority of patients with chronic 
IF, for whom the safe administration of parenteral nutrition has become 
difcult or impossible, may benet from small bowel transplantation 
(Box 22.24). The rst successful small bowel transplant was carried out in 
1988. The introduction of tacrolimus allowed a satisfactory balance of immu
nosuppression, avoiding rejection while minimising sepsis. Since then, over 
2000 transplants have been performed worldwide. Survival rates continue 
to improve, for both isolated small bowel and multivisceral transplantation 
(small bowel along with a combination of liver and/or kidney and/or pan
creas), although major complications are still frequent (Box 22.25). Current 
5year survival rates are 50%–80%, with better outcomes for younger 
patients and those receiving isolated small bowel procedures.
Further developments in treatment of intestinal failure 
Longacting recombinant human GLP2 analogues, such as teduglutide 
and apraglutide, enhance intestinal absorption by:
 increasing intestinal blood ow to the intestine
 increasing portal blood ow away from the intestine
 slowing intestinal transit times
 reducing gastric acid secretion.
In patients with short bowel syndrome and IF, the increased intesti
nal absorptive function induced by teduglutide can signicantly reduce 
the volumes of parenteral uids and nutrition required, and may allow 
some patients to regain independence from parenteral support. Side
effects include abdominal cramps and distension (seen in 50%), peri
stomal swelling, pain, nausea, vomiting and local injection site reactions. 
Since teduglutide stimulates proliferation of the intestinal epithelium, it 
should be avoided in those with history of gastrointestinal malignancy. 
In patients with a colon, a pretreatment screening colonoscopy should 
be undertaken to detect and remove any polyps. Use of teduglutide is 
currently limited by high costs.
Articial nutrition at the end of life 
In some situations, assisted nutrition may not reverse weight loss 
or improve quality and duration of life. Such scenarios may present 
when approaching the end of life, or with weight loss due to progres
sive incurable disease, such as advanced respiratory or cardiac fail
ure, malignancy or dementia. A decision not to intervene may then be 
appropriate. An intervention that merely prolongs life without preserving 
or adding to its quality is seldom justied as in the patient’s best inter
est, particularly if the intervention is not without risk itself. A thought
ful and sensitive discussion explaining what articial nutrition can and 
cannot achieve is vital, involving the multidisciplinary team looking after 
the patient, along with carers, next of kin and, in some cases, legal 
representatives (Box 22.26).
Nutrition and dementia 
Weight loss is seen commonly in older people (Box 22.27) or in those 
with dementia, and nutritional and eating problems are a signicant 
source of concern for those caring for them. It is appropriate to:
 screen for malnutrition
 assess specic eating difculties (e.g. Edinburgh Feeding Evaluation 
in Dementia questionnaire)
 monitor and document body weight
 encourage adequate intake of food
 therapeutic trial of oral nutritional supplements.
Undernutrition can be distressing and there may be specic circum
stances where a trial of enteral feeding can be justied (see Box 22.26). 
22.23  Management of short bowel patients 
(and ‘high-output’ stoma)
Accurate charting of uid intake and losses
 Vital: oral intake determines stool volume and should be restricted rather than 
encouraged
Dehydration and hyponatraemia
 Must rst be corrected intravenously to restore circulating volume and reduce 
thirst
 Stool volume should be minimised and any ongoing uid imbalance between 
oral intake and stool losses replenished intravenously
Measures to reduce stool volume losses
 Restrict oral uid intake to ≤500 mL/24 hrs
 Give a further 1000 mL oral uid as oral rehydration solution containing 
90–120 mmol Na/L
 Slow intestinal transit (to maximise opportunities for absorption):
 Loperamide, codeine phosphate
 Reduce volume of intestinal secretions:
 Gastric acid: omeprazole 20 mg/day orally
 Other secretions: octreotide 50–100 µg 3 times daily by subcutaneous 
injection
Measures to increase absorption
 Teduglutide (a recombinant glucagon-like peptide 2) signicantly reduces 
requirements for intravenous uid and nutritional support by promoting growth 
and integrity of small bowel mucosa
22.24  Potential indications for small bowel transplantation
Complications of central venous catheters
 Central venous thrombosis leading to loss of two or more intravenous access 
points
 Severe or recurrent line sepsis
 Recurrent severe acute kidney injury related to dehydration
Metabolic complications of parenteral nutrition
 Parenteral nutrition-related liver brosis, cirrhosis and liver failure
22.25  Complications of small bowel/multivisceral transplantation
 Sepsis:
Enteric bacterial species
Staphylococci
Fungal species
 Cytomegalovirus infection
 Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD)
 Graft-versus-host disease
 Acute and chronic rejection
 Chronic renal impairment

[[p827]]
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases     773
22
Success is more likely in those with mild to moderate dementia, after 
a reversible crisis precipitated by some acute event. In dementia, tube 
feeding rarely improves quality of life (Fig. 22.12), but PEG is better toler
ated than the nasal route.
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases 
Vitamins 
Vitamins are organic compounds with vital roles as cofactors in certain 
metabolic pathways. They are categorised into the fatsoluble (vitamins 
A, D, E and K) and watersoluble (vitamins of the B complex group and 
vitamin C).
Recommended daily intakes of micronutrients (Box 22.28) vary 
between countries. In the UK, the ‘reference nutrient intake’ (RNI) has 
been calculated as the mean plus two standard deviations (SD) of daily 
intake in the population, which therefore describes intake that satises 
97.5% of the population. The lower reference nutrient intake (LRNI) is the 
mean minus 2 SD, below which may be insufcient for 2.5% of the pop
ulation. These dietary reference values (DRV) have superseded the terms 
RDI (recommended daily intake) and RDA (recommended daily amount) 
still used in other countries. Additional amounts of some micronutrients 
may be required in pregnancy and lactation (Box 22.29).
Vitamin deciency diseases are most prevalent in lowerincome coun
tries, but still occur in highincome countries. Older people (Box 22.30) and 
alcohol misusers are at risk of deciencies in B vitamins and in vitamins D 
and C. Nutritional deciencies in pregnancy can affect either the mother or 
the developing fetus, and extra increments of vitamins are recommended 
in the UK (see Box 22.29). Darkerskinned individuals living at higher lati
tude, and those who cover up or do not go outside are at increased risk 
of vitamin D deciency due to inadequate sunlight exposure. Fatsoluble 
deciencies, notably and catastrophically vitamin E, can result from rare 
abetalipoproteinaemia. Deciencies of vitamins occur with intestinal 
malabsorption, both primary gastrointestinal problems and secondary 
to hepatic or pancreatic diseases or to autoimmune conditions (e.g. 
coeliac, pernicious anaemia) (Box 22.31). Routine dietary supplements 
are recommended for these ‘atrisk’ groups. Doctors must also be alert 
to micronutrient deciencies induced by some drugs, and from extreme 
diets. Severe carbohydrate restriction limits thiamine consumption and 
beri beri can develop. Some extreme, nonevidencebased, diets can 
jeopardise vitamin A status.
There is a great deal of unscrupulous marketing and claims about vita
mins. Some vitamins may have pharmacological actions when given at 
supraphysiological doses, such vitamin A for acne. Taking vitamin sup
plements is highly promoted for commercial reasons, and fashionable 
in many population sectors, although there is no evidence of benet. 
Serious toxic effects are met with high dosages of vitamins A, B6 and D. 
Cocktails of micronutrients referred to as ‘antioxidant’ (vitamin C, beta
carotene and often selenium or zinc) are still marketed as remedies to 
prevent heart disease, although large clinical trials have shown more, not 
less, heart disease in supplemented groups.
Investigation of suspected vitamin deciency or excess may involve 
biochemical assessment of body stores (Box 22.32). Measurements in 
blood should be interpreted carefully, however, in conjunction with the 
clinical presentation.
Fat-soluble vitamins 
Vitamin A (retinol) 
Preformed retinol is found only in foods of animal origin. Vitamin A can 
also be derived from carotenes, which are present in green and coloured 
vegetables and some fruits. Carotenes provide most of the total vitamin 
A in the UK and constitute the only supply in vegans. Retinol is converted 
to several other important molecules:
 11-cis-retinaldehyde is part of the photoreceptor complex in rods of 
the retina.
 Retinoic acid induces differentiation of epithelial cells by binding to 
specic nuclear receptors, which induce responsive genes. In vita
min A deciency, mucussecreting cells are replaced by keratinpro
ducing cells.
 Retinoids are necessary for normal growth, fetal development, fertil
ity, haematopoiesis and immune function.
The most important consequence of vitamin A deciency is irreversible 
blindness in young children, and it also contributes to worse outcomes 
from many infections, such as measles. Asia is most notably affected 
and the problem is being addressed through widespread vitamin A 
22.26  Ethical and legal considerations in the management of 
articial nutritional support
 Care of the sick involves the duty of providing adequate uid and nutrients
 Food and uid should not be withheld from a patient who expresses a desire to 
eat and drink, unless there is a medical contraindication (e.g. risk of aspiration)
 A treatment plan should include consideration of nutritional issues and should 
be agreed by all members of the health-care team
 In the situation of palliative care, tube feeding should be instituted only if it is 
needed to relieve symptoms
 Tube feeding is usually regarded in law as a medical treatment. Like other 
treatments, the need for such support should be reviewed on a regular basis 
and changes made in the light of clinical circumstances
 A competent adult patient must give consent for any invasive procedures, 
including passage of a nasogastric tube or insertion of a central venous  
cannula
 If a patient is unable to give consent, the health-care team should act in that 
person's best interests, taking into account any wishes previously expressed by 
the patient and the views of family
 Under certain specied circumstances (e.g. anorexia nervosa), it is appropriate 
to provide articial nutritional support to the unwilling patient
Adapted from British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition guidelines, www.bapen.org.uk.
22.27  Energy balance in old age
 Body composition: muscle mass falls with inactivity, and percentage of body 
fat increases.
 Energy expenditure: with lower lean body mass, basal metabolic rate is 
decreased and energy requirements are reduced.
 Weight loss: after weight gain throughout adult life, weight often falls beyond 
the age of 75–80 years. This may reect decreased appetite, loss of smell and 
taste, and decreased interest in and nancial resources for food preparation, 
especially after loss of a partner.
 BMI: less reliable in old age as height is lost (due to kyphosis, osteoporotic 
crush fractures, loss of intervertebral disc spaces). Alternative measurements 
include arm demispan and knee height, which can be extrapolated to estimate 
height.
Intake
Cognitive
impairment
Dementia
Cognitive
impairment
Age-related
changes and
diseases
Frailty
Sarcopenia
Weight loss
Nutritional
deficiencies
Fig. 22.12 Malnutrition in dementia – a vicious circle. From Volkert D, 
Chourdakis M, Faxen-Irving G, et al. ESPEN guidelines on nutrition in dementia. Clin 
Nutr 2015; 34:1052–1073.

[[p828]]
774    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
22.28  Summary of clinically important vitamins and WHO recommended daily intakes1
Vitamin
Sources2
Reference nutrient intake (RNI)3
Rich
Important
Fat-soluble
A (retinol)
Liver
Milk and milk products, eggs, sh oils
700 µg men
600 µg women
D (cholecalciferol)
Fish oils
Ultraviolet exposure to skin
Egg yolks, margarine, fortied cereals
10 µg if >65 years or no sunlight 
exposure
E (tocopherol)
Sunower oil
Vegetables, nuts, seed oils
No RNI. Safe intake:
4 mg men
3 mg women
K (phylloquinone, menaquinone)
Soya oil, menaquinones produced by 
intestinal bacteria
Green vegetables
No RNI. Safe intake: 1 µg/kg
Water-soluble
B1 (thiamin)
Pork
Cereals, grains, beans
0.8 mg per 9.68 MJ (2000 kcal) 
energy intake
B2 (riboavin)
Milk
Milk and milk products, breakfast 
cereals, bread
1.3 mg men
1.1 mg women
B3 (niacin, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide)
Meat, cereals
17 mg men
13 mg women
B6 (pyridoxine)
Meat, sh, potatoes, bananas
Vegetables, intestinal microora 
synthesis
1.4 mg men
1.2 mg women
Folate
Liver
Green leafy vegetables, fortied 
breakfast cereals
200 µg
B12 (cobalamin)
Animal products
Bacterial colonisation
1.5 µg
Biotin
Egg yolk
Intestinal ora
No RNI. Safe intake: 10–200 µg
C (ascorbic acid)
Citrus fruit
Fresh fruit, fresh and frozen 
vegetables
40 mg
1See WHO document: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42716/9241546123.pdf?ua = 1.  2Rich sources contain the nutrient in high concentration but are not generally eaten in large 
amounts; important sources contain less but contribute most because larger amounts are eaten. 3Requirements vary by age, and recommendations differ between countries. These gures are mostly 
generous: deciency is unlikely unless intakes are well below them.
22.29  Nutrition in pregnancy and lactation
 Weight gain to reach BMI = 30 kg/m2 in the third trimester is desirable. 
Heavier women need not gain so much.
 Obesity: promotes gestational diabetes and fetal abnormalities, but weight loss 
is undesirable during pregnancy. Overweight women should reach a healthier 
weight before pregnancy.
 Energy requirements: increased in both mother and fetus but can be met 
through reduced maternal energy expenditure.
 Micronutrient requirements: adaptive mechanisms ensure increased 
uptake of minerals in pregnancy, but extra increments of some are required 
during lactation (see Box 22.32). Additional increments of some vitamins are 
recommended during pregnancy and lactation:
Vitamin A: for growth and maintenance of the fetus, and to provide some 
reserve (important in some countries to prevent blindness associated with 
vitamin A deciency). Teratogenic in excessive amounts.
Vitamin D: to ensure bone and dental development in the infant. Higher 
incidences of hypocalcaemia, hypoparathyroidisim and defective dental 
enamel have been seen in infants of women not taking vitamin D 
supplements at >50° latitude.
Folate: taken pre-conceptually and during the rst trimester, reduces the 
incidence of neural tube defects by 70%.
Vitamin B12: in lactation only.
Thiamin: to meet increased fetal energy demands.
Riboavin: to meet extra demands.
Niacin: in lactation only.
Vitamin C: for the last trimester to maintain maternal stores as fetal 
demands increase.
Iodine: in countries with high consumption of staple foods (e.g. brassicas, 
maize, bamboo shoots) that contain goitrogens (thiocyanates or 
perchlorates) that interfere with iodine uptake, supplements prevent infants 
being born with cretinism.
22.30  Vitamin deciency in old age
 Requirements: although requirements for energy fall with age, those for 
micronutrients do not. If dietary energy intake falls, a vitamin-rich diet is 
required to compensate.
 Vitamin D: levels are commonly low due to low total dietary intake, low sun 
exposure and less efcient skin conversion. This leads to bone loss and 
fractures. Supplements have modest effectiveness for preventing fractures, so 
should be given to those at risk of falls in institutional care, but other measures 
to prevent falls are vital.
 Vitamin B12 deciency: a causal relationship with dementia has not been 
identied, but it does produce neuropsychiatric effects and should be checked 
in all those with declining cognitive function.
22.31  Common gastrointestinal disorders that may be 
associated with malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins
 Biliary obstruction
 Pancreatic exocrine insufciency
 Coeliac disease
 Ileal inammation or resection
supplementation programmes. Adults are not usually at risk because 
liver stores can supply vitamin A when foods containing vitamin A are 
unavailable.
Early deciency causes impaired adaptation to the dark (night blind
ness), but this is rarely recognised. Keratinisation of the cornea (xeroph
thalmia) gives rise to characteristic Bitot's spots and progresses to 
keratomalacia, with corneal ulceration, scarring and irreversible blindness 

[[p829]]
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases     775
22
22.32  Biochemical assessment of vitamin status
Nutrient
Biochemical assessments of deciency or excess
Vitamin A
Serum retinol may be low in deciency
Serum retinyl esters: when vitamin A toxicity is suspected
Vitamin D
Plasma/serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D): reects 
body stores (liver and adipose tissue)
Plasma/serum 1,25(OH)2D: difcult to interpret
Vitamin E
Serum tocopherol:cholesterol ratio
Vitamin K
Coagulation assays (e.g. prothrombin time)
Plasma vitamin K
Vitamin B1
(thiamin)
Whole-blood vitamin B1 or red blood cell transketolase 
activity
(Treat suspected deciency without waiting for results)
Vitamin B2
(riboavin)
Red blood cell glutathione reductase activity or whole-
blood vitamin B2
Vitamin B3
(niacin)
Urinary metabolites: 1-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide, 
1-methylnicotinamide
Vitamin B6
Plasma pyridoxal phosphate or erythrocyte transaminase 
activation coefcient
Vitamin B12
Plasma B12: poor measure of overall vitamin B12 status but 
will detect severe deciency
Alternatives (methylmalonic acid and holotranscobalamin) 
are not used routinely
Folate
Red blood cell folate
Plasma folate: reects recent intake but also detects 
unmetabolised folic acid from foods and supplements
Vitamin C
Leucocyte ascorbic acid: assesses vitamin C tissue stores
Plasma ascorbic acid: reects recent (daily) intake
(Fig. 22.13). In countries where vitamin A deciency is endemic, pregnant 
women should be advised to eat dark green, leafy vegetables and yellow 
fruits (to build up stores of retinol in the fetal liver), and infants should 
be fed the same. The WHO is according high priority to prevention in 
communities where xerophthalmia occurs, giving single prophylactic 
oral doses of 60 mg retinyl palmitate (providing 200 000 U retinol) to pre
school children. This also reduces mortality from gastroenteritis and res
piratory infections.
Repeated moderate or high doses of retinol can cause liver damage, 
hyperostosis and teratogenicity. Women in countries where deciency 
is not endemic are therefore advised not to take vitamin A supple
ments in pregnancy. Acute overdose leads to nausea and headache, 
increased intracranial pressure and skin desquamation. Excessive 
intake of carotene causes harmless orange pigmentation of the skin 
(hypercarotenosis).
Vitamin D 
Vitamin D is required for musculoskeletal health, specically preventing 
rickets and osteomalacia. Adequate levels of vitamin D may also be 
important in some other conditions and may improve immune function. 
The natural form of vitamin D, cholecalciferol, is formed in the skin by 
the action of ultraviolet (UV) light on 7dehydrocholesterol, a metabolite 
of cholesterol. Vitamin D is converted in the liver to 25hydroxyvitamin 
D (25(OH)D), which is further hydroxylated in the kidneys to 1,25dihy
droxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D), the most active form of the vitamin (see 
Fig. 26.62). This 1,25(OH)2D activates specic intracellular receptors that 
inuence calcium metabolism, bone mineralisation and tissue differentia
tion. The synthetic form, ergocalciferol or vitamin D2, is considered to be 
less potent than endogenous D3
In much of the world, skin exposure to sunlight is the main source. 
Moving away from the equator, the intensity of UV light decreases, so 
A
B
Fig. 22.13 Eye signs of vitamin A deciency. 
Bitot spots in xerophthalmia, 
showing the white triangular plaques (arrows).
Keratomalacia in a 14-month-old 
child. There is liquefactive necrosis affecting the greater part of the cornea, with 
typical sparing of the superior aspect. (A) Courtesy of Institute of Ophthalmology, 
Moorelds Eye Hospital, London. (B) From WHO. Report of a joint WHO/USAID 
meeting, vitamin A deciency and xerophthalmia (WHO technical report series 
no. 5 W); 1976.
that at a latitude above 50° (including northern Europe) vitamin D is not 
synthesised in winter, and even above 30° there is seasonal variation. 
The large body store, in the liver, normally accumulated during the sum
mer, is consumed during the winter. The limited sunlight exposure in 
the UK has led to recommendations that everyone over the age of 1 
should be given 10 µg vitamin D supplement daily, with a lower dose 
of 8.5–10 µg in breastfed babies under 1 year of age. Formula milk is 
fortied with vitamin D so further supplements are only necessary when 
< 500 mL of formula milk is consumed daily. Supplementation at these 
doses is appropriate for babies and people in old age who are conned 
indoors, and those who habitually cover up their skin when outdoors. 
The richest food sources are oily sh such as salmon, sardines, herring 
and mackerel, red meat, liver and eggs. Breakfast cereals, margarines 
and milk products are widely fortied with vitamin D in some parts of 
Europe and in North America.
The effects of vitamin D deciency (calcium deciency, rickets and 
osteomalacia) are described on page 1053. An analogue of vita
min D (calcipotriol) is used for treatment of skin conditions such as 
psoriasis.
Excessive doses of cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol or the hydroxylated 
metabolites cause hypercalcaemia. Partly because redundant receptors 
for vitamin D are present in most tissues, commercial agencies have pro
posed a role for vitamin D in nearly every human disease, and market it 
in large doses. Randomised trials are required to refute each claim, and 
they have nearly all been refuted.

[[p830]]
776    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
Vitamin E 
There are eight related fatsoluble substances with vitamin E activity. The 
most important dietary form is αtocopherol. Vitamin E has many direct 
metabolic actions:
 It prevents oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell mem
branes by free radicals.
 It helps maintain cell membrane structure.
 It affects DNA synthesis and cell signalling.
 It is involved in the antiinammatory and immune systems.
Human deciency is rare and has been described only in premature 
infants and in malabsorption, notably with abetalipoproteinaemia. It can 
cause a mild haemolytic anaemia, ataxia and visual scotomas. Vitamin 
E intakes of up to 3200 mg/day (1000fold greater than recommended 
intakes) are considered safe. Diets rich in vitamin E (e.g. vegetable oils, 
nuts and seeds) are consumed in countries with lower rates of coronary 
heart disease, but randomised controlled trials have not demonstrated 
cardioprotective effects of vitamin E or other antioxidants.
Vitamin K 
Vitamin K is supplied in the diet mainly as vitamin K1 (phylloquinone) in 
the UK, or as vitamin K2 (menaquinone) from fermented products in parts 
of Asia. Vitamin K2 is also synthesised by bacteria in the colon. Vitamin 
K is a cofactor for carboxylation reactions: in particular, the production 
of γcarboxyglutamate (gla). Gla residues are found in four of the coag
ulation factor proteins (II, VII, IX and X; p. 927), conferring their capac
ity to bind to phospholipid surfaces in the presence of calcium. Other 
important gla proteins are osteocalcin and matrix gla protein, which are 
important in bone mineralisation.
Vitamin K deciency leads to delayed coagulation and bleeding. In 
obstructive jaundice, dietary vitamin K is not absorbed and it is essen
tial to administer the vitamin in parenteral form before surgery. Warfarin 
and related anticoagulants act by antagonising vitamin K. Vitamin K is 
given routinely to newborn babies to prevent haemorrhagic disease. 
Symptoms of excess have been reported only in infants, with synthetic 
preparations linked to haemolysis and liver damage.
Water-soluble vitamins 
Thiamin (vitamin B1) 
Thiamin is mainly supplied by nuts and seeds, including legumes and 
wholegrain cereals. Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) is a cofactor for 
enzyme reactions involved in the metabolism of macronutrients (carbo
hydrate, fat and alcohol), including:
 decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetylcoenzyme A, which bridges 
between glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle
 transketolase activity in the hexose monophosphate shunt pathway
 decarboxylation of αketoglutarate to succinate in the Krebs cycle.
In thiamin deciency, cells cannot metabolise glucose aerobically to 
generate energy as ATP. Neuronal cells are most vulnerable because 
they depend almost exclusively on glucose for energy requirements. 
Impaired glucose oxidation also causes an accumulation of pyruvic and 
lactic acids, which produce vasodilatation and increased cardiac output.
Deciency – beri-beri 
Thiamin deciency constitutes a clinical emergency, causing sudden cat
astrophic and often permanent damage if treatment is delayed. It occurs 
when sufcient wholegrain cereals or other seeds and nuts are not con
sumed, classically in the developing world, from diets based on polished 
rice. It also occurs among people who follow extreme lowcarbohydrate 
diets, for example for weight loss. It is especially encountered in chronic 
alcohol misusers, among whom poor diet, impaired absorption, storage 
and phosphorylation of thiamin in the liver, and the increased requirements 
for thiamin to metabolise ethanol, all contribute to deciency.
The body has very limited stores of thiamin, so deciency can develop 
after only 1 month on a thiaminfree diet. There are two forms of the 
disease in adults, which may coexist:
 Dry (or neurological) beri-beri may manifest with chronic peripheral 
neuropathy and with wrist and/or foot drop. However its most dra
matic presentation is with Wernicke encephalopathy, the triad of 
ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and confusion, which may progress to per
manent Korsakoff psychosis.
 Wet (or cardiac) beri-beri causes generalised oedema due to biven
tricular heart failure with pulmonary congestion and ECG changes.
Wet beriberi usually recovers full and swiftly with thiamin replacement. 
However, with dry beriberi, response to thiamin administration is not uni
formly good. Multivitamin and mineral therapy seems to produce some 
improvement, however, suggesting that other dietary deciencies may 
be involved, with zinc particularly incriminated.
Possible thiamin deciency, and any clinical suggestions of Wernicke 
encephalopathy or wet beriberi, should be treated on suspicion, imme
diately, without waiting for biochemical conrmation of the diagnosis, 
with intravenous vitamin B and C mixture. Korsakoff psychosis, brain 
damage with failure to create memory, can develop rapidly, and is irre
versible and does not respond to thiamin treatment.
Riboavin (vitamin B2 ) 
Riboavin is required for the avin cofactors involved in oxidation–reduc
tion reactions. It is widely distributed in animal and vegetable foods. 
Levels are low in staple cereals but germination, e.g. as bean sprouts, 
increases its content. It is destroyed under alkaline conditions by heat and 
by exposure to sunlight. Deciency is rare in developed countries. It mainly 
affects the tongue and lips and manifests as glossitis, angular stomatitis 
and  cheilosis. The genitals may be involved, as well as the skin areas 
rich in sebaceous glands, causing nasolabial or facial dyssebacea. Rapid 
 recovery usually follows administration of riboavin 10 mg daily by mouth.
Niacin (vitamin B3 ) 
Niacin encompasses nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. Nicotinamide is 
an essential part of the two pyridine nucleotides, nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADP), which play a key role as hydrogen acceptors and donors for 
many enzymes. Niacin can be synthesised in the body in limited amounts 
from the amino acid tryptophan.
Deciency – pellagra 
Pellagra was formerly endemic among poor people who subsisted 
chiey on maize, which contains niacytin, a form of niacin that the 
body is unable to utilise. Pellagra can develop in only 8 weeks in 
individuals eating diets that are very decient in niacin and trypto
phan. It remains a problem in parts of Africa, and is occasionally seen 
in alcohol misusers and in patients with chronic small intestinal dis
ease in developed countries. Pellagra can occur in Hartnup disease, 
a genetic disorder characterised by impaired absorption of several 
amino acids, including tryptophan. It is also seen occasionally in 
carcinoid syndrome, when tryptophan is consumed in the excessive 
production of 5hydroxytryptamine (5HT, serotonin). Pellagra is the 
‘Disease of the three Ds’:
 Dermatitis. Characteristic erythema resembling severe sunburn, 
appearing symmetrically over the parts of the body exposed to sun
light, particularly the limbs (Fig. 22.14) and especially on the neck 
but not the face (Casal’s necklace). The skin lesions may progress to 
vesiculation, cracking, exudation and secondary infection.
 Diarrhoea. Often associated with anorexia, nausea, glossitis and 
dysphagia, reecting the presence of a noninfective inammation 
that extends throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
 Dementia. In severe deciency, delirium occurs acutely and demen
tia develops if untreated.

[[p831]]
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases     777
22
Treatment is with nicotinamide, 100 mg 3 times daily orally or par
enterally. The response is usually rapid. Within 24 hours the erythema 
diminishes, the diarrhoea ceases and a striking improvement occurs in 
the patient's mental state.
Toxicity 
Excessive intakes of niacin may lead to reversible hepatotoxicity. Nicotinic 
acid is a lipidlowering agent but doses above 200 mg a day cause vas
odilatory symptoms (‘ushing’ and/or hypotension).
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6 ) 
Pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine are different forms of vitamin B6
that undergo phosphorylation to produce pyridoxal 5phosphate (PLP). 
PLP is the cofactor for a large number of enzymes involved in the 
metabolism of amino acids. Vitamin B6 is available in most foods.
Deciency is rare, although certain drugs, such as isoniazid and peni
cillamine, act as chemical antagonists to pyridoxine. Pyridoxine adminis
tration is effective in isoniazidinduced peripheral neuropathy and some 
cases of sideroblastic anaemia. Large doses of vitamin B6 have an 
antiemetic effect in radiotherapyinduced nausea. Although vitamin B6
supplements have become popular in the treatment of nausea in preg
nancy, carpal tunnel syndrome and premenstrual syndrome, there is no 
convincing evidence of benet. Very high doses of vitamin B6 taken for 
several months can cause unpleasant sensory polyneuropathy, which 
may become permanent.
Biotin 
Biotin is a coenzyme in the synthesis of fatty acids, isoleucine and 
valine, and is also involved in gluconeogenesis. Deciency results from 
consuming very large quantities of raw egg whites (> 30% energy intake) 
because the avidin they contain binds to and inactivates biotin in the 
intestine. It may also be seen after long periods of total parenteral nutri
tion. The clinical features of deciency include scaly dermatitis, alopecia 
and paraesthesia.
Folate (folic acid) 
Folates exist in many forms. The main circulating form is 5methyltetrahy
drofolate. The natural forms, in plant foods, are prone to oxidation. Folic 
acid is the stable synthetic form. Folate works as a methyl donor for cellular 
methylation and protein synthesis, particularly for haematopoiesis. It is also 
directly involved in DNA and RNA synthesis, and requirements increase 
during embryonic development. Deciency states include dietary insuf
ciency and also altered folate metabolism, which may be genetic.
The commonest clinical presentation of folate deciency is as macro
cytic anaemia, which may extend to pancytopenia, in people with poor 
consumption of fruit and green vegetables. It is particularly frequent 
among alcohol misusers. Folate deciency in early pregnancy may cause 
three major birth defects (spina bida, anencephaly and encephalocele) 
resulting from imperfect closure of the neural tube, which takes place 
3–4 weeks after conception. Women who have experienced a pregnancy 
affected by a neural tube defect should take 5 mg of folic acid daily from 
before conception and throughout the rst trimester; this reduces the 
incidence of these defects by 70%. All women planning a pregnancy are 
advised to include good sources of folate in their diet, and to take folate 
supplements throughout the rst trimester. Liver is the richest source of 
folate but an alternative source (e.g. leafy vegetables) is advised in early 
pregnancy because of the high vitamin A content of liver. Folate deciency 
has also been associated with heart disease, dementia and cancer. There 
is mandatory fortication of our with folic acid in the United States and 
voluntary fortication of many foods across Europe. Neural tube defects 
have declined dramatically, but there are some concerns about increased 
incidence of colon cancer, through accelerating the growth of polyps.
Hydroxycobalamin (vitamin B12) 
Vitamin B12 is a cofactor in folate coenzyme recycling and nerve myeli
nation. Vitamin B12 and folate are particularly important in DNA synthesis 
in red blood cells. The haematological disorders (macrocytic or megalo
blastic anaemias) caused by their deciency are discussed in Chapter 25. 
Vitamin B12, but not folate, is needed for the integrity of myelin, so that 
vitamin B12 deciency is also associated with neurological disease (see 
Box 25.33).
In older people and chronic alcohol misusers, or after bowel surgery, 
vitamin B12 deciency arises from insufcient intake and/or from mal
absorption, but purely dietary deciency is rare, as it is synthesised by 
colonic bacteria. The classic cause is malabsorption through pernicious 
anaemia. Several drugs, including neomycin, can render vitamin B12
inactive. Adequate intake of folate maintains erythropoiesis and there is 
a concern that fortication of foods with folate may delay recognition of 
underlying vitamin B12 deciency.
In severe deciency there is insidious, diffuse and uneven demyelina
tion. It may be clinically manifest as peripheral neuropathy or spinal cord 
degeneration affecting both posterior and lateral columns (‘subacute 
combined degeneration of the spinal cord’), or there may be cerebral 
manifestations (resembling dementia) or optic atrophy. Vitamin B12 ther
apy improves symptoms in most cases.
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 
Ascorbic acid is a natural antioxidant in fruit and vegetables. It serves as 
an essential cofactor in the hydroxylation of proline and lysine in protocol
lagen, to hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine in mature collagen. It is also 
an active reducing agent in the aqueous phase of living tissues, and is 
involved in intracellular electron transfer. It is very easily destroyed by heat, 
increased pH and light, and is very soluble in water; hence many traditional 
cooking methods reduce it. Claims that highdose vitamin C improves 
immune function (including resistance to the common cold), prevents 
cancers or heart disease and cholesterol turnover are unsubstantiated.
Deciency – scurvy 
Vitamin C deciency causes defective formation of collagen with impaired 
healing of wounds, capillary haemorrhage and reduced platelet adhe
siveness (normal platelets are rich in ascorbate) (Fig. 22.15). Precipitants 
and clinical features of scurvy are shown in Box 22.33. A dose of 250 mg 
vitamin C 3 times daily by mouth should saturate the tissues quickly. The 
deciencies in the patient's food choices also need to be corrected, and 
other vitamin supplements given if necessary, for example for alcohol 
misusers. Daily intakes above 1 g/day can cause diarrhoea and the for
mation of renal oxalate stones.
Other bioactive dietary compounds 
There are a number of nonessential organic compounds found in veg
etable foods with purported health benets, such as reducing risk of 
heart disease or cancers. Groups of compounds such as the avonoids 
and phytoestrogens do show bioactivity through their respective anti
oxidant and oestrogenic or antioestrogenic activities. Flavonoids (of 
which there are many different classes) are potent antioxidants found 
Fig. 22.14 Dermatitis in niacin deciency (pellagra). There are red, scaly, 
cracked areas with sharply demarcated borders and surrounding pigmented skin.
From Piqué-Duran E, Pérez-Cejudo JA, Cameselle D, et al. Pellagra: A clinical, 
histopathological, and epidemiological study of 7 cases. Actas Dermosiliogr 2012; 
103(1):51–58.

[[p832]]
778    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
in fruit and vegetables, tea and wine; phytoestrogens are found in soy 
products (with higher intakes in parts of Asia compared to Europe and 
the United States) and other pulses. Caffeine and related compounds in 
tea and coffee, can with habituation improve mental performance in the 
short term, with adverse effects including agitation and tachycardia at 
higher intakes. Acute withdrawal of usual caffeine intake (e.g. in a hos
pital admission) can provoke headaches, indicating its addictive quality. 
It is added to carbonated beverages and ‘tonic wines’, ostensibly as a 
avouring, but increases their consumption.
Inorganic micronutrients 
A number of inorganic elements are necessary for structure and growth, 
as electrolytes, or as cofactors in enzymes and are thus essential diet
ary constituents for humans (Box 22.34). Deciency is seen when there 
is inadequate dietary intake or excessive loss from the body. Toxic effects 
have also been observed from selfmedication and disordered absorption 
or excretion. Examples of clinical toxicity include excess of iron (haemo
chromatosis or haemosiderosis), uoride (uorosis), copper (Wilson’s dis
ease) and selenium (selenosis, seen in parts of China). For most minerals, 
the available biochemical plasma markers do not accurately reect whole
body status or dietary intake, and dietary assessment is required.
Calcium and phosphorus 
Calcium is the most abundant cation in the body and powerful homeo
static mechanisms control circulating ionised calcium levels. WHO diet
ary guidelines for calcium differ between countries, with higher intakes 
usually recommended in places with higher fracture prevalence. Between 
20% and 30% of calcium in the diet is absorbed, depending on vitamin 
D status and food source. Calcium requirements depend on phospho
rus intakes, with an optimum molar ratio (Ca:P) of 1:1. Excessive phos
phorus intakes (e.g. 1–1.5 g/day) with a Ca:P of 1:3 have been shown 
to cause hypocalcaemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Calcium absorption may be impaired in vitamin D deciency and in 
malabsorption secondary to small intestinal disease. Calcium deciency 
causes impaired bone mineralisation and can lead to osteomalacia in 
adults. The potential benets of high calcium intake in osteoporosis are 
discussed on p. 1052. Too much calcium can lead to constipation, and 
toxicity has been observed in ‘milkalkali syndrome’.
Dietary insufciency of phosphorus is rare as a cause of deciency 
(except in older people with limited diets, and importantly in severe star
vation) because it is present in nearly all foods and phosphates are added 
to a number of processed foods. Phosphate deciency in adults occurs:
 in patients with renal tubular phosphate loss
 in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis
 in patients receiving a prolonged high dosage of aluminium 
hydroxide
 in alcohol misusers, sometimes when they are fed with highcarbo
hydrate foods
 in patients receiving parenteral nutrition if inadequate phosphate is 
provided.
Deciency causes hypophosphataemia and muscle weakness 
secondary to ATP deciency.
Iron 
Iron is involved in the synthesis of haemoglobin and is required for the 
transport of electrons within cells and for a number of enzyme reactions. 
Nonhaem iron in cereals and vegetables is poorly absorbed but makes 
the greater contribution to overall intake, compared to the wellabsorbed 
haem iron from animal products. Fruits and vegetables containing vitamin 
C enhance iron absorption, while the tannins in tea reduce it. Dietary cal
cium reduces iron uptake from the same meal, which may precipitate iron 
deciency in those with borderline iron stores. There is no physiological 
mechanism for excretion of iron, so homeostasis depends on the regulation 
of iron absorption (see Fig. 25.20). This is regulated at the level of duodenal 
enterocytes by hepcidin (a peptide secreted by hepatocytes in the duo
denum). The normal daily loss of iron is 1 mg, arising from desquamated 
surface cells and intestinal losses. A regular loss of only 2 mL of blood per 
day doubles the iron requirement. On average, an additional 20 mg of iron 
is lost during menstruation, so premenopausal women require about twice 
as much iron as men (and more if menstrual losses are heavy).
The major consequence of iron deciency is anaemia. This is one of 
the most important nutritional causes of ill health in all parts of the world. 
In the UK, it is estimated that 10% women are irondecient. Dietary iron 
overload is occasionally observed and results in iron accumulation in the 
liver and, rarely, cirrhosis. Haemochromatosis results from an inherited 
increase in iron absorption.
Normally, only a small proportion of dietary iron is absorbed. Iron 
absorption mechanisms are upregulated, to absorb a greater proportion 
if dietary provision is low.  Iron shares and competes for a pathway for 
absorption with zinc.  Indiscriminate  iron supplementation can therefore 
impair zinc status.  In overdosage, iron supplements are highly toxic and 
can be fatal for children.
A
Fig. 22.15 Scurvy.
hyperkeratosis. (A,B) From Ho V, Prinsloo P, Ombiga J. Persistent anaemia due to 
scurvy. J NZ Med Assoc 2007; 120:62. Reproduced with permission.
B
22.33  Scurvy – vitamin C deciency
Precipitants
Increased requirement
Dietary deciency
 Trauma, surgery, burns, infections
 Smoking
 Drugs (glucocorticoids, aspirin, 
indometacin, tetracycline)
 Lack of dietary fruit and vegetables 
for > 2 months
 Infants fed exclusively on boiled milk
Clinical features
 Swollen gums that bleed easily
 Perifollicular and petechial 
haemorrhages
 Ecchymoses
 Haemarthrosis
 Gastrointestinal bleeding
 Anaemia
 Poor wound healing

[[p833]]
Micronutrients, minerals and their diseases     779
22
22.34  Summary of clinically important minerals
Mineral
Sources1
Rich
Important
Calcium
Milk and milk products, tofu
Milk, boned sh, green vegetables, beans
700 mg2
Phosphorus
Most foods contain phosphorus
550 mg2
Marmite and dry-roasted peanuts
Milk, cereal products, bread and meat
Magnesium
Whole grains, nuts
Unprocessed and wholegrain foods
300 mg men
270 mg women2
Iron
Liver, red meat (haem iron)
Non-haem iron from vegetables, wholemeal bread
8.7 mg
14.8 mg women <50 years
Zinc
Red meat, seafood
Dairy produce, wholemeal bread
9.5 mg men
7 mg women2
Iodine
Edible seaweeds
Sea sh
Milk and dairy products
Sea food products
140 µg
Selenium
Fish, food crops grown in  
selenium-rich soils
Fish
75 µg men
60 µg women2
Copper
Shellsh, liver
Bread, cereal products, vegetables
1.2 mg2
Fluoride
Tea
Drinking water, tea
No RNI. Safe intake: 0.5 mg/kg
Potassium
Dried fruit, potatoes, coffee
Fresh fruit, vegetables, meat and dairy foods
3500 mg
Sodium
Table salt, anchovies
Processed foods, bread, bacon
1600 mg
1Rich sources contain the nutrient in high concentration but are not generally eaten in large amounts; important sources contain less but contribute most because larger amounts are eaten. 2Increased 
amounts are required in women during lactation.
Iodine 
Iodine is required, in very small amounts, for synthesis of thyroid hor
mones and thus for neurodevelopment. It is present in sea sh, seaweed 
and most plant foods grown near the sea. The amount of iodine in soil 
and water inuences the iodine content of plant foods, and of animals 
grazing on them. Iodine is lacking, giving rise in older times to endemic 
goitre and cretinism, in the highest mountainous areas of the world (e.g. 
the Alps and the Himalayas) and in the soil of frequently ooded plains 
(e.g. Bangladesh). In the UK, most dietary iodine in human diets until 
recently came from disinfectant used to wash cows’ udders before milk
ing. Milk and sea sh are now the main sources, but many people have 
inadequate intakes.
About a billion people in the world are estimated to have an inadequate 
iodine intake and hence are at risk of iodine deciency disorder. Goitre 
is the most common manifestation, affecting about 200 million people.
In areas where women have endemic goitre, 1% or more of babies 
are born with cretinism (characterised by impaired growth and neuro
logical development and physical deformities). There is a higher than 
usual prevalence of deafness, slowed reexes and poor learning in the 
remaining population. The best way of preventing neonatal cretinism 
is to ensure adequate levels of iodine during pregnancy. This can be 
achieved by intramuscular injections with 1–2 mL of iodised poppy seed 
oil (475–950 mg iodine) to women of childbearing age every 3–5 years, 
by administration of iodised oil orally at 6monthly or yearly intervals to 
adults and children.
In many countries foods are fortied with iodine to avoid iodine de
ciency, especially reported among young people who avoid sh and/or 
dairy products. Iodised salt is most common, but with health advice to 
minimise sodium consumption, other common foods such as milk and 
breads can be fortied, provided their cumulative consumption does not 
become excessive.
Zinc 
Zinc is present in most foods of vegetable and animal origin, and is stored 
in the liver. It is an essential component of many enzymes, including car
bonic anhydrase, alcohol dehydrogenase and alkaline phosphatase.
Acute zinc deciency has been reported in patients receiving prolonged 
zincfree parenteral nutrition and causes diarrhoea, mental apathy, a 
moist, eczematoid dermatitis, especially around the mouth, and loss of 
hair. Chronic zinc deciency occurs in dietary deciency, malabsorption 
syndromes, when there are chronic losses (e.g. of exudates from leg 
ulcers), in alcoholism and in cirrhosis. It causes the clinical features seen 
in the very rare congenital disorder known as acrodermatitis enteropath
ica (growth retardation, hair loss and chronic diarrhoea). Zinc deciency 
is thought to be responsible for onethird of the world's population not 
reaching their optimal height. In the Middle East, chronic deciency has 
been associated with dwarsm and hypogonadism. In starvation, zinc 
deciency causes thymic atrophy; zinc supplements may accelerate the 
healing of skin lesions, promote general wellbeing, improve appetite and 
reduce the morbidity associated with the undernourished state, and 
lower the mortality associated with diarrhoea and pneumonia in children.
Selenium 
The family of selenoenzymes includes glutathione peroxidase, which 
helps prevent free radical damage to cells, and monodeiodinase, which 
converts thyroxine to triiodothyronine. North American soil has a higher 
selenium content than European and Asian soil, and the decreasing 
reliance of Europe on imported American food in recent decades has 
resulted in a decline in dietary selenium intake.
Selenium deciency can cause hypothyroidism, cardiomyopathy in 
children (Keshan disease) and myopathy in adults. Excess selenium can 
cause heart disease, and has been linked to industrial pollution.
Fluoride 
Fluoride is an essential nutrient necessary for normal dental enamel, 
and also incorporated as a component of bone mineral. Fluoride 
is most important for young children, before the permanent teeth 
erupt, while their enamel is being laid down, but also for healthy 
enamel recycling and repair after damage. Fluoride deficiency results 
in weakened dental enamel, vulnerable to attack by acid produced 
from sugars by oral bacteria, and thus to dental caries and tooth 
loss. Fluoride in normal amounts may help strengthen bone and 

[[p834]]
780    NUTRITIONAL FACTORS IN DISEASE
protect against fractures. Excessive intakes cause a brown mottling 
of dental enamel, and may compromise bone structure, making them 
more brittle.
Fluoride is an unusual micronutrient in being supplied almost entirely 
from drinking water, including local water and that consumed from 
other areas as bottled or canned drinks. If the water supply contains 
more than 1 part per million (ppm) of uoride, the incidence of dental 
caries is low. Very hard waters may contain over 10 ppm, present
ing no problem other than some discoloration of teeth. However, soft 
waters contain little or no uoride, so dental caries and loss is very 
frequent without supplementation. Almost no foods provide signicant 
amounts of uoride, an exception being tea, permitting strong teeth 
in areas where both tea and sugar cane are grown and consumed by 
children.
Adding of traces of uoride to public water supplies, to maintain a 
normal healthful concentration of 1 ppm, is now a widespread practice 
but, where this is not policy, dental health must depend on educa
tion, supplementation to children, and provision of uoridecontaining 
toothpaste.
Chronic uoride poisoning is occasionally seen where the water supply 
contains >10 ppm uoride. It can also occur in workers handling cryolite 
(aluminium sodium uoride), used in smelting aluminium. Pitting of teeth 
is a result of excess uoride intake as a child.
Sodium, potassium and magnesium 
Most animal and plant foods are low in natural sodium, and rich in 
potassium and magnesium. Western diets are high in sodium due to the 
sodium chloride (salt) that is added to processed food. In the UK, it is 
recommended that daily salt intakes are kept well below 6 g, and potas
sium and magnesium intakes maintained at levels a little greater than 
currently, principally to prevent the common gradual rise in blood pres
sure which occurs if children are weaned onto a lifelong higher sodium 
diet. The pathophysiological roles of sodium, potassium and magnesium 
are discussed in Chapter 14
Other essential inorganic nutrients 
These include chloride (a counterion to sodium and potassium), cobalt 
(required for vitamin B12), sulphur (a constituent of methionine and 
cysteine), manganese (needed for or activates many enzymes) and chro
mium (necessary for insulin action). Deciency of chromium presents as 
hyperglycaemia and has been reported in adults as a rare complication 
of prolonged parenteral nutrition.
Copper metabolism is abnormal in Wilson’s disease. Deciency occa
sionally occurs but only in young children, causing microcytic hypochro
mic anaemia, neutropenia, retarded growth, skeletal rarefaction and 
dermatosis.
Further information 
Websites 
gov.uk/government/groups/scienticadvisorycommitteeonnutrition Scientic 
Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN): UK recommended dietary 
consumptions.
diabetes.org.uk/professionals/positionstatementsreports/foodnutritionlifestyle/
evidencebasednutritionguidelinesforthepreventionandmanagementof
diabetes Diabetes UK dietary guidelines for diabetes.
bapen.org.uk British Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition; includes the 
MUST tool.
bsg.org.uk British Society of Gastroenterology: guidelines on management of 
patients with a short bowel, enteral feeding for adult hospital patients and the 
provision of a percutaneously placed enteral tube feeding service .
espen.org European Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: guidelines for 
adult parenteral nutrition; perioperative care in elective colonic and rectal/pelvic 
surgery; nutrition in dementia; acute and chronic intestinal failure in adults; and 
nutrition in cancer patients.
nice.org.uk National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: guidance for 
nutritional support in adults.

[[p835]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 22.1.  Which of the following is true? In a clinical setting, overweight/
obesity should be assessed using
A. BMI
B. Waist circumference
C. Observation and clinical judgement
D. Plasma leptin concentration
E. A composite of BMI and full clinical evaluation
Answer: E.
The recommended approach to assess an individual is to measure 
BMI (and waist if BMI is < 35 kg/m2), and to monitor progress using body 
weight and clinical staging based on evaluation of clinical status using a 
scheme such as Edmonton Obesity Staging System. BMI alone provides 
a useful benchmark, but BMI has relatively poor correlation with body fat 
content (R2 = 0.6) and it does not capture the variable link with symp
toms or medical conditions mediated by the diseaseprocess of obesity. 
Waist provides slightly better correlation with body fat content, and of 
secondary disease risk than BMI, but cannot be used reliably when BMI 
is above 35. Observation and clinical judgement are valuable, but do 
not provide a baseline to assess progress. Plasma leptin can now be 
measured, but only as a research tool. It correlates reasonably strongly 
with BMI or body fat content but is not accurate for individual assess
ment. Another technique – bioimpedance measurement – is simple and 
cheap, widely used in gyms, but it is not more accurate than using scales 
or a waisttape measure to estimate body fat content.
 22.2.  Which of the following is true? Parenteral (intravenous) feeding 
(TPN)
A. Is the goldstandard safe clinical practice after any bowel 
surgery
B. Can be established routinely using standard feed bags
C. Requires a central IV access line, which is also useful for 
blood sampling
D. Should be set up at weekends to save staff time during 
weekdays
E. Requires management by a dedicated nutrition support team
Answer: E.
Evidence shows that case selection and outcomes (particularly line 
infection rates) are greatly improved when a multidisciplinary Nutrition 
Support Team is in place. Parenteral feeding incurs many potentially seri
ous complications and should not be used if there is likelihood of a func
tional gut within 3–5 days. TPN cannot be established routinely using 
standard feed bags as a full nutritional assessment is required in order 
to determine the requirements of each individual patient. TPN requires 
a central line, but this should never be used for other procedures, such 
as blood testing, because of high risks of introducing infection. Setting 
up parenteral feeding is timeconsuming and requires planning and full 
multidisciplinary coordination, which is rarely possible outside normal 
work hours and starting at a weekend is not advisable.
 22.3.  Which of the following is true? Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
A. In large doses is effective for preventing colds
B. Is destroyed by cooking
C. Allows improved absorption of iron from foods
D. Contributes to antioxidant vitamin (ACE) treatment for pre
vention of heart disease
E. Is stored in the liver, to provide a buffer against periods of low 
intake
Answer: C.
When the iron content of foods is low, or when greater iron absorp
tion is needed to counteract deciency, consuming foods that contain 
iron and vitamin C together improves iron availability. There is weak evi
dence that suggests megadoses of vitamin C might reduce duration 
of minor cold symptoms to a very small degree. Vitamin C content of 
foods is reduced but not entirely destroyed by cooking. Boiled potatoes 
are a major food source for many people. There is consistent evidence 
that antioxidant treatments with vitamins A, C and E do not reduce 
heart disease. Indeed this treatment actually increases mortality in large 
randomised trials. Vitamin C is a watersoluble vitamin, and as such has 
little or no storage in the body. Daily consumption is needed, from fruits 
and vegetables.

[[p836]]
Gastroenterology
23
A Rej
TS Chew
DS Sanders
Clinical examination of the gastrointestinal tract 782
Functional anatomy and physiology 784
Oesophagus, stomach and duodenum 784
Small intestine 785
Pancreas 788
Colon 788
Intestinal microbiota 788
Control of gastrointestinal function 788
Gut hormones 789
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 789
Imaging 789
Tests of infection 793
Tests of function 793
Radioisotope tests 795
Gut hormone testing 795
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease 795
Dysphagia 795
Dyspepsia 796
Heartburn and regurgitation 796
Vomiting 797
Gastrointestinal bleeding 797
Diarrhoea 800
Malabsorption 801
Weight loss 801
Constipation 803
Abdominal pain 804
Disorders of the mouth and salivary glands 805
Disorders of the oesophagus 806
Gastro-oesophageal reux disease 806
Tumours of the oesophagus 809
Perforation of the oesophagus 810
Oesophageal motility disorders 811
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum 812
Gastritis 812
Peptic ulcer disease 812
Tumours of the stomach 817
Gastric motility disorders 819
Disorders of the small intestine 819
Disorders causing malabsorption 819
Miscellaneous disorders of the small intestine 824
Adverse food reactions 825
Infections of the small intestine 825
Tumours of the small intestine 825
Small intestine motility disorders 825
Disorders of the colon and rectum 826
Colorectal polyps 826
Colorectal cancer 827
Diverticulosis 832
Colonic motility disorders 833
Anorectal disorders 834
Inammatory bowel disease 835
Functional bowel disorders 847
Functional dyspepsia 847
Functional causes of vomiting 847
Irritable bowel syndrome 847
Ischaemic gut injury 848
Diseases of the pancreas 850
Acute pancreatitis 850
Chronic pancreatitis 852
Congenital abnormalities affecting the pancreas 854
Tumours of the pancreas 855
Diseases of the peritoneal cavity 856
Peritonitis 856
Tumours 856
Other disorders 856

[[p837]]
782    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Clinical examination of the gastrointestinal tract 
Observation
Hands
Clubbing
Koilonychia
Signs of liver disease
(Ch. 24)
Head and neck
Pallor
Jaundice
Angular stomatitis
Glossitis
Parotid enlargement
Mouth ulcers
Dentition
Lymphadenopathy
Abdominal examination
(see opposite)
Multiple surgical scars,
a prolapsing ileostomy
and enterocutaneous
fistulae in a patient
with Crohn’s disease
 Distressed/in pain?
 Fever?
 Dehydrated?
 Habitus
 Skin
Skin and nutritional
status
Muscle bulk
Subcutaneous fat
Signs of weight loss
Erythema nodosum
Groin
Herniae
Lymph nodes
Perineum/rectal
(see opposite)
Fistulae
Skin tags
Haemorrhoids
Masses
Clubbing in patient with
malabsorption
Virchow’s gland in
gastric cancer
Pyoderma gangrenosum
in ulcerative colitis
Atrophic glossitis and
angular stomatitis in
vitamin B12 deficiency
Observe
Distension
Respiratory movements
Scars
Colour
Palpate
Tender/guarding
Masses
Viscera
  Liver (Ch. 24)
  Kidneys (Ch. 18)
  Spleen
Percuss
Ascites
Viscera
Auscultate
Bowel sounds
Bruits
3
4
5
6
2
1
1
2
3
4
6
5

[[p838]]
23
Abdominal examination: possible ndings
Clinical examination of the gastrointestinal tract     783
Epigastric mass
Gastric cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Aortic aneurysm
Left upper quadrant mass
?Spleen
Edge
Can’t get above it
Moves towards right
iliac fossa
Dull percussion note
Notch
?Kidney
Rounded
Can get above it
Moves down
Resonant to percussion
Ballotable
Tender to palpation
?Peritonitis
Guarding and rebound
Absent bowel sounds
Rigidity
?Obstruction
Distended
Tinkling bowel sounds
Visible peristalsis
Left iliac fossa mass
Sigmoid colon cancer
Constipation
Diverticular mass
Right iliac fossa mass
Caecal carcinoma
Crohn’s disease
Appendix abscess
Hepatomegaly
Palpable gallbladder
(Ch. 24)
Generalised distension
Fat (obesity)
Fluid (ascites/blood)
Flatus (obstruction/ileus)
Faeces (constipation)
Fetus (pregnancy)
Suprapubic mass
Bladder
Pregnancy
Fibroids/carcinoma
Rectal examination: common ndings
Tumour
Polyp
Cancer
Extrinsic
Tumour
Abscess
Prostate
Uterus/cervix
Prolapse
Stool
Consistency
Colour
Steatorrhoea
Bloody/black
Faecal immunochemical
test for occult blood
Anal disease
Tags
Haemorrhoids
Polyps
Crohn’s disease
4
6

[[p839]]
784    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Swallowing begins as a
voluntary process. The
food bolus is forcibly
propelled by the tongue
into the pharynx
The upper oesophageal
sphincter relaxes
Peristaltic activity,
controlled by a brainstem
centre, is mediated
by autonomic nerves
The lower oesophageal
sphincter relaxes. The
food enters the stomach
1
2
3
4
Upper sphincter
(cricopharyngeus
muscle)
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Endoscopic
view
Normal
high-resolution
manometry
Fig. 23.1 The oesophagus: anatomy and function. The swallowing wave.
Vagus nerves
Cardia
Fundus
Antrum
Body
Pancreas
First part of
duodenum
Second part of
duodenum
Common bile duct
Endoscopic view
Endoscopic view
Third part of
duodenum
Diaphragm
Fig. 23.2 Normal gastric and duodenal anatomy.
Diseases of the gastrointestinal tract are a major cause of morbidity and mor-
tality. Around 10% of all consultations in primary care are for gastroenterologi-
cal problems, split equally between the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract. 
Infective diarrhoea and malabsorption are responsible for much ill health and 
many deaths in low- and middle-income countries. The gastrointestinal tract is 
the most common site for cancer development. Colorectal cancer is the third 
most common cancer in men and second most common in women, with pop-
ulation-based screening programmes existing in many countries. Functional 
gastrointestinal disorders account for at least 40% of all referrals to gastroenter-
ology services and consume considerable health-care resources. The inam-
matory bowel diseases, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, together affect 
1 in 250 people in the Western world, with substantial associated morbidity.
Functional anatomy and physiology 
Oesophagus, stomach and duodenum 
The oesophagus is a muscular tube that extends 25 cm from the cri-
coid cartilage to the cardiac orice of the stomach, with the gastroesoph-
ageal junction being 40 cm from the incisors. The oesophagus has both 
an upper and a lower sphincter. A peristaltic swallowing wave propels the 
food bolus into the stomach (Fig. 23.1).
The stomach acts as a ‘hopper’, retaining and grinding food, and then 
actively propelling it into the upper small bowel (Fig. 23.2).

[[p840]]
Functional anatomy and physiology     785
23
small bowel every 1–2 hours. Entry of food into the gastrointestinal tract 
stimulates small bowel peristaltic activity. Functions of the small intestine 
are:
 digestion (mechanical, enzymatic and peristaltic)
 absorption – the products of digestion, water, electrolytes and vitamins
 protection against ingested toxins
 immune regulation.
Digestion and absorption 
Fat 
Dietary lipids comprise long-chain triglycerides, cholesterol esters and 
lecithin. Lipids are insoluble in water and undergo lipolysis and incorpo-
ration into mixed micelles before they can be absorbed into enterocytes 
Enterochromaffin-like
cell
Parietal cell
Histamine
Gastrin
CCK-2R
Gastrin
CCK-2R
H2
ACh-R
(M3)
Vagal
stimulation
Anticipation or
smell of food
Gastric
distension
H+/K+ ATPase
K+ H+
Cl
Fig. 23.3 Control of acid secretion. Gastrin released from antral G cells in 
response to food (protein) binds to cholecystokinin receptors (CCK-2R) on the surface 
of enterochromafn-like (ECL) cells, which in turn release histamine. The histamine 
binds to H2 receptors on parietal cells and this leads to secretion of hydrogen 
ions in exchange for potassium ions at the apical membrane. Parietal cells also 
express CCK-2R and it is thought that activation of these receptors by gastrin is 
involved in regulatory proliferation of parietal cells. Cholinergic (vagal) activity and 
gastric distension also stimulate acid secretion; somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide (VIP) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) may inhibit it. (ACh-R = 
acetylcholine receptor; ATPase = adenosine triphosphatase)
Gastric secretion 
Gastrin, histamine and acetylcholine are the key stimulants of acid secretion. 
Hydrogen and chloride ions are secreted from the apical membrane of gas-
tric parietal cells into the lumen of the stomach by a hydrogen–potassium 
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) (‘proton pump’) (Fig. 23.3). The hydro-
chloric acid sterilises the upper gastrointestinal tract and converts the zymo-
gen pepsinogen, which is secreted by chief cells, to pepsin, which digests 
proteins to polypeptides. The glycoprotein intrinsic factor, secreted in parallel 
with acid, is necessary for vitamin B12 absorption in the terminal ileum.
Gastrin, somatostatin and ghrelin 
The hormone gastrin is produced by G cells mainly in the gastric antrum, 
with somatostatin being secreted from D cells throughout the gastroin-
testinal tract. Gastrin stimulates acid secretion and mucosal growth while 
somatostatin suppresses it. Ghrelin, secreted from oxyntic glands, stimu-
lates acid secretion, as well as appetite and gastric emptying.
Protective factors 
Bicarbonate ions, stimulated by prostaglandins, mucins and trefoil factor 
family (TFF) peptides, together protect the gastroduodenal mucosa from 
the ulcerative properties of acid and pepsin.
Small intestine 
The jejunum extends from the ligament of Treitz to the ileocaecal valve 
(Fig. 23.4). During fasting, a wave of peristaltic activity passes down the 
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Jejunum
Arteries
Veins
Lymphatics
Paneth
cells
Ligament
of Treitz
Duodenal villi
Crypts
Villi
Ileum
Fig. 23.4 Small intestine: anatomy. Epithelial cells are formed in crypts and 
differentiate as they migrate to the tip of the villi to form enterocytes (absorptive cells) 
and goblet cells.

[[p841]]
786    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Simple
micelles
Enterohepatic
circulation
Pancreatic
enzyme
secretion
Gallbladder
contraction
C V P
Digestion of
triglycerides
C
V
P
C V P
Apoproteins
Absorption
Chylomicrons
Bile acids resorbed
in terminal ileum
1
3
2
4
5
6
Fat
emulsification
by motor
activity
CCK
release from
duodenum
Dietary
fat
Fat solubilisation
(‘mixed’ micelles)
Bile acids
and salts
Fat
Lipase
Colipase
Monoglycerides Free fatty
acids
Triglycerides
Lymphatics
Enterocyte
Triglyceride
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Cholesterol (C)
Phospholipids (P)
Vitamins A, D, E and K (V)
Fig. 23.5 Fat digestion. Step 1: Luminal phase. Fatty acids stimulate cholecystokinin (CCK) release from the duodenum and upper jejunum. The CCK stimulates release of 
amylase, lipase, colipase and proteases from the pancreas, causes gallbladder contraction and relaxes the sphincter of Oddi, allowing bile to ow into the intestine. Step 2: 
Fat solubilisation. Bile acids and salts combine with dietary fat to form mixed micelles, which also contain cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins. Step 3: Digestion. Pancreatic 
lipase, in the presence of its co-factor, colipase, cleaves long-chain triglycerides, yielding fatty acids and monoglycerides. Step 4: Absorption. Mixed micelles diffuse to the brush 
border of the enterocytes. Within the brush border, long-chain fatty acids bind to proteins, which transport the fatty acids into the cell, whereas cholesterol, short-chain fatty 
acids, phospholipids and fat-soluble vitamins enter the cell directly. The bile salts remain in the small intestinal lumen and are actively transported from the terminal ileum into 
the portal circulation and returned to the liver (the enterohepatic circulation). Step 5: Re-esterication. Within the enterocyte, fatty acids are re-esteried to form triglycerides. 
Triglycerides combine with cholesterol ester, fat-soluble vitamins, phospholipids and apoproteins to form chylomicrons. Step 6: Transport. Chylomicrons leave the enterocytes by 
exocytosis, enter mesenteric lymphatics, pass into the thoracic duct and eventually reach the systemic circulation.
along with the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K. The lipids are pro-
cessed within enterocytes and pass via lymphatics into the systemic cir-
culation. Fat absorption and digestion can be considered as a stepwise 
process, as outlined in Figure 23.5
Carbohydrates 
Starch is hydrolysed by salivary and pancreatic amylases to:
 α-limit dextrins containing 4–8 glucose molecules
 the disaccharide maltose
 the trisaccharide maltotriose.
Disaccharides are digested by enzymes xed to the microvillous 
membrane to form the monosaccharides glucose, galactose and 
fructose. Glucose and galactose enter the cell by an energy-requir-
ing process involving a carrier protein, and fructose enters by simple 
diffusion.
Protein 
The steps involved in protein digestion are shown in Figure 23.6. 
Intragastric digestion by pepsin is quantitatively modest, but important, 
because the resulting polypeptides and amino acids stimulate cholecys-
tokinin (CCK) release from the mucosa of the proximal jejunum, which in 
turn stimulates release of pancreatic proteases, including trypsinogen, 
chymotrypsinogen, pro-elastases and procarboxypeptidases, from the 
pancreas. On exposure to brush border enterokinase, inert trypsinogen 
is converted to the active proteolytic enzyme trypsin, which activates 
the other pancreatic pro-enzymes. Trypsin digests proteins to produce 
oligopeptides, peptides and amino acids. Oligopeptides are further 
hydrolysed by brush border enzymes to yield dipeptides, tripeptides 
and amino acids. These small peptides and the amino acids are actively 
transported into the enterocytes, where intracellular peptidases further 
digest peptides to amino acids. Amino acids are then actively trans-
ported across the basal cell membrane of the enterocyte into the portal 
circulation and the liver.
Water and electrolytes 
Absorption and secretion of electrolytes and water occur throughout the 
intestine. Electrolytes and water are transported by two pathways:
 the paracellular route, in which passive ow through tight junctions 
between cells is a consequence of osmotic, electrical or hydrostatic 
gradients
 the transcellular route across apical and basolateral membranes by 
energy-requiring specic active transport carriers (pumps).
In healthy individuals, uid balance is tightly controlled, such that only 
100 mL of the 8 litres of uid entering the gastrointestinal tract daily is 
excreted in stools (Fig. 23.7).
Vitamins and trace elements 
Water-soluble vitamins are absorbed throughout the intestine. The 
absorption of folic acid, vitamin B12, calcium and iron is described in 
Chapter 25

[[p842]]
Functional anatomy and physiology     787
23
CCK
release
Minor digestion
by pepsins
Trypsinogen
Enterokinase
Trypsin
Proteins
Activation of other
pro-enzymes
Peptides
Amino acids
Oligopeptides
Brush border
enzymes
Small peptides
Amino acids
Enterocyte
Peptides
Peptidase
Amino acids
Portal
circulation
Liver
Peptides
Peptidase
Amino acids
Stomach
Small intestine
Pancreas
Pancreatic
pro-enzyme
secretion
Fig. 23.6 Protein digestion. (CCK = cholecystokinin)
Saliva
1500 mL
Gastric
2000 mL
Pancreas
1500 mL
Small
intestine
1500 mL
100 mL
Food + H2O intake
1200 mL
Bile
500 mL
Colonic
reabsorption
1400 mL
Portal
vein
6700 mL
Total in
Reabsorbed
Stool excretion
8200 mL
8100 mL
100 mL
Fig. 23.7 Fluid homeostasis in the gastrointestinal tract.
1
Lumen
2
Epithelium
3
Subepithelial
layer
Fig. 23.8 Intestinal defence mechanisms. See text for details.
Protective function of the small intestine 
Physical defence mechanisms 
There are several levels of defence in the small bowel (Fig. 23.8). Firstly, 
the gut lumen contains host bacteria, mucins and secreted antibac-
terial products, including defensins and immunoglobulins that help 
combat pathogenic infections. Secondly, epithelial cells have relatively 
impermeable brush border membranes and passage between cells is 
prevented by tight and adherens junctions. These cells can react to 
foreign peptides (‘innate immunity’) using pattern recognition receptors 
found on cell surfaces (Toll receptors) or intracellularly. Lastly, in the sub-
epithelial layer, immune responses occur under control of the adaptive 
immune system in response to pathogenic compounds.
Immunological defence mechanisms 
Gastrointestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) constitutes 
25% of the total lymphatic tissue of the body and is at the heart of adap-
tive immunity. Within Peyer’s patches, B lymphocytes differentiate to 
plasma cells following exposure to antigens and these migrate to mes-
enteric lymph nodes to enter the blood stream via the thoracic duct. The 
plasma cells return to the lamina propria of the gut through the circulation 
and release immunoglobulin A (IgA), which is transported into the lumen 
of the intestine. Intestinal T lymphocytes help localise plasma cells to the 
site of antigen exposure, as well as producing inammatory mediators. 
Macrophages in the gut phagocytose foreign materials and secrete a 

[[p843]]
788    GASTROENTEROLOGY
range of cytokines, which mediate inammation. Similarly, activation of 
mast-cell surface IgE receptors leads to degranulation and release of 
other molecules involved in inammation.
Pancreas 
The exocrine pancreas (Box 23.1) is necessary for the digestion of fat, 
protein and carbohydrate. Pro-enzymes are secreted from pancre-
atic acinar cells in response to circulating gastrointestinal hormones 
(Fig. 23.9) and are activated by trypsin. Bicarbonate-rich uid is secreted 
from ductular cells to produce an optimum alkaline pH for enzyme activ-
ity. The endocrine pancreas is discussed in Chapters 20 and 21
Colon 
The colon (Fig. 23.10) absorbs water and electrolytes. It also acts as 
a storage organ and has contractile activity. Two types of contraction 
occur. The rst of these is segmentation (ring contraction), which leads 
to mixing but not propulsion; this promotes absorption of water and elec-
trolytes. Propulsive (peristaltic contraction) waves occur several times a 
day and propel faeces to the rectum. All activity is stimulated after meals 
through the gastrocolic reex in response to release of hormones such 
as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), motilin and CCK. Faecal con-
tinence depends on maintenance of the anorectal angle and tonic con-
traction of the external anal sphincters. On defecation, there is relaxation 
of the anorectal muscles, increased intra-abdominal pressure from the 
Valsalva manoeuvre and contraction of abdominal muscles, and relaxa-
tion of the anal sphincters.
Intestinal microbiota 
The human microbiota comprises 1014 microbial residents in the human 
body, vastly outnumbering host cells. Indeed, the number of bacterial 
genes in the microbiota genome exceeds that of the host by 100-fold 
or more. This represents a vast ecosystem that is central to health and 
homeostasis, and is disordered in disease. In terms of nomenclature, 
‘microbiota’ refers to the microorganisms that live in a particular niche, 
while ‘microbiome’ refers to the collective genomes of these microbi-
ota. There is a degree of heritability of this microbiota, but it is clear that 
there are many environmental factors that can affect it, including diet, 
drugs, physical activity, smoking, stress and natural ageing. Generally, 
the adult intestinal microbiota is acquired by the age of 2 years. A dys-
biosis or imbalance between the different components of the intestinal 
microbiota has been associated with diseases of the gastrointestinal 
tract, such as inammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer; liver 
disease, including hepatocellular carcinoma; and pathologies outside 
the gastrointestinal tract, such as diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disor-
ders, cerebrovascular disorders, asthma and psychiatric disorders, such 
as depression. Many challenges remain in understanding the intestinal 
microbiota and how it impacts on health and disease.
Control of gastrointestinal function 
Secretion, absorption, motor activity, growth and differentiation of the gut 
are all modulated by a combination of neuronal and hormonal factors.
The nervous system and gastrointestinal function 
The central nervous system (CNS), the autonomic system (ANS) and the 
enteric nervous system (ENS) interact to regulate gut function. The ANS 
comprises:
 parasympathetic pathways (vagal and sacral efferent), which are 
cholinergic, and increase smooth muscle tone and promote sphinc-
ter relaxation
 sympathetic pathways, which release noradrenaline (norepinephrine), 
reduce smooth muscle tone and stimulate sphincter contraction.
Duodenum
MRCP–normal pancreas
CCK
Acetylcholine
Secretin
VIP
Bombesin
Substance P
Acinus
Ductule
Secretin
Pro-enzyme
HCO3 + water
5 cm
Ampulla of Vater
Accessory ampulla
PD
Fig. 23.9 Pancreatic structure and function. Ductular cells secrete alkaline uid in response to secretin. Acinar cells secrete digestive enzymes from zymogen granules in 
response to a range of secretagogues. The photograph shows a normal pancreatic duct (PD) and side branches, as dened at magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP). Note the incidental calculi in the gallbladder and common bile duct (arrow). (CCK = cholecystokinin; VIP = vasoactive intestinal polypeptide)
23.1  Pancreatic enzymes
Enzyme
Substrate
Product
Amylase
Starch and glycogen
Limit dextrans
Maltose
Maltriose
Lipase
Colipase
Triglycerides
Monoglycerides and free 
fatty acids
Proteolytic enzymes
Trypsinogen
Chymotrypsinogen
Pro-elastase
Pro-
carboxypeptidases
Proteins and 
polypeptides
Short polypeptides

[[p844]]
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease     789
23
The enteric nervous system 
In conjunction with the ANS, the ENS senses gut contents and condi-
tions, and regulates motility, uid exchange, secretion, blood ow and 
other key gut functions. It comprises two major networks intrinsic to 
the gut wall. The myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus in the smooth muscle 
layer regulates motor control; and the submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus 
exerts secretory control over the epithelium, entero-endocrine cells 
and submucosal vessels. Together, these plexuses form a two-lay-
ered neuronal mesh along the length of the gut. Although connected 
centrally via the ANS, the ENS can function autonomously using a 
variety of transmitters, including acetylcholine, noradrenaline (norepi-
nephrine), 5-HT, nitric oxide, substance P and calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP). There are local reex loops within the ENS but also 
loops involving the coeliac and mesenteric ganglia and the paraverte-
bral ganglia. The parasympathetic system generally stimulates motil-
ity and secretion, while the sympathetic system generally acts in an 
inhibitory manner.
Peristalsis 
Peristalsis is a reex triggered by gut wall distension, which consists 
of a wave of circular muscle contraction to propel contents from the 
oesophagus to the rectum. It can be inuenced by innervation but func-
tions independently. It results from a basic electrical rhythm originating 
from the interstitial cells of Cajal in the circular layer of intestinal smooth 
muscle. These are stellate cells of mesenchymal origin with smooth 
muscle features, which act as the ‘pacemaker’ of the gut.
Migrating motor complexes 
Migrating motor complexes (MMCs) are waves of contraction spreading 
from the stomach to the ileum, occurring at a frequency of about 5 per 
minute every 90 minutes or so, between meals and during fasting. They 
may serve to sweep intestinal contents distally in preparation for the next 
meal and are inhibited by eating.
Gut hormones 
The origin, action and control of the major gut hormones, peptides and 
non-peptide signalling transmitters are summarised in Box 23.2
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease 
A wide range of tests is available for the investigation of patients with 
gastrointestinal symptoms. These can be classied broadly into tests of 
structure, tests for infection and tests of function.
Imaging 
Plain X-rays 
Plain X-rays of the abdomen are useful in the diagnosis of intestinal 
obstruction or paralytic ileus, where dilated loops of bowel and (in the 
erect position) uid levels may be seen (Fig. 23.11). Calcied lymph 
nodes, gallstones and renal stones can also be detected. Chest X-ray 
(performed with the patient in erect position) is useful in the diagnosis 
of suspected perforation, as it shows subdiaphragmatic free air (see 
Fig. 23.11).
Contrast studies 
X-rays with contrast medium are usually performed to assess not only 
anatomical abnormalities but also motility. Barium sulphate provides 
good mucosal coating and excellent opacication but can precipitate 
impaction proximal to an obstructive lesion. Water-soluble contrast is 
used to opacify bowel prior to abdominal computed tomography and in 
cases of suspected perforation. The double contrast technique improves 
mucosal visualisation by using gas to distend the barium-coated 
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Caecum
Appendix
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Rectum
Anal canal
External anal
sphincter
Internal anal
sphincter
Sigmoid
colon
Descending
colon
Ascending colon
Ileocaecal valve
Transverse colon
Fig. 23.10 The normal colon, rectum and anal canal.

[[p845]]
790    GASTROENTEROLOGY
B
A
Fig. 23.11 Examples of plain X-rays.
23.2  Gut hormones and peptides
Hormone
Origin
Stimulus
Action
Gastrin
Predominantly stomach (G cell)
Products of protein digestion
Suppressed by acid and somatostatin
Stimulates gastric acid secretion
Stimulates growth of gastrointestinal mucosa
Somatostatin
Throughout gastrointestinal tract 
(D cell)
Fat ingestion
Inhibits gastrin and insulin secretion
Decreases acid secretion
Decreases absorption
Inhibits pancreatic secretion
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Duodenum and jejunum (I cells); 
also ileal and colonic nerve 
endings
Products of protein digestion
Fat and fatty acids
Suppressed by trypsin
Stimulates pancreatic enzyme secretion
Stimulates gallbladder contraction
Relaxes sphincter of Oddi
Modulates satiety
Decreases gastric acid secretion
Reduces gastric emptying
Regulates pancreatic growth
Secretin
Duodenum and jejunum (S cells)
Duodenal acid
Fatty acids
Stimulates pancreatic uid and bicarbonate 
secretion
Decreases acid secretion
Reduces gastric emptying
Motilin
Duodenum, small intestine and 
colon (Mo cells)
Fasting
Dietary fat
Regulates peristaltic activity, including migrating 
motor complexes (MMCs)
Gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide (GIP)
Duodenum (K cells) and jejunum
Glucose and fat
Stimulates insulin release (also known as 
glucose-dependent insulinotrophic polypeptide)
Inhibits acid secretion
Enhances satiety
Glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1)
Ileum and colon (L cells)
Carbohydrates, protein and fat
Stimulates insulin release
Inhibits acid secretion and gastric emptying
Enhances satiety
Vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP)
Nerve bres throughout 
gastrointestinal tract
Unknown
Has vasodilator action
Relaxes smooth muscle
Stimulates water and electrolyte secretion
Ghrelin
Stomach
Fasting
Inhibited by eating
Stimulates appetite, acid secretion and gastric 
emptying
Peptide YY
Ileum and colon
Feeding
Modulates satiety
intestinal surface. Contrast studies are useful for detecting lling defects, 
such as tumours, strictures, ulcers and motility disorders, but are inferior 
to endoscopic procedures and more sophisticated cross-sectional imag-
ing techniques, such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging. The major uses and limitations of various contrast studies are 
shown in Box 23.3 and Figure 23.12
Ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic 
resonance imaging 
Ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) are key tests in the evaluation of intra-abdominal dis-
ease. They are non-invasive and offer detailed images of the abdominal 

[[p846]]
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease     791
23
contents; portable ultrasound devices are increasingly used at the 
bedside to provide rapid diagnostic information, e.g. in acute abdom-
inal pain and to assist with investigations such as paracentesis. 
Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is used 
in the staging of malignancies and images may be fused with CT 
to enhance localisation. Their main applications are summarised in 
Box 23.4 and Figure 23.13
Endoanal ultrasound and anorectal manometry 
Endoanal ultrasound is primarily used in the evaluation of anal stula 
and anal sphincter pathology, in individuals presenting with faecal 
incontinence. In conjunction with this, anorectal manometry is com-
monly performed to detect abnormalities of sphincter function and 
recto-anal coordination. Anorectal manometry is also commonly used 
to assess constipation, particularly when thought due to obstructive 
defecation.
Endoscopy 
Videoendoscopes provide high-denition imaging and accessories can 
be passed down the endoscope to allow both diagnostic and ther-
apeutic procedures, some of which are illustrated in Figure 23.14. 
Endoscopes with magnifying lenses allow almost microscopic detail to 
be observed, and imaging modalities, such as confocal endomicros-
copy, autouorescence and ‘narrow-band imaging’, are increasingly 
used to detect subtle abnormalities not visible by standard ‘white light’ 
endoscopy. The implications of endoscopic procedures in older people 
are shown in Box 23.5
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 
This is performed under light sedation, or using only local anaesthetic 
throat spray after the patient has fasted for at least 4 hours. With the 
patient in the left lateral position, the entire oesophagus (excluding phar-
ynx), stomach and rst two parts of duodenum can be seen. Indications, 
contraindications and complications are given in Box 23.6. While upper 
gastrointestinal endoscopy is mainly performed via the transoral route, 
transnasal endoscopy is becoming an emerging alternative in some 
units.
23.3  Contrast radiology in the investigation of gastrointestinal 
disease
Barium 
swallow/meal
Barium follow-
through
Barium enema
Indications 
and major 
uses
Motility 
disorders 
(achalasia and 
gastroparesis)
Perforation or 
stula (non-
ionic contrast)
Diarrhoea and 
abdominal pain 
of small bowel 
origin
Possible 
obstruction by 
strictures
Suspected 
malabsorption
Assessment of 
Crohn’s disease
Altered bowel habit
Evaluation of 
strictures or 
diverticular disease
Megacolon
Limitations
Risk of 
aspiration
Poor mucosal 
detail
Low sensitivity 
for early cancer
Inability to 
biopsy
Time-
consuming 
nature
Radiation 
exposure
Relative 
insensitivity
Difculty in frail or 
incontinent patients
Sigmoidoscopy 
needed to see 
rectum
Low sensitivity for 
lesions < 1 cm
A
P
B
C
Fig. 23.12 Examples of contrast radiology.
of the sigmoid colon with multiple diverticula (arrows).
A
B
C
D
L
PV
Fig. 23.13 Examples of ultrasound, CT and MRI.
and cystic malignant tumour in the pancreatic tail (arrow). (PV = portal vein; L = 

[[p847]]
792    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Endoscopic ultrasound 
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) combines endoscopy with intralumi-
nal ultrasonography using a high-frequency transducer to produce 
high-resolution ultrasound images. This allows visualisation through 
the wall of the gastrointestinal tract and into surrounding tissues, 
e.g. the pancreas or lymph nodes. It can therefore be used to per-
form fine needle aspiration or biopsy of mass lesions. EUS is helpful 
in the diagnosis of pancreatic tumours, chronic pancreatitis, pan-
creatic cysts, cholangiocarcinoma, common bile duct stones, amp-
ullary lesions and submucosal tumours. It also plays an important 
role in the staging of certain cancers, e.g. those of oesophagus and 
pancreas. The role of EUS as a therapeutic modality has increased, 
and can be used in the drainage of pancreatic fluid collections and 
coeliac plexus block for pain management. Possible complications 
of EUS include bleeding, infection, cardiopulmonary events and 
perforation.
Capsule endoscopy 
Capsule endoscopy (Fig. 23.15) uses a capsule containing an imaging 
device, battery, transmitter and antenna; as it traverses the small intes-
tine, it transmits images to a battery-powered recorder worn on a belt 
round the patient’s waist. After approximately 8 hours, the capsule is 
excreted. Images from the capsule are analysed as a video sequence 
and it is usually possible to localise the segment of small bowel where 
lesions are seen. Abnormalities detected usually require enteroscopy for 
conrmation and therapy. Indications, contraindications and complica-
tions are listed in Box 23.7
Enteroscopy – push enteroscopy/double balloon enteroscopy 
While upper gastrointestinal endoscopy can reach the proximal small 
intestine in most patients, enteroscopy is an endoscopic technique that 
allows more extensive evaluation of the small intestine, extending into 
the jejunum and/or ileum. Push enteroscopy uses a long endoscope 
to examine up to the proximal jejunum. Deeper evaluation of the small 
bowel can be assessed by using a technique called double balloon 
enteroscopy, which uses a long endoscope with a exible overtube. 
Sequential and repeated ination and deation of balloons on the tip 
of the overtube and enteroscope allow the operator to push and pull 
along the entire length of the small intestine to the terminal ileum, to 
diagnose or treat small bowel lesions detected by capsule endoscopy or 
other imaging modalities. This technique can be performed via an ante-
grade approach (via the mouth) or retrograde approach (via the anus), 
23.5  Endoscopy in old age
 Tolerance: endoscopic procedures are generally well tolerated, even in very old 
people.
 Side-effects from sedation: older people are more sensitive, and 
respiratory depression, hypotension and prolonged recovery times 
are more common.
 Bowel preparation for colonoscopy: can be difcult in frail, immobile 
people. Sodium phosphate-based preparations can cause dehydration or 
hypotension and should be avoided in those with underlying cardiac or renal 
failure. Minimal-preparation CT colonograms provide an excellent alternative 
in these individuals.
 Antiperistaltic agents: hyoscine should be avoided in those with glaucoma 
and can also cause tachyarrhythmias. Glucagon is preferred if an antiperistaltic 
agent is needed.
(CT = computed tomography)
23.4  Imaging in gastroenterology
Ultrasound
Computed tomography (CT)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Positron emission 
tomography-CT (PET-CT)
Indications and 
major uses
Abdominal masses
Organomegaly
Ascites
Biliary tract dilatation
Gallstones
Guided biopsy of lesions
Small bowel imaging
Assessment of pancreatic 
disease
Hepatic tumour deposits
CT colonography (‘virtual 
colonoscopy’)
Tumour staging
Assessment of lesion 
vascularity
Abscesses and collections
Hepatic tumour staging
MRCP
Pelvic/perianal disease
Crohn’s stulae
Small bowel visualisation
Detection of metastases not 
seen on ultrasound or CT
Images can be fused with CT 
to form composite image
Limitations
Low sensitivity for small lesions
Little functional information
Operator-dependent
Gas and obesity may obscure view
Cost
Radiation dose
Claustrophobic patients
Contraindicated in presence 
of metallic prostheses, cardiac 
pacemaker, cochlear implants
Signal detection depends 
on metabolic activity 
within tumour – not all are 
metabolically active
(MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography)
23.6  Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Indications
 Dyspepsia in patients > 55 years of age or with alarm symptoms
 Atypical chest pain
 Dysphagia
 Vomiting
 Weight loss
 Acute or chronic gastrointestinal bleeding
 Screening for oesophageal varices in chronic liver disease
 Abnormal CT scan or barium meal
 Duodenal biopsies in the investigation of malabsorption and conrmation of a 
diagnosis of coeliac disease prior to commencement of gluten-free diet
 Therapy, including treatment of bleeding lesions, banding/injection of varices, 
dilatation of strictures, insertion of stents, placement of percutaneous 
gastrostomies, ablation of Barrett’s oesophagus and resection of high-grade 
dysplastic lesions and early neoplasia in the upper gastrointestinal tract
Contraindications
 Severe shock
 Recent myocardial infarction, unstable angina, cardiac arrhythmia
 Severe respiratory disease*
 Atlantoaxial subluxation*
 Possible visceral perforation
Complications
 Cardiorespiratory depression due to sedation
 Aspiration pneumonia
 Perforation
*These are ‘relative’ contraindications; in experienced hands, endoscopy can be 
safely performed. 
(CT = computed tomography)

[[p848]]
Investigation of gastrointestinal disease     793
23
Control of
bleeding
Injection sclerotherapy
Diathermy
Variceal ligation
Laser therapy
Haemostatic therapy
Treatment of
tumours
Laser therapy
Polypectomy
Photodynamic
therapy/radiofrequency
ablation
Treatment of
strictures
Stent insertion
Balloon dilatation
Bouginage
Management
of biliary and
pancreatic
disease
Basket retrieval
Endoscopic clipping
Endoscopic mucosal
resection
Endoscopic
submucosal
dissection (ESD)
Stent insertion
Pseudocyst drainage
Sphincterotomy
Stent insertion
Fig. 23.14 Examples of therapeutic techniques in endoscopy.
dependent upon the site of the lesion. Indications, contraindications and 
complications are listed in Box 23.8
Sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy 
Sigmoidoscopy can be carried out either in the outpatient clinic using a 
rigid plastic sigmoidoscope or in the endoscopy suite using a colono-
scope following bowel preparation. When sigmoidoscopy is combined 
with proctoscopy, accurate detection of haemorrhoids, ulcerative colitis 
and distal colorectal neoplasia is possible. After full bowel cleansing, it 
is possible to examine the entire colon and the terminal ileum using a 
colonoscope. Indications, contraindications and complications of colo-
noscopy are listed in Box 23.9
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) has largely 
replaced endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
in the evaluation of obstructive jaundice since it produces comparable 
images of the biliary tree and pancreas, providing information that com-
plements that obtained from CT and EUS.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
Using a side-viewing duodenoscope, it is possible to cannulate the 
main pancreatic duct and common bile duct. ERCP is used mainly in 
the treatment of a range of biliary and pancreatic diseases that have 
been identied by other imaging techniques such as MRCP, EUS and CT. 
Indications for and risks of ERCP are listed in Box 23.10
Histology 
Biopsy material obtained endoscopically or percutaneously can provide 
useful information (Box 23.11).
Tests of infection 
Bacterial cultures 
Stool cultures are essential in the investigation of diarrhoea, especially when 
it is acute or bloody, in order to identify pathogenic organisms (see Ch. 13).
Serology 
Detection of antibodies plays a limited role in the diagnosis of gastro-
intestinal infection caused by organisms such as Helicobacter pylori, 
Salmonella species and Entamoeba histolytica.
Breath tests 
Non-invasive breath tests for H. pylori infection are discussed on page 
814 and breath tests for suspected small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
on page 822.
Tests of function 
A number of dynamic tests can be used to investigate aspects of gut 
function, including digestion, absorption, inammation and epithelial per-
meability. Some of the more common ones are listed in Box 23.12. In the 
assessment of suspected malabsorption, blood tests (full blood count, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)), and measurement of C-reactive 
protein (CRP), folate, vitamin B12, iron status, albumin, calcium and phos-
phate) are essential, and endoscopy is undertaken to obtain mucosal 
biopsies. Faecal calprotectin is very sensitive at detecting mucosal 
inammation.

[[p849]]
794    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Oesophageal motility 
A barium swallow can give useful information about oesopha-
geal motility. Videouoroscopy, with joint assessment by a speech 
and language therapist and a radiologist, may be necessary in dif-
cult cases. High resolution oesophageal manometry (see Fig. 23.1), 
often in conjunction with 24-hour pH measurements, is of value in 
diagnosing cases of refractory gastro-oesophageal reux, acha-
lasia and non-cardiac chest pain. Oesophageal impedance test-
ing is useful for detecting non-acid or gas reux events, especially in 
patients with atypical symptoms or those who respond poorly to 
acid suppression.
23.11  Reasons for biopsy or cytological examination
 Suspected malignant lesions
 Assessment of mucosal abnormalities
 Diagnosis of infection (Candida, Helicobacter pylori, Giardia lamblia)
 Analysis of genetic mutations
23.10  Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
Indications
Diagnostic
 Biliary or pancreatic disease where other imaging is equivocal or 
contraindicated
 Ampullary biopsy or biliary cytology
Therapeutic
 Biliary disease:
Removal of common bile duct calculi*
Palliation of malignant biliary obstruction
Management of biliary leaks/damage complicating surgery
Dilatation of benign strictures
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 Pancreatic disease:
Drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts and stulae
Removal of pancreatic calculi (selected cases)
Contraindications
 Severe cardiopulmonary comorbidity
 Coagulopathy
Complications
 Occur in 5%–10% with a 30-day mortality of 0.5%–1%
General
 As for upper endoscopy
Specic
 Biliary disease:
Bleeding following sphincterotomy
Cholangitis (if biliary obstruction is not relieved by ERCP)
Gallstone impaction
 Pancreatic disease:
Acute pancreatitis
Infection of pseudocyst
*Laparoscopic surgery is preferred in t individuals who also require cholecystectomy.
23.9  Colonoscopy
Indications*
 Suspected inammatory bowel disease
 Chronic diarrhoea
 Altered bowel habit
 Rectal bleeding or iron deciency anaemia
 Assessment of abnormal CT colonogram or barium enema
 Colorectal cancer screening
 Colorectal adenoma and carcinoma follow-up
 Therapeutic procedures, including endoscopic resection, dilatation of strictures, 
laser, stent insertion and argon plasma coagulation
Contraindications
 Acute severe ulcerative colitis (unprepared exible sigmoidoscopy is preferred)
 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Complications
 Cardiorespiratory depression due to sedation
 Perforation
 Bleeding following polypectomy
*Colonoscopy is not useful in the investigation of constipation.
(CT = computed tomography)
A
B
Fig. 23.15 Wireless capsule endoscopy.
endoscopy image of scalloping of the small bowel suggestive of coeliac disease.
23.7  Wireless capsule endoscopy
Indications
 Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
 Small bowel Crohn’s disease
 Assessment of coeliac disease and its complications
 Screening and surveillance in familial polyposis syndromes
Contraindications
 Known or suspected small bowel stricture (risk of capsule retention)
 Caution in people with pacemakers or implantable debrillators
Complications
 Capsule retention (< 1%)
23.8  Double balloon enteroscopy
Indications
Diagnostic
 Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
 Malabsorption or unexplained diarrhoea
 Suspicious radiological ndings
 Suspected small bowel tumour
 Surveillance of polyposis syndromes
Therapeutic
 Coagulation/diathermy of bleeding lesions
 Jejunostomy placement
Contraindications
 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Complications
 As for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
 Post-procedure abdominal pain (≤ 20%)
 Pancreatitis (1%–3%)
 Perforation (especially after resection of large polyps)

[[p850]]
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease     795
23
Gastric emptying 
This involves administering a test meal containing solids and liquids labelled 
with different radioisotopes and measuring the amount retained in the stom-
ach afterwards (Box 23.13). It is useful in the investigation of suspected 
delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis), when other studies are normal.
Colonic and anorectal motility 
A plain abdominal X-ray taken on day 5 after ingestion of different-shaped 
inert plastic pellets on days 1–3 gives an estimate of whole-gut transit 
time. The test is useful in the evaluation of chronic constipation, when the 
position of any retained pellets can be observed, and helps to differentiate 
cases of slow transit from those due to dyssynergic defecation. The mech-
anism of defecation and anorectal function can be assessed by anorectal 
manometry, electrophysiological tests and defecating proctography.
Radioisotope tests 
Many different radioisotope tests are used (Boxes 23.12 and 23.13). In 
some, structural information is obtained, such as the localisation of a 
Meckel’s diverticulum. Others provide functional information, such as the 
rate of gastric emptying or ability to reabsorb bile acids. Others are tests 
of infection and rely on the presence of bacteria to hydrolyse a radio-
labelled test substance followed by detection of the radioisotope in 
expired air, such as the urea breath test for H. pylori
Gut hormone testing 
Excess gut hormone secretion by some gastrointestinal and pancreatic 
neuro-endocrine tumours can be assessed by measuring levels in blood. 
Commonly measured hormones include gastrin, somatostatin, vasoac-
tive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and pancreatic polypeptide.
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease 
Dysphagia 
Dysphagia is dened as difculty in swallowing. It may coexist with heart-
burn or vomiting but should be distinguished from both globus sensation 
23.12  Tests of gastrointestinal function
Process
Test
Principle
Comments
Absorption
Lactose
Lactose H2 breath test
Measurement of breath H2 content after 50 g oral lactose. 
Undigested sugar is metabolised by colonic bacteria in 
hypolactasia and expired hydrogen is measured
Non-invasive and accurate. May provoke pain and 
diarrhoea in sufferers
Fructose
Fructose H2 breath test
Measurement of breath H2 content after 25–50 g oral 
fructose. Unabsorbed fructose is fermented by colonic 
bacteria with expired hydrogen measured
Results can be difcult to interpret as breath 
testing does not reect fructose ingestion in 
everyday life
Bile acids
75SeHCAT test
Serum 
7α-hydroxycholestenone
Isotopic quantication of 7-day whole-body retention 
of oral dose 75Se-labelled homocholyltaurine (>15% = 
normal, 5%–15% borderline, < 5% = abnormal)
Intermediate metabolite of the bile acid synthetic 
pathway. Serum levels indicate activity of the pathway 
and are elevated in bile acid diarrhoea
Accurate and specic but requires two visits 
and involves radiation. Results can be equivocal. 
Serum 7α-hydroxycholestenone is almost as 
sensitive and specic
Simple test to perform and only marginally less 
sensitive and specic than 75SeHCAT test
Pancreatic exocrine  
function
Faecal elastase
Immunoassay of pancreatic enzymes on stool sample
Simple, quick and avoids urine collection. Does 
not detect mild disease
Mucosal 
inammation/
permeability
Faecal calprotectin  
or lactoferrin
Proteins secreted non-specically by neutrophils into the 
colon in response to inammation or neoplasia
Useful screening test for gastrointestinal 
inammation and for monitoring patients with 
Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Poor 
sensitivity for cancer
(75SeHCAT = 75Se-homocholic acid taurine)
23.13 Tests involving radioisotopes
Test
Isotope
Major uses and principle of test
Gastric emptying 
study
99mTc-sulphur
111In-DTPA
Assessment of gastric emptying, 
particularly for possible 
gastroparesis
Urea breath test
13C-urea
Non-invasive diagnosis of 
Helicobacter pylori. Bacterial 
urease enzyme splits urea to 
ammonia and CO2, which is 
detected in expired air
Meckel’s scan
99mTc-
pertechnetate
Diagnosis of Meckel’s 
diverticulum in cases of obscure 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Isotope 
is injected intravenously and 
localises in ectopic parietal 
mucosa within diverticulum
Somatostatin 
receptor 
scintigraphy (SRS)
111In-DTPA-
octreotide
99mTc-tektrotyd
Staging neuro-endocrine tumours. 
Labelled somatostatin analogues 
bind to cell surface somatostatin 
receptors on neuro-endocrine 
cancer cells
Positron emission 
tomography-CT 
(PET-CT)
18F-FDG
68Ga-labelled 
somatostatin 
analogue
Staging high-grade cancers
More sensitive and specic than 
SRS for staging neuro-endocrine 
tumours
(C = carbon; DTPA = diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; FDG = uorodeoxyglucose; In = indium; 
Tc = technetium)
(in which anxious people feel a lump in the throat without organic cause) 
and odynophagia (pain during swallowing, usually from gastro-oesophageal 
reux or candidiasis).
Dysphagia can occur due to problems in the oropharynx or oesoph-
agus (Fig. 23.16). Oropharyngeal disorders affect the initiation of swal-
lowing at the pharynx and upper oesophageal sphincter. The patient has 
difculty initiating swallowing and complains of choking, nasal regurgita-
tion or tracheal aspiration. Drooling, dysarthria, hoarseness and cranial 
nerve or other neurological signs may be present. Oesophageal disor-
ders cause dysphagia by obstructing the lumen or by affecting motil-
ity. Patients with oesophageal disease complain of food ‘sticking’ after 

[[p851]]
796    GASTROENTEROLOGY
symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reux but up to 50% of patients pres-
ent with other symptoms, such as chest pain, belching, halitosis, chronic 
cough or sore throats. In young patients with typical symptoms and a 
good response to dietary changes, antacids or acid suppression inves-
tigation is not required, but patients aged over 55 years and those with 
alarm symptoms or atypical features need urgent endoscopy.
Benign
Malignant
Oesophagitis
Dysmotility
Stricture
Manometry/
barium swallow
Endoscopy
and biopsy
Oesophageal
dysphagia
Videofluoroscopic
swallowing assessment
and neurological
investigation
Oropharyngeal
dysphagia
Food 'sticking' after
swallowing ± regurgitation
Dysphagia
Neurological disease
 Bulbar palsy
 Pseudobulbar palsy
 Myasthenia gravis
 Achalasia
 Non-specific
  motility disorder
 Peptic
 Candidiasis
 Eosinophilic
 Peptic
 Fibrous rings
 Eosinophilic
   oesophagitis
 Drugs, e.g.
   bisphosphonates
 Carcinoma of
   the oesophagus
 Carcinoma of
   the stomach
 Extrinsic
   compression
Difficulty initiating swallow
± choking or aspiration
Fig. 23.16 Investigation of dysphagia.
23.14 Causes of dyspepsia
Upper gastrointestinal disorders
 Peptic ulcer disease
 Acute gastritis
 Gallstones
 Oesophageal spasm
 Non-ulcer dyspepsia
 Irritable bowel syndrome
Other gastrointestinal disorders
 Pancreatic disease (cancer, chronic 
pancreatitis)
 Colonic carcinoma
 Hepatic disease (hepatitis, 
metastases)
Systemic disease
 Renal failure
 Hypercalcaemia
Drugs
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
 Glucocorticoids
 Iron and potassium supplements
 Digoxin
Others
 Psychological (anxiety, depression)
 Alcohol
23.15 Alarm features in dyspepsia
 Unintentional weight loss
 Anaemia
 Persistent vomiting
 Haematemesis and/or melaena
 Dysphagia
 Palpable abdominal mass
swallowing, although the level at which this is felt correlates poorly with 
the true site of obstruction. Swallowing of liquids is normal until strictures 
become extreme.
Investigations 
Dysphagia should always be investigated urgently. Endoscopy is the 
investigation of choice because it allows biopsy and dilatation of stric-
tures. Even if the appearances are normal, biopsies should be taken to 
look for eosinophilic oesophagitis. If no abnormality is found, then barium 
swallow with videouoroscopic swallowing assessment can be used to 
detect major motility disorders. In some cases, high-resolution oesoph-
ageal manometry is required, allowing accurate classication of abnor-
malities. Figure 23.16 summarises a diagnostic approach to dysphagia 
and lists the major causes.
Dyspepsia 
Dyspepsia describes symptoms such as discomfort, bloating and nausea, 
which are thought to originate from the upper gastrointestinal tract. There 
are many causes (Box 23.14), including some arising outside the digestive 
system. Heartburn and other ‘reux’ symptoms are separate entities and 
are considered elsewhere. Although symptoms often correlate poorly with 
the underlying diagnosis, a careful history is important to detect ‘alarm’ 
features requiring urgent investigation (Box 23.15) and to detect atypical 
symptoms that might be due to problems outside the gastrointestinal tract.
Dyspepsia affects up to 80% of the population at some time in life and most 
patients have no serious underlying disease. People who present with new 
dyspepsia at an age of more than 55 years and younger patients unrespon-
sive to empirical treatment require investigation to exclude serious disease. An 
algorithm for the investigation of dyspepsia is outlined in Figure 23.17.
Heartburn and regurgitation 
Heartburn describes retrosternal, burning discomfort, often rising up into 
the chest and sometimes accompanied by regurgitation of acidicor bit-
ter uid into the throat. These symptoms often occur after meals, on 
lying down or with bending, straining or heavy lifting. They are classical 

[[p852]]
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease     797
23
< 55 years
Urgent
endoscopy
> 55 years
Test for Helicobacter pylori, e.g. serology,
stool antigen or 13C urea breath test
Endoscopy
Positive
Negative
Helicobacter pylori
eradication
Treat
symptomatically
or 
consider other
diagnoses
Symptoms
resolve
Symptoms
persist
No
follow-up
Endoscopy
Dyspepsia
Are there
'alarm' features?
Yes
No
Fig. 23.17 Investigation of dyspepsia.
Alcoholism
Central nervous system disorders
 Vestibular neuronitis
 Migraine
 Raised intracranial pressure
 Meningitis
Gastroduodenal
 Peptic ulcer disease
 Gastric cancer
 Gastroparesis
The acute abdomen
 Appendicitis
 Cholecystitis
 Pancreatitis
 Intestinal obstruction
Metabolic
 Diabetic ketoacidosis
 Addison’s disease
Uraemia
Infections
 Hepatitis
 Gastroenteritis
 Urinary tract infection
Drugs
 NSAIDs
 Opiates
 Digoxin
 Antibiotics
 Cytotoxins
Psychogenic
Fig. 23.18 Causes of vomiting. (NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
Vomiting 
Vomiting is a complex reex involving both autonomic and somatic neu-
ral pathways. Synchronous contraction of the diaphragm, intercostal 
muscles and abdominal muscles raises intra-abdominal pressure and, 
combined with relaxation of the lower oesophageal sphincter, results in 
forcible ejection of gastric contents. It is important to distinguish true 
vomiting from regurgitation and to elicit whether the vomiting is acute 
or chronic (recurrent), as the underlying causes may differ. The major 
causes are shown in Figure 23.18.
Gastrointestinal bleeding 
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding 
This is the most common gastrointestinal emergency, with an estimated 
incidence of 134 per 100 000 of the population in the UK; the mortality of 
patients admitted to hospital is around 10%. Risk scoring systems have 
been developed to stratify the risk of needing endoscopic therapy or of 
having a poor outcome (Box 23.16). The advantage of the Blatchford 
score is that it may be used before endoscopy to predict the need for 
intervention to treat bleeding. Low scores (2 or less) are associated with 
a very low risk of adverse outcome. The common causes are shown in 
Figure 23.19.
Clinical assessment 
Haematemesis is red with clots when bleeding is rapid and profuse, 
or black (‘coffee grounds’) when less severe. Syncope may occur 
and is caused by hypotension from intravascular volume depletion. 
Symptoms of anaemia suggest chronic bleeding. Melaena is the 
passage of black, tarry stools containing altered blood; it is usually 
caused by bleeding from the upper gastrointestinal tract, although 
haemorrhage from the right side of the colon is occasionally respon-
sible. The characteristic colour and smell are the result of the action 
of digestive enzymes and of bacteria on haemoglobin. Severe acute 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding can sometimes cause maroon or 
bright red stool.
Management 
The principles of emergency management of non-variceal bleeding are 
discussed in detail below. Management of variceal bleeding is discussed 
on page 882.
1. Intravenous access 
The rst step is to gain intravenous access, ideally using two large-bore 
cannulae.

[[p853]]
798    GASTROENTEROLOGY
2. Initial clinical assessment 
 Dene circulatory status. Severe bleeding causes tachycardia, hypo-
tension and oliguria. The patient is cold and sweating, and may be 
agitated.
 Seek evidence of liver disease (p. 860). Jaundice, cutaneous stig-
mata, hepatosplenomegaly and ascites may be present in decom-
pensated cirrhosis.
 Identify comorbidity. The presence of cardiorespiratory, cerebro-
vascular or renal disease is important, both because these may be 
worsened by acute bleeding and because they increase the hazards 
of endoscopy and surgical operations. These comorbidities are, 
therefore, a common cause of death following acute gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage, even after successful haemostasis.
3. Basic investigations 
 Full blood count. Chronic or subacute bleeding leads to anaemia, 
but the haemoglobin concentration may be normal after sudden, 
major bleeding until haemodilution occurs. Thrombocytopenia 
may be a clue to the presence of hypersplenism in chronic liver 
disease.
 Urea and electrolytes. This test may show evidence of renal failure. 
The blood urea rises as the absorbed products of luminal blood are 
metabolised by the liver; an elevated blood urea with normal creati-
nine concentration implies severe bleeding.
 Liver function tests. These may show evidence of chronic liver 
disease.
 Prothrombin time. Check when there is a clinical suggestion of liver 
disease or patients are anticoagulated.
 Cross-matching. At least 2 units of blood should be cross-matched 
if a signicant bleed is suspected.
4. Resuscitation 
Intravenous crystalloid uids should be given to raise the blood pressure, 
with a 500 ml bolus recommended over less than 15 minutes in haemo-
dynamically unstable patients. In most patients, blood should be trans-
fused when haemoglobin is less than 70 g/L, although transfusion should 
be considered at higher levels in those with haemodynamic instability or 
ischaemic heart disease.
23.16 Modied Blatchford score: risk stratication in acute 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Admission risk marker
Score component value
Blood urea
≥ 25 mmol/L (70 mg/dL)
6
10–25 mmol/L (28–70 mg/dL)
4
8–10 mmol/L (22.4–28 mg/dL)
3
6.5–8 mmol/L (18.2–22.4 mg/dL)
2
< 6.5 mmol/L (18.2 mg/dL)
0
Haemoglobin for men
< 100 g/L (10 g/dL)
6
100–119 g/L (10–11.9 g/dL)
3
120–129 g/L (12–12.9 g/dL)
1
≥ 130 g/L (13 g/dL)
0
Haemoglobin for women
< 100 g/L (10 g/dL)
6
100–119 g/L (10–11.9 g/dL)
1
≥ 120 g/L (12 g/dL)
0
Systolic blood pressure
< 90 mmHg
3
90–99 mmHg
2
100–109 mmHg
1
> 109 mmHg
0
Other markers
Presentation with syncope
2
Hepatic disease
2
Cardiac failure
2
Pulse ≥ 100 beats/min
1
Presentation with melaena
1
None of the above
0
Liver
disease
Portal vein
thrombosis
Varices
(2 – 9%)
Oesophagitis
(10%)
Usually with
hiatus hernia
Retching
Mallory–Weiss tear
(5%)
Cancer of
stomach or
oesophagus
(2%)
NSAIDs
Helicobacter
pylori
Peptic ulcer
(35 – 50%)
Vascular
malformations
(5%)
Aortic graft
Aorto-duodenal
fistula
(0.2%)
NSAIDs
Alcohol
Gastric erosions
(10 – 20%)
Fig. 23.19 Causes of acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Frequency is given in parentheses. (NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)

[[p854]]
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease     799
23
5. Oxygen 
Oxygen saturations should be monitored with pulse oximetry, with a tar-
get saturation of 94%–98% and oxygen prescribed as required.
6. Antithrombotic drugs 
An increasing number of individuals present with an upper gastrointesti-
nal bleed while using antithrombotic medication. Aspirin can be contin-
ued during an upper gastrointestinal bleed. P2Y12-receptor antagonists 
(e.g. clopidogrel) should be temporarily stopped (unless prescribed fol-
lowing coronary artery stenting), as well as warfarin and direct oral anti-
coagulant therapy. However, early reintroduction of these medications 
should occur after haemostasis has been achieved to reduce thrombotic 
events and death.
7. Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy 
Intravenous PPI infusion should be given in non-variceal bleeding, in indi-
viduals who have a high-risk ulcer post endoscopy (e.g. ulcers with a clot 
and/or requiring endoscopic haemostasis). PPIs work by reducing gas-
tric acid secretion, neutralising intragastric pH, promoting clot stability by 
reducing pepsin-induced clot lysis and increasing platelet aggregation. 
While intravenous PPI infusion is most frequently used, intermittent intra-
venous PPI and oral high-dose PPI can be considered as alternatives. 
Box 23.17 outlines some common PPIs used.
8. Endoscopy 
This should be carried out after adequate resuscitation, ideally within 
24 hours; it yields a diagnosis in approximately 80% of cases. Patients 
with major endoscopic stigmata of recent haemorrhage (Fig. 23.20) 
can be treated endoscopically using a thermal or mechanical modal-
ity, such as a ‘heater probe’ or endoscopic clips, combined with injec-
tion of dilute adrenaline (epinephrine) into the bleeding point (‘dual 
therapy’). A biologically inert haemostatic mineral powder (TC325, 
‘haemospray’) can be used as rescue therapy when standard therapy 
fails. This may stop active bleeding and combined with PPI therapy 
may prevent rebleeding, thus avoiding the need for surgery. Newer 
techniques, such as ‘over-the-scope clips’, may also be used as a 
rescue therapy when standard therapy fails, treating large vessels or 
brotic lesions. Patients found to have bled from varices should be 
treated by band ligation (p. 883); balloon tamponade is another option 
if this fails, while arrangements are made for a transjugular intrahe-
patic portosystemic shunt (TIPSS). Balloon tamponade can be asso-
ciated with serious complications, and newer techniques, such as 
removable, self-expanding, covered metal oesophageal stents may 
be used as an alternative option.
9. Monitoring 
Patients should be closely observed, with hourly measurements of pulse, 
blood pressure, oxygen saturations and urine output.
10. Radiology and surgery 
Patients who have recurrent bleeding, where endoscopic attempts 
at haemostasis have failed, should be considered for radiological or 
surgical intervention. If available, angiographic control of bleeding 
is generally preferred to surgery in older, frail patients. If surgery is 
required, the choice of operation depends on the site and diagnosis 
of the bleeding lesion. Duodenal ulcers are treated by under-running, 
with or without pyloroplasty. Under-running for gastric ulcers can also 
be carried out (a biopsy must be taken to exclude carcinoma). Local 
excision may be performed, but when neither is possible, partial gas-
trectomy is required.
11. Eradication 
Following treatment for ulcer bleeding, all patients should avoid 
non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and those who test 
positive for H. pylori infection should receive eradication therapy 
(p. 814). Successful eradication should be conrmed by urea breath or 
faecal antigen testing.
23.17  Common proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and dosage for 
peptic ulcer disease
Oral administration
Standard dose
High dose
Lansoprazole
30 mg OD
30 mg BD
Omeprazole
20 mg OD
40 mg OD
Pantoprazole
40 mg OD
40 mg BD
Rabeprazole
20 mg OD
20 mg BD
Esomeprazole
20 mg OD
40 mg OD
Intravenous infusion
Dose
Omeprazole
Pantoprazole
Esomeprazole
80 mg IV bolus, followed by 8 mg/hr for 72 hrs
(BD = twice daily; IV = intravenous; OD = once daily)
A
B
Fig. 23.20 Major stigmata of recent haemorrhage and endoscopic treatment. 
injection of adrenaline (epinephrine) and application of a heater probe.

[[p855]]
800    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding 
The incidence of lower gastrointestinal bleeding is around 30–90 per 
100 000 of the population in the UK, with an in-hospital mortality of 
around 4%. This may be caused by haemorrhage from the colon, anal 
canal or small bowel. It is useful to distinguish those patients who pres-
ent with profuse, acute bleeding from those who present with chronic or 
subacute bleeding of lesser severity (see Box 23.18).
Severe acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding 
This presents with profuse red or maroon diarrhoea and with hypo-
volaemic shock. If available, CT angiography should be performed 
initially to localise the site of blood loss. If the bleeding source is 
identified, then catheter angiography with embolisation should be 
performed. If no source of bleeding is found then a colonoscopy 
should be performed. Some patients presenting with an apparent 
severe lower GI bleed are ultimately found to have a significant upper 
GI bleed.
The commonest cause of lower GI bleeding is diverticular disease, 
with up to two-thirds of cases being classied as severe. Bleeding 
from diverticular disease is often due to erosion of an artery within 
the mouth of a diverticulum. Multiple endoscopic options are avail-
able, with endoscopic clipping either alone or after the injection of 
dilute adrenaline (epinephrine) considered as rst-line treatment in the 
UK. Angiodysplasia is a disease of older adults, in which vascular 
malformations develop within the GI tract, commonly in the caecum. 
Bleeding can be acute and profuse; it usually stops spontaneously, 
but commonly recurs. Diagnosis is often difcult. Colonoscopy may 
reveal characteristic vascular spots and, in the acute phase, angio-
graphy can show bleeding into the intestinal lumen and an abnormal 
large, draining vein. The treatment of choice is endoscopic ther-
mal ablation, but resection of the affected bowel may be required if 
bleeding continues. Bowel ischaemia due to occlusion of the inferior 
mesenteric artery can present with abdominal colic and rectal bleed-
ing. It should be considered in patients (particularly older patients) 
who have evidence of generalised atherosclerosis. The diagnosis is 
made at colonoscopy. Resection is required only in the presence of 
periton itis. Meckel’s diverticulum with ectopic gastric epithelium may 
ulcerate and erode into a major artery. The diagnosis should be con-
sidered in children or adolescents who present with profuse or recur-
rent lower gastrointestinal bleeding. A Meckel’s 99mTc-pertechnetate 
scan is sometimes positive, but the diagnosis is commonly made only 
by laparotomy, at which time the diverticulum is excised.
Subacute or chronic lower gastrointestinal bleeding 
This can occur at all ages and is usually due to haemorrhoids or anal 
ssure. Haemorrhoidal bleeding is bright red and occurs during or after 
defecation. Proctoscopy can be used to make the diagnosis, but individ-
uals who have altered bowel habit and those who present over the age of 
40 years should undergo colonoscopy to exclude coexisting colorectal 
cancer. Anal ssure should be suspected when fresh rectal bleeding and 
anal pain occur during defecation.
Major gastrointestinal bleeding of unknown cause 
In some patients who present with major gastrointestinal bleeding, 
upper endoscopy, colonoscopy and CT angiography may fail to reveal 
a diagnosis. Wireless capsule endoscopy is increasingly used in such 
patients. The diagnostic yield is highest when performed as close as 
possible to the bleeding episode, particularly within the rst 48 hours of 
presenting with bleeding. Wireless capsule endoscopy is often used to 
dene a source of bleeding prior to enteroscopy (Fig. 23.21), with push 
or double balloon enteroscopy being used to visualise the small intes-
tine and treat the bleeding source. When all else fails, laparotomy with 
on-table endoscopy is indicated.
Chronic occult gastrointestinal bleeding 
In this context, occult means that blood or its breakdown products are 
present in the stool but cannot be seen by the naked eye. Occult bleed-
ing may reach 200 mL per day and cause iron deciency anaemia. Any 
cause of gastrointestinal bleeding may be responsible, but the most 
important is colorectal cancer, particularly carcinoma of the caecum, 
which may produce no gastrointestinal symptoms. In clinical practice, 
investigation of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract should be con-
sidered whenever a patient presents with unexplained iron deciency 
anaemia.
Diarrhoea 
Diarrhoea is dened as the passage of three or more loose or liquid 
stools per day. Stool weight was previously used to dene diarrhoea 
(> 200 g stool per day), but is no longer recommended as normal stool 
volumes can exceed this value. The most severe symptom in many 
patients is urgency of defecation, while faecal incontinence can occur in 
acute and chronic diarrhoeal illnesses.
Acute diarrhoea 
This is extremely common and is usually caused by faecal–oral transmis-
sion of bacteria or their toxins, viruses or parasites (see Ch. 13). Infective 
diarrhoea is usually short-lived and patients who present with a history 
of diarrhoea lasting more than 10 days rarely have an infective cause. A 
variety of drugs, including antibiotics, cytotoxic drugs, PPIs and NSAIDs, 
may be responsible.
23.18  Causes of lower gastrointestinal bleeding
Severe acute
 Diverticular disease
 Angiodysplasia
 Ischaemia
 Meckel’s diverticulum
 Inammatory bowel disease (rarely)
Moderate, chronic/subacute
 Fissure
 Haemorrhoids
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Carcinoma
 Large polyps
 Angiodysplasia
 Radiation enteritis
 Solitary rectal ulcer
Fig. 23.21 Angiodysplastic lesion noted on capsule endoscopy.

[[p856]]
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease     801
23
Chronic or relapsing diarrhoea 
Chronic diarrhoea can be categorised as being caused by disease of 
the colon or small bowel, or due to malabsorption (Box 23.19). Clinical 
presentation, examination of the stool, routine blood tests and imaging 
reveal a diagnosis in many cases. Young patients (< 40 years) with typical 
symptoms of a functional bowel disorder, with negative initial investiga-
tions, may have a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (p. 847).
Malabsorption 
Diarrhoea and weight loss in patients with a normal diet are likely to be 
caused by malabsorption. The symptoms are diverse in nature and var-
iable in severity. A few patients have apparently normal bowel habit, but 
diarrhoea usually occurs and may be watery and voluminous. Bulky, pale 
and offensive stools that oat in the toilet (steatorrhoea) signify fat mal-
absorption. Abdominal distension, borborygmi, cramps, weight loss and 
undigested food in the stool may be present. Some patients complain 
only of malaise and lethargy. In others, symptoms related to deciencies 
of specic vitamins, trace elements and minerals may occur (Fig. 23.22).
Pathophysiology 
Malabsorption results from abnormalities of the three processes that are 
essential to normal digestion:
 Intraluminal maldigestion occurs when deciency of bile or pancre-
atic enzymes results in inadequate solubilisation and hydrolysis of 
nutrients. Fat and protein malabsorption results. This may also occur 
with small bowel bacterial overgrowth.
 Mucosal malabsorption results from small bowel resection or conditions 
that damage the small intestinal epithelium, thereby diminishing the 
surface area for absorption and depleting brush border enzyme activity.
 ‘Post-mucosal’ lymphatic obstruction prevents the uptake and 
transport of absorbed lipids into lymphatic vessels. Increased pres-
sure in these vessels results in leakage into the intestinal lumen, 
leading to protein-losing enteropathy.
Investigations 
Investigations should be performed both to conrm the presence of malab-
sorption and to determine the underlying cause. Routine blood tests may 
show one or more of the abnormalities listed in Box 23.20. Tests to conrm 
fat and protein malabsorption should be performed (see Box 23.12). An 
approach to the investigation of malabsorption is shown in Figure 23.23
Weight loss 
Weight loss may be physiological, due to dieting, exercise, starvation, 
or the decreased nutritional intake that accompanies old age. Weight 
loss of more than 5% of usual body weight over 6–12 months is clin-
ically important and can indicate the presence of an underlying dis-
ease. Hospital and general practice weight records may be valuable in 
conrming that weight loss has occurred, as may reweighing patients 
at intervals; sometimes weight is regained or stabilises in those with 
no obvious cause. Pathological weight loss can be due to psychiatric 
illness, systemic disease, gastrointestinal causes or advanced dis-
ease of many organ systems (Fig. 23.24).
Physiological causes 
Weight loss can occur in the absence of serious disease in healthy indi-
viduals who have changes in physical activity or social circumstances. It 
may be difcult to be sure of this diagnosis in older patients, when the 
dietary history may be unreliable, and professional help from a dietitian 
may be required.
Psychiatric illness 
Features of anorexia nervosa, bulimia and affective disorders (see 
Ch. 31) may be apparent only after formal psychiatric input. Patients with 
alcohol dependence lose weight as a consequence of self-neglect and 
poor dietary intake. Depression may cause weight loss.
Systemic disease 
Chronic infections, including tuberculosis (Ch. 17), recurrent urine 
or chest infections, and a range of parasitic and protozoan infections 
(Ch. 13), should be considered. A history of foreign travel, high-risk activ-
ities and specic features, such as fever, night sweats, rigors, produc-
tive cough and dysuria, must be sought. High-risk sexual activity and 
recreational drug misuse may suggest human immunodeciency virus 
(HIV)-related illness (Ch. 14). Weight loss is a late feature of disseminated 
malignancy, but by the time the patient presents, other features of cancer 
are often present. Chronic inammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis and polymyalgia rheumatica (Ch. 26), are often associated with 
weight loss.
Gastrointestinal disease 
Almost any disease of the gastrointestinal tract can cause weight loss. 
Dysphagia and gastric outow obstruction (p. 816) cause weight loss by 
23.19  Chronic or relapsing diarrhoea
Colonic
Malabsorption
Small bowel
Clinical features
Blood and mucus in stool
Cramping lower abdominal pain
Steatorrhoea
Undigested food in the stool
Weight loss and nutritional disturbances
Large-volume, watery stool
Abdominal bloating
Cramping mid-abdominal pain
Some causes
Inammatory bowel disease
Microscopic colitis
Neoplasia
Ischaemia
Irritable bowel syndrome
Pancreatic:
Chronic pancreatitis
Cancer of pancreas
Cystic brosis
Enteropathy:
Coeliac disease
Tropical sprue
Lymphoma
Lymphangiectasia
Crohn’s disease
Neuro-endocrine tumour
Small bowel carcinoid
VIPoma
Drug-induced:
NSAIDs
Aminosalicylates
SSRIs
Investigations
Faecal calprotectin
Ileocolonoscopy with biopsies
Faecal elastase
Faecal calprotectin
Ultrasound, CT and MRCP
Stool volume
Small bowel biopsy
Serum gut hormone prole and 24 hr urine 5HIAA
Barium follow-through or small bowel MRI
Barium follow-through or small bowel MRI
(CT = computed tomography; 5HIAA = 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-
inammatory drugs; SSRIs = selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors; VIP = vasoactive intestinal polypeptide)

[[p857]]
802    GASTROENTEROLOGY
reducing food intake. Malignancy at any site may cause weight loss by 
mechanical obstruction, anorexia or cytokine-mediated systemic effects. 
Malabsorption from pancreatic diseases (p. 850) or small bowel causes 
may lead to profound weight loss with specic nutritional deciencies 
(p. 766). Inammatory diseases, such as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative 
colitis (p. 835), cause anorexia, fear of eating and loss of protein, blood 
and nutrients from the gut.
Metabolic disorders and miscellaneous causes 
Weight loss may occur in association with metabolic disorders, such as 
a new presentation of type 1 diabetes or thyrotoxicosis, as well as end-
stage respiratory and cardiac disease.
Investigations 
In cases where the cause of weight loss is not obvious after thorough 
history-taking and physical examination, or where an existing condi-
tion is considered unlikely, the following investigations are indicated: 
urinalysis for glucose, protein and blood; blood tests, including liver 
23.20  Routine blood test abnormalities in malabsorption
Haematology
 Microcytic anaemia (iron deciency)
 Macrocytic anaemia (folate or B12 deciency)
 Increased prothrombin time (vitamin K deciency)
Biochemistry
 Hypoalbuminaemia
 Hypocalcaemia
 Hypomagnesaemia
 Hypophosphataemia
 Low serum zinc
Purpura and bruising
(vitamins C, K)
Poor wound healing
(vitamin C, protein, zinc)
Distension, steatorrhoea,
watery diarrhoea
Lethargy
Depression
Night blindness
(vitamin A)
Anaemia
(iron, folate, B12)
Angular stomatitis, glossitis
(iron, folate, B12)
Bleeding gums
(vitamin C)
Follicular
hyperkeratosis
(vitamin A)
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
(zinc)
Koilonychia
(iron)
Paraesthesia, tetany
(calcium, magnesium)
Clubbing
Osteomalacia, rickets
(calcium, vitamin D)
Muscle wasting (protein)
Proximal myopathy
(vitamin D)
Peripheral neuropathy
(B12)
Peripheral oedema
(hypoalbuminaemia)
Fig. 23.22 Possible physical consequences of malabsorption.
      Consider bile salt malabsorption
    SeHCAT scan
    Serum 7α-hydroxycholestenone 
Normal
Normal
Suspected malabsorption
Clinical features of steatorrhoea
    Blood tests (urea and electrolytes,
     immunoglobulins, Ca2+, Mg2+,
     full blood count, clotting, albumin,
     folate, B12, coeliac antibodies)
Investigate small intestine
    Duodenal biopsy
    Barium studies or small bowel MRI
    Faecal calprotectin
    Lactulose/glucose hydrogen 
      breath test
Investigate pancreas
    Pancreatic function tests,
      e.g. faecal elastase
    Ultrasound scan/CT
    MRCP
Fig. 23.23 Investigation for suspected malabsorption. (CT = computed 
tomography; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; MRI = 
magnetic resonance imaging; 75SeHCAT = 75Se-homocholic acid taurine)

[[p858]]
Presenting problems in gastrointestinal disease     803
23
function tests, random blood glucose and thyroid function tests; CRP 
and ESR (may be raised in unsuspected infections, such as tuber-
culosis, connective tissue disorders and malignancy); and faecal 
calprotectin. Where the cause of weight loss is still unclear, chest 
X-ray, whole-body CT imaging and/or endoscopic investigation may 
be required. Rarely, tests such as bone marrow aspiration or liver 
biopsy may be necessary to identify conditions like cryptic miliary 
tuberculosis (Ch. 17). Before embarking on invasive or very costly 
investigations, it is always worth revisiting the patient’s history and 
reweighing at intervals.
Constipation 
Constipation is dened as infrequent passage of hard stools. Patients 
may also complain of straining, a sensation of incomplete evacuation 
and either perianal or abdominal discomfort. Constipation can be acute, 
typically lasting less than 1 week, or chronic, lasting greater than 4 
weeks. Chronic constipation is normally due to a primary cause, such 
as dietary intake (e.g. insufcient bre), lifestyle factors (e.g. sedentary 
lifestyle) or disorders of rectal evacuation.
Secondary causes of chronic constipation are numerous, including 
drugs such as opiates. Box 23.21 outlines causes of constipation.
Clinical assessment and management 
The onset, duration and characteristics are important; for example, a 
neonatal onset suggests Hirschsprung’s disease, while a recent change 
in bowel activity in middle age should raise the suspicion of an organic 
disorder, such as colonic carcinoma. The presence of rectal bleeding, 
pain and weight loss is important, as are excessive straining, symptoms 
suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome, a history of childhood constipa-
tion and emotional distress.
Careful examination contributes more to the diagnosis than extensive 
investigation. A search should be made for general medical disorders, as 
well as signs of intestinal obstruction. Neurological disorders, especially 
spinal cord lesions, should be sought. Perineal inspection and rectal 
examination are essential and may reveal abnormalities of the pelvic oor 
(abnormal descent, impaired sensation), anal canal or rectum (masses, 
faecal impaction, prolapse).
It is neither possible nor appropriate to investigate every person with 
constipation. For those with chronic constipation, investigation will 
usually proceed along the lines described below.
Initial investigations 
A thorough history and physical examination should be performed. 
Careful digital rectal examination and inspection of the perineum is 
essential, and useful in the assessment of pelvic oor abnormalities. A full 
blood count, routine biochemistry, including serum calcium and thyroid 
function tests, should be carried out. If these are normal, then dietary and 
lifestyle modications should be advised, such as increased uid intake, 
dietary bre supplementation and exercise. Laxatives should be com-
menced if individuals fail to respond. Organic causes should be explored 
using colonoscopy in individuals with concerning symptoms (e.g. rectal 
bleeding, pain or weight loss).
Further investigations 
If no cause is found and disabling symptoms are present, then specialist 
referral for investigation of possible dysmotility may be necessary. The 
problem may be due to delayed transit of stool in the colon (slow transit 
constipation) or from functional abnormalities in the pelvic oor and anal 
sphincter muscles (dyssynergic defecation). Intestinal marker studies, 
anorectal manometry, electrophysiological studies and magnetic reso-
nance proctography can all be used to dene the problem.
Chronic infection
HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis
Brucellosis
Gut infestations
Gastrointestinal
Poor dentition
Any cause of oral pain,
dysphagia
Malabsorption
Malignancy at any site
Inflammatory bowel disease
Chronic infection
Cirrhosis
Respiratory
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Occult malignancy (especially
small-cell carcinoma)
Empyema
Psychosocial
Deprivation, starvation
Eating disorders
Depression, bipolar illness
Bereavement
Chronic pain/sleep
deprivation
Alcoholism
Rheumatological
Rheumatoid arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Renal
Occult malignancy
Chronic renal failure
Salt-losing
nephropathy
Cardiac
Congestive cardiac failure
Infective endocarditis
Endocrine
Type 1 diabetes
Thyrotoxicosis
Addison’s disease
Neurodegenerative
Parkinsonism
Dementia
Motor neuron disease
Fig. 23.24 Some important causes of weight loss.

[[p859]]
804    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Abdominal pain 
There are four types of abdominal pain:
 Visceral. Gut organs are insensitive to stimuli such as burning and 
cutting but are sensitive to distension, contraction, twisting and 
stretching. Pain from unpaired structures is usually, but not always, 
felt in the midline.
 Parietal. The parietal peritoneum is innervated by somatic nerves 
and its involvement by inammation, infection or neoplasia causes 
sharp, well-localised and lateralised pain.
 Referred pain. Gallbladder pain, for example, may be referred to the 
back or shoulder tip.
 Psychogenic. Cultural, emotional and psychosocial factors inuence 
everyone’s experience of pain. In some patients, no organic cause 
can be found despite investigation, and psychogenic causes (depres-
sion or somatisation disorder) may be responsible (see Ch. 31).
The causes, assessment and management of acute abdominal pain are 
discussed in Chapter 9
Chronic or recurrent abdominal pain 
It is essential to take a detailed history, paying particular attention to fea-
tures of the pain and any associated symptoms (Boxes 23.22 and 23.23).
Note should be made of the patient’s general demeanour, mood and 
emotional state, signs of weight loss, fever, jaundice or anaemia. If a thor-
ough abdominal and rectal examination is normal, a careful search should 
be made for evidence of disease affecting other structures, particularly 
the vertebral column, spinal cord, lungs and cardiovascular system.
Investigations will depend on the clinical features elicited during the 
history and examination:
 Endoscopy and ultrasound are indicated for epigastric pain, and for 
dyspepsia and symptoms suggestive of gallbladder disease.
 Colonoscopy is indicated for patients with altered bowel habit, rectal 
bleeding or features of obstruction suggesting colonic disease.
 CT or MR angiography should be considered when pain is provoked 
by food in a patient with widespread atherosclerosis, as this may 
indicate mesenteric ischaemia.
 Persistent symptoms require exclusion of colonic or small bowel 
disease. However, young patients with pain related to defecation, 
bloating and alternating bowel habit are more likely to have irritable 
bowel syndrome (p. 847). Simple investigations (blood tests, faecal 
calprotectin and sigmoidoscopy) are sufcient in the absence of 
rectal bleeding, weight loss and abnormal physical ndings.
 Ultrasound, CT and faecal elastase are required for patients with 
upper abdominal pain radiating to the back. A history of alcohol 
misuse, weight loss and diarrhoea suggests chronic pancreatitis or 
pancreatic cancer.
 Recurrent attacks of pain in the loins radiating to the anks with 
urinary symptoms should prompt investigation for renal or ureteric 
stones by abdominal X-ray, ultrasound and computed tomography 
of the kidneys, ureters and bladder (CT KUB).
 Chronic abdominal wall pain (CAWP) should be considered when 
pain is clearly related to movement, with the commonest cause 
being anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome. A positive 
Carnett’s sign (abdominal pain is unchanged or worsened when 
abdominal muscles are tensed, e.g. by asking the patient to lift their 
head and shoulders from the examination couch) may point towards 
23.21  Causes of constipation
Gastrointestinal causes
Dietary
 Lack of bre and/or uid intake
Motility
 Slow-transit constipation
 Irritable bowel syndrome
 Drugs (see below)
 Chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction
Structural
 Colonic carcinoma
 Diverticular disease
 Hirschsprung’s disease
Defecation
 Anorectal disease (Crohn’s, ssures, 
haemorrhoids)
 Dyssynergic defecation
Non-gastrointestinal causes
Drugs
 Opiates
 Anticholinergics
 Calcium antagonists
 Iron supplements
 Aluminium-containing antacids
Neurological
 Multiple sclerosis
 Spinal cord lesions
 Cerebrovascular accidents
 Parkinsonism
Metabolic/endocrine
 Diabetes mellitus
 Hypercalcaemia
 Hypothyroidism
 Pregnancy
Others
 Any serious illness with immobility, 
especially in old age
 Depression
23.22  Extra-intestinal causes of chronic or recurrent 
abdominal pain
Retroperitoneal
 Aortic aneurysm
 Malignancy
 Lymphadenopathy
 Abscess
Psychogenic
 Depression
 Anxiety
 Hypochondriasis
 Somatisation
Locomotor
 Vertebral compression/fracture
 Abdominal muscle strain
Metabolic/endocrine
 Diabetes mellitus
 Acute intermittent porphyria
 Hypercalcaemia
Drugs/toxins
 Glucocorticoids
 Azathioprine
 Lead
 Alcohol
Haematological
 Sickle-cell disease
 Haemolytic disorders
Neurological
 Spinal cord lesions
 Tabes dorsalis
 Radiculopathy
23.23  How to assess abdominal pain
 Duration
 Site and radiation
 Severity
 Precipitating and relieving factors (food, drugs, alcohol, posture, movement, 
defecation)
 Nature (colicky, constant, sharp or dull, wakes patient at night)
 Pattern (intermittent or continuous)
 Associated features (vomiting, dyspepsia, altered bowel habit)

[[p860]]
Disorders of the mouth and salivary glands     805
23
the diagnosis. CAWP is frequently overlooked and patients are often 
mis-diagnosed as having a functional disorder.
 A past history of psychiatric disturbance, repeated negative inves-
tigations or vague symptoms that do not t any disease or organ 
pattern suggest a psychological origin for the pain. Careful review of 
case notes and previous investigations, along with open and honest 
discussion with the patient, reduces the need for further cycles of 
unnecessary and invasive tests. Care must always be taken, how-
ever, not to miss rare pathology, such as acute intermittent porphyria 
(p. 644) or atypical presentations of common diseases.
Constant abdominal pain 
Patients with chronic pain that is constant or nearly always present usu-
ally have features to suggest the underlying diagnosis. No cause will be 
found in a minority, despite thorough investigation, leading to considera-
tion of functional causes of abdominal pain. Centrally mediated abdom-
inal pain syndrome is characterised by severe constant or frequent 
abdominal pain that is rarely related to gut function, thought to result 
from abnormal CNS processing of normal visceral afferent sensory input 
and psychosocial factors are often operative (see Ch. 31). The manage-
ment is reliant on establishing an effective patient–physician relationship, 
psychological support and the appropriate use of drugs such as tricyclic 
antidepressants to minimise the effects of the pain on social, personal 
and occupational life. Narcotic bowel syndrome may also present with 
constant abdominal pain, and is associated with increased or continu-
ous use of opioids, with opioid-induced hyperalgesia thought to be the 
cause for symptoms. Patients tend to have an improvement in pain on 
withdrawal of opiates.
Disorders of the mouth and salivary glands 
Aphthous ulceration 
Aphthous ulcers are supercial and painful; they occur in any part of 
the mouth. Recurrent ulcers occur in around 20% of the population and 
are particularly common in women prior to menstruation. The cause is 
unknown, but in severe cases other causes of oral ulceration must be 
considered (Box 23.24). Biopsy is occasionally necessary for diagnosis.
Treatment is generally not required. Acute episodes may be treated 
with topical glucocorticoids (such as 0.1% triamcinolone in Orabase) or 
choline salicylate (8.7%) gel. Symptomatic relief is achieved using local 
anaesthetic mouthwashes. Rarely, patients with very severe, recurrent 
aphthous ulcers may need oral glucocorticoids.
Oral cancer 
Squamous carcinoma of the oral cavity is common worldwide and is 
more common in males. Five-year survival is around 50%, largely as 
a result of late diagnosis. Poor diet, alcohol excess and smoking or 
tobacco chewing are the traditional risk factors but high-risk, oncogenic 
strains of human papillomavirus (HPV-16 and HPV-18) have been iden-
tied as being responsible for much of the recent increase in incidence, 
especially in cases affecting the base of tongue, soft palate and tonsils. 
In parts of Asia, the disease is common among people who chew areca 
nuts wrapped in leaves of the betel plant (‘betel nuts’).
Oral cancer may present in many ways (Box 23.25) and a high index 
of suspicion is required. All possible sources of local trauma or infection 
should be treated in patients with suspicious lesions and they should 
be reviewed after 2 weeks, with biopsy if the lesion persists. Small 
cancers can be resected but extensive surgery, with neck dissection 
to remove involved lymph nodes, may be necessary. Some patients 
can be treated with radical radiotherapy alone, and sometimes chemo-
radiotherapy is also given after surgery to treat microscopic residual 
disease. Some tumours may be amenable to photodynamic therapy 
(PDT), avoiding the need for surgery. Recurrent or metastatic dis-
ease may require treatment with the monoclonal antibody cetuximab 
(an epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor), in combination with 
chemotherapy.
Candidiasis 
The yeast Candida albicans is a normal mouth commensal, but it may 
proliferate to cause thrush. This occurs in babies, debilitated patients, 
people receiving glucocorticoid or antibiotic therapy, individuals with dia-
betes and immunosuppressed patients, especially those receiving cyto-
toxic therapy and those with HIV infection. White patches are seen on 
the tongue and buccal mucosa. Odynophagia or dysphagia suggests 
pharyngeal and oesophageal candidiasis. A clinical diagnosis is sufcient 
to instigate therapy, although brushings or biopsies can be obtained for 
mycological examination. Oral thrush can be treated using topical treat-
ments such as miconazole or nystatin. Resistant cases or immunosup-
pressed patients may require oral uconazole.
Parotitis 
Parotitis is caused by viral or bacterial infection. Mumps causes a 
self-limiting acute parotitis (p. 284). Bacterial parotitis usually occurs as 
a complication of major surgery. It is a consequence of dehydration and 
poor oral hygiene, and can be avoided by good post-operative care. 
Patients present with painful parotid swelling and this can be compli-
cated by abscess formation. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are required, 
while surgical drainage is necessary for abscesses. Other causes of sal-
ivary gland enlargement are listed in Box 23.26 and implications of oral 
health in older people are discussed in Box 23.27
23.24  Causes of oral ulceration
Aphthous
 Idiopathic
 Premenstrual
Infection
 Fungal (candidiasis)
 Viral (herpes simplex, HIV)
 Bacterial, including syphilis, 
tuberculosis
Gastrointestinal diseases
 Crohn’s disease
 Coeliac disease
Dermatological conditions
 Lichen planus
 Immunobullous disorders (Ch. 27)
 Dermatitis herpetiformis
 Erythema multiforme
Drugs
 Nicorandil, NSAIDs, methotrexate, 
penicillamine, losartan, ACE inhibitors
 Stevens–Johnson syndrome  
(Ch. 27)
 Cytotoxic drugs
Systemic diseases
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (Ch. 26)
 Behçet’s disease (Ch. 26)
Neoplasia
 Carcinoma
 Leukaemia
 Kaposi’s sarcoma
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; NSAIDs = non-
steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
23.25  Symptoms and signs of oral cancer
 Solitary ulcer without precipitant, e.g. local trauma
 Solitary white patch (‘leukoplakia’) that fails to wipe off
 Solitary red patch
 Fixed lump
 Lip numbness in absence of trauma or infection
 Trismus (pain/difculty in opening the mouth)
 Cervical lymphadenopathy

[[p861]]
806    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Disorders of the oesophagus 
Gastro-oesophageal reux disease 
Gastro-oesophageal reux resulting in heartburn affects approximately 
15% of the general population.
Pathophysiology 
Occasional episodes of gastro-oesophageal reux are common in 
healthy individuals. Reux is normally followed by oesophageal peristaltic 
waves that efciently clear the gullet, alkaline saliva neutralises residual 
acid and symptoms do not occur. Gastro-oesophageal reux disease 
develops when the oesophageal mucosa is exposed to gastroduodenal 
contents for prolonged periods of time, resulting in symptoms and, in 
a proportion of cases, oesophagitis. Several factors are known to be 
involved in the development of gastro-oesophageal reux disease and 
these are shown in Figure 23.25
Abnormalities of the lower oesophageal sphincter 
The lower oesophageal sphincter is tonically contracted under normal 
circumstances, relaxing only during swallowing (see Fig. 23.1).
Some patients with gastro-oesophageal reux disease have reduced 
lower oesophageal sphincter tone, permitting reux when intra-abdominal 
pressure rises. In others, basal sphincter tone is normal, but reux occurs 
in response to frequent episodes of inappropriate sphincter relaxation.
Hiatus hernia 
Hiatus hernia (Box 23.28 and Fig. 23.26) causes reux because the pressure 
gradient is lost between the abdominal and thoracic cavities, which nor-
mally pinches the hiatus. In addition, the oblique angle between the cardia 
and oesophagus disappears. Many patients who have large hiatus hernias 
develop reux symptoms but the relationship between the presence of a 
hernia and symptoms is poor. Nevertheless, almost all patients who develop 
oesophagitis, Barrett’s oesophagus or peptic strictures are found to have a 
hiatus hernia.
Delayed oesophageal clearance 
Defective oesophageal peristaltic activity is commonly found in patients 
who have oesophagitis. It is a primary abnormality, since it persists after 
oesophagitis has been healed by acid-suppressing drug therapy. Poor 
oesophageal clearance leads to increased acid exposure time.
Gastric contents 
Gastric acid is the most important oesophageal irritant and there is a 
close relationship between acid exposure time and symptoms. Pepsin 
and bile also contribute to mucosal injury.
Defective gastric emptying 
Gastric emptying is delayed in patients with gastro-oesophageal reux 
disease. The reason is unknown.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure 
Pregnancy and obesity are established predisposing causes. Weight loss 
may improve symptoms.
Dietary and environmental factors 
Dietary fat, chocolate, alcohol, tea and coffee relax the lower oesopha-
geal sphincter and may provoke symptoms. The foods that trigger symp-
toms vary widely between affected individuals.
Patient factors 
Visceral sensitivity and patient vigilance play a role in determining symp-
tom severity and consulting behaviour in individual patients.
Clinical features 
The major symptoms are heartburn and regurgitation, often provoked by 
bending, straining or lying down. ‘Waterbrash’, which is salivation due to 
reex salivary gland stimulation as acid enters the gullet, is often pres-
ent. Gastro-oesophageal reux is commoner in older people (Box 23.29) 
and in those who are overweight. Some patients are woken at night by 
23.26  Causes of salivary gland swelling
 Infection:
Mumps
Bacterial (post-operative)
 Calculi
 Sjögren syndrome (Ch. 26)
 Sarcoidosis
 Tumours:
Benign: pleomorphic adenoma (95% of cases)
Intermediate: mucoepidermoid tumour
Malignant: carcinoma
23.27  Oral health in old age
 Dry mouth: affects around 40% of healthy older people.
 Gustatory and olfactory sensation: declines and chewing power is 
diminished.
 Salivation: baseline salivary ow falls, but stimulated salivation is unchanged.
 Root caries and periodontal disease: common partly because oral hygiene 
deteriorates with increasing frailty.
 Bacteraemia and sepsis: may complicate Gram-negative anaerobic infection 
in the periodontal pockets of the very frail.
Acid-pepsin
(bile)
Delayed
gastric
emptying
Hiatus hernia
Defective
oesophageal
clearance
Abnormal lower
oesophageal
sphincter
  Reduced tone
  Inappropriate
relaxation
Increased
intra-abdominal
pressure
Obesity
Dietary
factors
Fig. 23.25 Factors associated with the development of gastro-oesophageal 
reux disease.
23.28  Important features of hiatus hernia
 Herniation of the stomach through the diaphragm into the chest
 Occurs in 30% of the population over the age of 50 years
 Often asymptomatic
 Heartburn and regurgitation can occur
 Gastric volvulus may complicate large hernias

[[p862]]
Disorders of the oesophagus     807
23
choking as reuxed uid irritates the larynx. Others develop odynophagia 
or dysphagia. A variety of other features have been described, such as 
atypical chest pain that may be severe and can mimic angina; it may be 
due to reux-induced oesophageal spasm. Others include hoarseness 
(‘acid laryngitis’), recurrent chest infections, chronic cough and asthma. 
The true relationship of these features to gastro-oesophageal reux dis-
ease remains unclear.
Complications 
Oesophagitis 
A range of endoscopic ndings is recognised, from mild redness to 
severe bleeding ulceration with stricture formation, although appear-
ances may be completely normal (Fig. 23.27). There is a poor correlation 
between symptoms and histological and endoscopic ndings.
Barrett’s oesophagus 
Barrett’s oesophagus is a pre-malignant condition, in which the nor-
mal squamous lining of the lower oesophagus is replaced by columnar 
mucosa (columnar lined oesophagus; CLO) that may contain areas of 
intestinal metaplasia (Fig. 23.28). Patients are often asymptomatic until 
discovered, and can present with oesophageal cancer. Barrett’s oesoph-
agus is an adaptive response to chronic gastro-oesophageal reux and 
is found in 10% of patients undergoing gastroscopy for reux symptoms. 
The estimated prevalence in Western countries is 1%–2% of the popu-
lation. The relative risk of oesophageal cancer is increased 40–120-fold, 
but the absolute risk is low (0.1%–0.5% per year). The epidemiology and 
aetiology of Barrett’s oesophagus are poorly understood. The prevalence 
is increasing, and it is more common in men (especially of European 
ancestry), the obese (central obesity in particular) and those over 50 
years of age. Cigarette smoking is a moderate risk factor, while there is 
a less clear association with alcohol. The risk of cancer seems to relate 
to the severity and duration of reux rather than the presence of Barrett’s 
oesophagus per se, and it has been suggested that duodenogastro-
oesophageal reux of bile, pancreatic enzymes and pepsin, as well as 
gastric acid, may be important in the pathogenesis. The molecular events 
underlying progression of Barrett’s oesophagus to dysplasia and cancer 
are incompletely understood, but inactivation of the tumour suppression 
protein p16 by loss of heterozygosity or promoter hypermethylation is 
a key event, followed by somatic inactivation of TP53, which promotes 
aneuploidy and tumour progression. Studies are in progress to develop 
biomarkers that will allow detection of those at higher cancer risk, but are 
currently not used in clinical practice.
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Lower
oesophageal
sphincter
Diaphragm
Diaphragm
A
B
Fig. 23.26 Types of hiatus hernia. 
Inset:
Inset: Barium meal showing a gastric volvulus (small arrows) complicating a sliding hiatus hernia (large arrow).
23.29  Gastro-oesophageal reux disease in old age
 Prevalence: higher.
 Severity of symptoms: does not correlate with the degree of mucosal 
inammation.
 Complications: late complications, such as peptic strictures or bleeding from 
oesophagitis, are more common.
 Recurrent pneumonia: consider aspiration from occult gastro-oesophageal 
reux disease.
Fig. 23.27 Severe reux oesophagitis. There is near-circumferential supercial 
ulceration and inammation extending up the gullet.

[[p863]]
808    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Diagnosis 
Endoscopy is the gold standard for diagnosis. Multiple systematic biop-
sies are taken, in addition to sampling any visible lesions, to maximise the 
chance of detecting intestinal metaplasia and/or dysplasia.
Management 
Neither potent acid suppression nor anti-reux surgery stops progres-
sion or induces regression of Barrett’s oesophagus, and treatment is 
indicated only for symptoms of reux or complications, such as stricture. 
Endoscopic therapies can induce regression and at present may be used 
for those with dysplasia and mucosal oesophageal adenocarcinoma. 
Regular endoscopic surveillance can detect dysplasia at an early stage 
and may improve survival but, because most Barrett’s oesophagus is 
undetected until cancer develops, surveillance strategies are unlikely to 
inuence the overall mortality rate of oesophageal cancer. Surveillance 
is expensive and the cost-effectiveness of this approach is debatable. 
Currently, surveillance intervals for Barrett’s oesophagus are risk stratied 
by the length of the Barrett’s oesophagus segment, and by the presence 
and grade of dysplasia.
For those with high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma, the 
treatment options are either oesophagectomy or endoscopic therapy, 
with a combination of endoscopic resection of any visibly abnormal areas 
and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of the remaining Barrett’s mucosa, as 
an ‘organ-preserving’ alternative to surgery. Promising alternative abla-
tive therapies to RFA are in development, such as cryoablation, but fur-
ther studies are required before recommending these as a second-line 
option for patients who fail to respond to RFA.
Anaemia 
Iron deciency anaemia can occur as a consequence of occult blood 
loss from long-standing oesophagitis. Most patients have a large hiatus 
hernia and bleeding can stem from subtle erosions in the neck of the 
sac (‘Cameron lesions’). Nevertheless, hiatus hernia is very common and 
other causes of blood loss, particularly colorectal cancer, must be con-
sidered in anaemic patients, even when endoscopy reveals oesophagitis.
Benign oesophageal stricture 
Fibrous strictures can develop as a consequence of long-standing 
oesophagitis, especially in older people and those with poor oesopha-
geal peristaltic activity. The typical presentation is with dysphagia that is 
worse for solids than for liquids. Bolus obstruction following ingestion of 
meat causes absolute dysphagia. A history of heartburn is common but 
not invariable; many patients presenting in old age with strictures have 
no preceding heartburn.
Diagnosis is by endoscopy, when biopsies of the stricture can be 
taken to exclude malignancy. Endoscopic balloon dilatation or bougi-
nage is helpful. Subsequently, long-term therapy with a PPI at full dose 
should be started to reduce the risk of recurrent oesophagitis and stric-
ture formation. The patient should be advised to chew food thoroughly 
and it is important to ensure adequate dentition.
Gastric volvulus 
Occasionally, a massive intrathoracic hiatus hernia may twist on itself, lead-
ing to a gastric volvulus. This gives rise to complete oesophageal or gas-
tric obstruction and the patient presents with severe chest pain, vomiting 
and dysphagia. The diagnosis is made by chest X-ray (air bubble in the 
chest) and barium swallow (see Fig. 23.26B). A nasogastric tube is normally 
inserted in the acute phase to facilitate decompression, with surgery usually 
advised after the acute episode. Endoscopic decompression may be an 
alternative option in selected patients in old age.
Investigations 
Young patients who present with typical symptoms of gastro-oesopha-
geal reux, without worrying features such as dysphagia, weight loss or 
anaemia, can be treated empirically without investigation. Investigation is 
advisable if patients present over the age of 50–55 years, if symptoms are 
atypical or if a complication is suspected. Endoscopy is the investigation 
of choice. This is performed to exclude other upper gastrointestinal dis-
eases that can mimic gastro-oesophageal reux and to identify complica-
tions. A normal endoscopy in a patient with compatible symptoms should 
not preclude treatment for gastro-oesophageal reux disease.
Oesophageal pH monitoring is indicated if the diagnosis is unclear 
or surgical intervention is under consideration. This involves tethering a 
slim catheter with a terminal radiotelemetry pH-sensitive probe above the 
gastro-oesophageal junction; wireless oesophageal pH monitoring is avail-
able in some centres for those intolerant of catheter-based monitoring. 
Intraluminal pH is recorded while the patient undergoes normal activities, 
and episodes of symptoms are noted and related to pH. An oesophageal 
pH of less than 4 for more than 6% of the study time is considered diag-
nostic for reux disease. In patients with difcult reux, impedance testing 
can detect weakly acidic or alkaline reux that is not revealed by standard 
pH testing.
Management 
A treatment algorithm for gastro-oesophageal reux is outlined in 
Figure 23.29. Lifestyle advice should be given, including weight loss, 
avoidance of dietary items that worsen symptoms, elevation of the bed 
head in those who experience nocturnal symptoms, avoidance of late 
meals and cessation of smoking. Patients who fail to respond to these 
measures should be offered PPIs, which are usually effective in resolv-
ing symptoms and healing oesophagitis. Recurrence of symptoms is 
common when therapy is stopped and some patients require life-long 
treatment at the lowest acceptable dose. When dysmotility features are 
prominent, prokinetics such as domperidone (not available in the United 
States) or metoclopramide can be helpful. There is no evidence that H. 
pylori eradication has any therapeutic value. Proprietary antacids and 
alginates can also provide symptomatic benet. H2-receptor antagonist 
drugs relieve symptoms without healing oesophagitis.
Long-term PPI therapy can lead to the development of parietal cell 
hyperplasia and hypertrophy, leading to acid rebound on withdrawal of PPIs 
after long-term usage. PPI therapy is also associated with reduced absorp-
tion of iron, B12 and magnesium. The drugs may also predispose to enteric 
infections with Salmonella, Campylobacter and possibly Clostridioides dif-
cile. They may have an undesirable impact on the composition of the gut 
microbiota, although the clinical importance of this is unclear. An associ-
ation between microscopic colitis and PPIs has also been suggested, as 
well as with acute interstitial nephritis. Long-term therapy increases the risk 
of Helicobacter-associated progression of gastric mucosal atrophy (see 
below) and H. pylori eradication is advised in patients requiring PPIs for 
more than 1 year. The risks described with PPIs are relatively modest, but 
patients should receive the lowest dose of PPIs to manage their symptoms.
Fig. 23.28 Barrett’s oesophagus. Tongues of pink columnar mucosa are seen 
extending upwards above the oesophago-gastric junction.

[[p864]]
Disorders of the oesophagus     809
23
Patients who fail to respond to medical therapy, those who are unwill-
ing to take long-term PPIs and those whose major symptom is severe 
regurgitation should be considered for laparoscopic fundoplication (see 
this book’s companion text, Principles and Practice of Surgery); endo-
scopic anti-reux procedures are currently in development.
Other causes of oesophagitis 
Infection 
Oesophageal candidiasis occurs in debilitated patients and those taking 
broad-spectrum antibiotics or cytotoxic drugs. It is a particular problem 
in patients with HIV/AIDS, who are also susceptible to a spectrum of 
other oesophageal infections (p. 359).
Corrosives 
Suicide attempt by ingestion of caustic acid (e.g. vinegar) or alkaline 
agents (e.g. bleach) is followed by painful burns of the mouth and phar-
ynx and by extensive erosive oesophagitis (p. 234). Late complications 
include oesophageal strictures, which may require endoscopic dilatation 
or stent insertion, or surgery in severe cases.
Drugs 
Potassium supplements and NSAIDs may cause oesophageal 
ulcers when the tablets are trapped above an oesophageal stricture. 
Liquid preparations of these drugs should be used in such patients. 
Bisphosphonates cause oesophageal ulceration and should be used 
with caution in patients with known oesophageal disorders. Tetracyclines, 
such as doxycycline, can also cause oesophagitis.
Eosinophilic oesophagitis 
This is an increasingly recognised condition, that affects both children 
and adults, and is more common in males.. It occurs more often in atopic 
individuals and is characterised by eosinophilic inltration of the oesoph-
ageal mucosa. Children commonly present with vomiting, difculty feed-
ing or failure to thrive. In contrast, adults present with dysphagia or food 
bolus obstruction more often than heartburn, while other symptoms, 
such as chest pain may be present. Endoscopy is usually normal, but 
mucosal rings, longitudinal furrows, exudates, oedema, strictures or a 
narrow-calibre oesophagus can occur (Fig. 23.30). To obtain a diagnosis, 
multiple biopsies should be taken from different levels of the oesophagus. 
One of the features noted on histology is an increase in eosinophil density 
(≥ 15 eosinophils per high-powered eld (HPF)).
Dietary modications are an effective rst-line treatment for this con-
dition, and include elemental and elimination diets. Adherence to these 
diets can be challenging, particularly in adults. In terms of pharmaco-
logical management, an empiric 8-week trial of high-dose PPI can be 
used in the rst instance. Around one-third of patients will respond to 
this, known as PPI-responsive oesophageal eosinophilia. In patients who 
do not respond, 8–12 weeks of therapy with topical glucocorticoids can 
be used, such as uticasone and budesonide. Fluticasone is delivered 
by spraying into the mouth via a metered-dose inhaler, and swallowed 
rather than inhaled. Budesonide is administered as an oral viscous solu-
tion. There are few pharmacological options beyond this, with biologic 
agents currently experimental. Endoscopic oesophageal dilatation may 
be considered in individuals with strictures or mucosal rings that have 
failed to respond to medical therapy.
Benign oesophageal stricture 
Benign oesophageal stricture is usually a consequence of gastro-
oesophageal reux disease (Box 23.30) and occurs most often in older 
adults who have poor oesophageal clearance. Rings, caused by sub-
mucosal brosis, are found at the oesophago-gastric junction (‘Schatzki 
ring’) and cause intermittent dysphagia, often starting in middle age. 
A post-cricoid web is a rare complication of iron deciency anaemia 
(Paterson–Kelly or Plummer–Vinson syndrome), and may be compli-
cated by the development of squamous carcinoma. Benign strictures 
can be treated by endoscopic dilatation, in which wire-guided bougies or 
balloons are used to disrupt the brous tissue of the stricture.
Tumours of the oesophagus 
Benign tumours 
The most common is a leiomyoma. This is usually asymptomatic, but 
may cause bleeding or dysphagia.
Carcinoma of the oesophagus 
Squamous oesophageal cancer (Box 23.31) accounts for 90% of 
oesophageal cancers globally, being more common in Iran, areas 
of Africa and China. Squamous cancer can occur in any part of the 
oesophagus, although almost all tumours in the upper oesophagus are 
squamous cancers. Adenocarcinomas typically arise in the lower third 
Symptoms
Antacids/alginates
Proton pump inhibitor at full dose
Good response
Poor response
or side-effects
Reconsider
diagnosis
Consider pH
monitoring
Normal
Positive
Proton pump inhibitor
at maintenance dose
H2-receptor
antagonists
Antacids
Fundoplication
Fig. 23.29 Treatment of gastro-oesophageal reux disease: a ‘step-down’ 
approach.
Fig. 23.30 Endoscopic features suggestive of eosinophilic oesophagitis.

[[p865]]
810    GASTROENTEROLOGY
of the oesophagus from Barrett’s oesophagus or from the cardia of the 
stomach, and are more common in America, Australia and Europe. The 
incidence is increasing possibly as a result of the high prevalence of 
gastro-oesophageal reux and Barrett’s oesophagus in Western popu-
lations. Despite modern treatment, the overall 5-year survival of patients 
presenting with oesophageal cancer is less than 20%.
Clinical features 
Most patients have a history of progressive, painless dysphagia for solid 
foods. Others present acutely because of food bolus obstruction. In the 
late stages, weight loss is often extreme; chest pain or hoarseness sug-
gests mediastinal invasion. Fistulation between the oesophagus and the 
trachea or bronchial tree leads to coughing after swallowing, pneumonia 
and pleural effusion. Physical signs may be absent but, even at initial 
presentation, cachexia, cervical lymphadenopathy or other evidence of 
metastatic spread is common.
Investigations 
The investigation of choice is upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 
(Fig. 23.31) with biopsy. Once a diagnosis has been made, investigations 
should be performed to stage the tumour and dene operability. Thoracic 
and abdominal CT, often combined with positron emission tomography 
(PET-CT), should be carried out to identify metastatic spread and local 
invasion (Fig. 23.32). Invasion of the aorta, major airways or coeliac axis 
usually precludes surgery, but patients with resectable disease on imaging 
should undergo EUS to determine the depth of penetration of the tumour 
into the oesophageal wall and to detect locoregional lymph node involve-
ment (Fig. 23.33). These investigations will dene the TNM (tumour, node, 
metastases) stage of the disease (Box 7.3).
Management 
Endoscopic management is an option in specialist centres for very early 
supercial tumours. Techniques such as endoscopic mucosal resection 
or endoscopic submucosal dissection with or without radiofrequency 
ablation, have become established for Barrett’s oesophagus and, in par-
ticular, adenocarcinoma. Oesophagectomy is the treatment of choice for 
limited and locally advanced tumours where resection is possible. For 
locally advanced tumours, neoadjuvant and perioperative chemother-
apy or chemoradiotherapy (e.g. cisplatin and capecitabine) can reduce 
the tumour bulk and increase the chances of complete (R0) surgical 
resection. Neoadjuvant therapy can also relieve dysphagia and improve 
nutritional status. Some patients with squamous carcinoma can have a 
complete response following denitive chemoradiotherapy, with a subset 
not requiring surgery initially but close surveillance. All cases should be 
discussed within a multidisciplinary oesophageal cancer team (MDT).
Approximately 70% of patients have extensive disease at presenta-
tion; in these, treatment is palliative and should focus on relief of dys-
phagia and pain. Palliative radiotherapy or stent placement can be used 
for symptom control. Palliative chemotherapy can be used for selected 
patients, particularly for those with adenocarcinoma. Quality of life can be 
improved by nutritional support and appropriate analgesia.
Perforation of the oesophagus 
Oesophageal perforation is a rare but potentially life-threatening clinical 
condition. The most common cause is iatrogenic endoscopic perforation 
complicating dilatation or intubation. Malignant, corrosive or post-radio-
therapy strictures are more likely to be perforated than peptic strictures.
23.30  Causes of oesophageal stricture
 Gastro-oesophageal reux disease
 Webs and rings
 Carcinoma of the oesophagus or cardia
 Eosinophilic oesophagitis
 Extrinsic compression from bronchial carcinoma
 Corrosive ingestion
 Post-operative scarring following oesophageal resection
 Following radiotherapy
 Following long-term nasogastric intubation
 Bisphosphonates
23.31  Squamous carcinoma: aetiological factors
 Smoking
 Alcohol excess
 Chewing betel nuts or tobacco
 Achalasia of the oesophagus
 Coeliac disease
 Post-cricoid web
 Post-caustic stricture
 Tylosis (familial hyperkeratosis of palms and soles)
Fig. 23.31 Adenocarcinoma of the lower oesophagus. A polypoidal 
adenocarcinoma in association with Barrett’s oesophagus.
Fig. 23.32 Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) 
staging of oesophageal carcinoma. Whole-body PET scan showing avid uptake in 
the primary tumour (thick arrow) but also in distant paratracheal (superior thin arrow) 
and gastro-oesophageal (inferior thin arrow) lymph nodes.

[[p866]]
Disorders of the oesophagus     811
23
Spontaneous oesophageal perforation (‘Boerhaave syndrome’) results 
from forceful vomiting and retching, accounting for around 15% of cases. 
Severe chest pain and shock occur as oesophago-gastric contents enter 
the mediastinum and thoracic cavity. Subcutaneous emphysema, pleu-
ral effusions and pneumothorax develop. The diagnosis can be made 
using a water-soluble contrast swallow but, in difcult cases, both CT 
and careful endoscopy (usually in an intubated patient) may be required. 
Delay in diagnosis is a key factor in the high mortality associated with 
this condition.
Surgery remains the mainstay of treatment for oesophageal perfora-
tion. However, an increasing subgroup of patients are being managed 
via non-operative measures, such as individuals with small well-dened 
tears. Non-operative options include conservative management involving 
broad spectrum antibiotics and parental nutrition, and endoscopic man-
agement such as clip placement.
Oesophageal motility disorders 
Pharyngeal pouch 
This occurs because of incoordination of swallowing within the phar-
ynx, which leads to herniation through the cricopharyngeus muscle and 
formation of a pouch. It is rare, affecting 1 in 100 000 people; it occurs 
predominantly in men, and is most common in the seventh and eighth 
decades of life. Many patients have no symptoms, but regurgitation, 
halitosis and dysphagia can be present. Some notice gurgling in the 
throat after swallowing. The investigation of choice is a barium swallow 
(see Fig. 23.12A), which demonstrates the pouch and reveals incoor-
dination of swallowing, often with pulmonary aspiration. Treatment is 
indicated in symptomatic patients, and can be via a surgical approach, 
such as cricopharyngeus myotomy (diverticulotomy), with or without 
resection of the pouch. Recently, there has been the development 
of minimally invasive endoscopic approaches, such as endoscopic 
diverticulectomy.
Achalasia of the oesophagus 
Pathophysiology 
Achalasia is characterised by:
 a hypertonic lower oesophageal sphincter, which fails to relax in 
response to the swallowing wave
 failure of propagated oesophageal contraction, leading to progres-
sive dilatation of the gullet.
The cause is unknown. It is associated with autoimmune diseases, 
such as type 1 diabetes mellitus, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheu-
matoid arthritis and Sjögren syndrome. Defective release of nitric oxide 
by inhibitory neurons in the lower oesophageal sphincter has been 
reported, and there is degeneration of ganglion cells within the sphinc-
ter and the body of the oesophagus. Loss of the dorsal vagal nuclei 
within the brainstem can be demonstrated in later stages. Infection with 
Trypanosoma cruzi in Chagas’ disease (Ch. 13) causes a syndrome that 
is clinically indistinguishable from achalasia.
Clinical features 
The presentation is with dysphagia, typically to solids and liquids. 
Regurgitation to saliva and food can also occur, as well as some patients 
experiencing episodes of chest pain due to oesophageal spasm. Around 
one-third of patients can experience weight loss. As the disease pro-
gresses, dysphagia worsens, the oesophagus empties poorly and 
nocturnal pulmonary aspiration develops. Achalasia predisposes to 
squamous carcinoma of the oesophagus.
Investigations 
Endoscopy should always be carried out because carcinoma of the car-
dia can mimic the presentation and radiological and manometric features 
of achalasia (‘pseudo-achalasia’). A barium swallow shows tapered nar-
rowing of the lower oesophagus and, in late disease, the oesophageal 
body is dilated, aperistaltic and food-lled (Fig. 23.34A). Manometry con-
rms the high-pressure, non-relaxing lower oesophageal sphincter with 
poor contractility of the oesophageal body (Fig. 23.34B).
Management 
Endoscopic 
Forceful pneumatic dilatation using a 30–35 mm-diameter, uoroscopically 
positioned balloon disrupts the oesophageal sphincter and improves symp-
toms in 80% of patients. Some patients require more than one dilatation, but 
those needing frequent dilatation are best treated surgically. Endoscopically 
directed injection of botulinum toxin into the lower oesophageal sphincter 
induces clinical remission, but relapse is common, with worsening response 
on repeated treatments. It tends to be reserved for frail individuals in old age 
where other treatments are too risky. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) 
is a newer advanced endoscopic technique for the management of achala-
sia, but is currently only performed in specialist centres (Fig. 23.35).
Surgical 
Surgical myotomy (Heller’s operation), commonly performed laparo-
scopically or as an open operation, is effective but is more invasive than 
endoscopic dilatation. Both pneumatic dilatation and myotomy may be 
complicated by gastro-oesophageal reux, and this can lead to severe 
oesophagitis because oesophageal clearance is so poor. For this reason, 
Heller’s myotomy is accompanied by a partial fundoplication anti-reux 
procedure. PPI therapy is often necessary after surgery.
Other oesophageal motility disorders 
Distal oesophageal spasm presents in late middle age with episodic chest 
pain that may mimic angina, but is sometimes accompanied by transient 
dysphagia. Some cases occur in response to gastro-oesophageal reux. 
Treatment is based on the use of PPIs when gastro-oesophageal reux 
is present. Oral or sublingual nitrates or nifedipine may relieve attacks of 
pain. The results of drug therapy are often disappointing, as are the alter-
natives such as pneumatic dilatation and surgical myotomy. ‘Nutcracker’ 
oesophagus is a condition in which extremely forceful peristaltic activity 
leads to episodic chest pain and dysphagia. Treatment is with nitrates 
or nifedipine. Some patients present with oesophageal motility disorders 
that do not t into a specic disease entity. The patients usually present 
in old age and with dysphagia and chest pain. Manometric abnormalities 
occur, ranging from poor peristalsis to spasm. Treatment is with dilatation 
and/or vasodilators for chest pain.
T
Fig. 23.33 Endoscopic ultrasound staging of oesophageal carcinoma. There 
is a supercial adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus (T). The submucosa (white band, 
white arrows) is not involved but there is a small involved local lymph node (white 
arrow, inset). The tumour is therefore staged T1a, N1.

[[p867]]
812    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Secondary causes of oesophageal dysmotility 
In systemic sclerosis or CREST syndrome (p. 1040) the muscle of the 
oesophagus is replaced by brous tissue, which causes failure of peri-
stalsis leading to heartburn and dysphagia. Oesophagitis is often severe 
and benign brous strictures occur. These patients require long-term 
therapy with PPIs. If patients remain symptomatic, endoscopic dilatation 
may be considered. Dermatomyositis, rheumatoid arthritis and myasthe-
nia gravis may also cause dysphagia.
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum 
Gastritis 
Gastritis is a histological diagnosis, although it can also be recognised 
at endoscopy.
Acute gastritis 
Acute gastritis is often erosive and haemorrhagic. Neutrophils are the 
predominant inammatory cell in the supercial epithelium. Many cases 
result from alcohol, aspirin or NSAID ingestion (Box 23.32). Acute gas-
tritis often produces no symptoms, but may cause dyspepsia, anorexia, 
nausea or vomiting, and haematemesis or melaena. Many cases resolve 
quickly and do not merit investigation; in others, endoscopy and biopsy 
may be necessary to exclude peptic ulcer or cancer. Treatment should 
be directed at the underlying cause. Short-term symptomatic therapy 
with antacids, and acid suppression using PPIs, prokinetics (domperi-
done) or antiemetics (metoclopramide) may be necessary.
Chronic gastritis due to Helicobacter pylori infection 
This is the most common cause of chronic gastritis (see Box 23.32). 
The predominant inammatory cells are lymphocytes and plasma cells. 
Correlation between symptoms and endoscopic or pathological ndings 
is poor. Most patients are asymptomatic and do not require treatment, 
but patients with dyspepsia may benet from H. pylori eradication.
Autoimmune chronic gastritis 
This involves the body of the stomach but spares the antrum; it results 
from autoimmune damage to parietal cells. The histological features are 
diffuse chronic inammation, atrophy and loss of fundic glands, intesti-
nal metaplasia and sometimes hyperplasia of enterochromafn-like (ECL) 
cells. Circulating antibodies to parietal cell and intrinsic factor may be 
present. In some patients, the degree of gastric atrophy is severe and 
loss of intrinsic factor secretion leads to pernicious anaemia (p. 954). 
The gastritis itself is usually asymptomatic. Some patients have evidence 
of other organ-specic autoimmunity, particularly thyroid disease. In the 
long-term, there is a two- to threefold increase in the risk of gastric can-
cer (see below).
Ménétrier’s disease 
In this rare condition, the gastric pits are elongated and tortuous, with 
replacement of the parietal and chief cells by mucus-secreting cells. 
The cause is unknown but there is excessive production of transforming 
growth factor alpha (TGF-α). As a result, the mucosal folds of the body 
and fundus are greatly enlarged. Most patients are hypochlorhydric. While 
some patients have upper gastrointestinal symptoms, the majority present 
in middle or old age with protein-losing enteropathy (p. 824) due to exu-
dation from the gastric mucosa. Endoscopy shows enlarged, nodular and 
coarse folds, although biopsies may not be deep enough to show all the 
histological features. Treatment with antisecretory drugs, such as PPIs with 
or without octreotide, may reduce protein loss and H. pylori eradication 
may be effective, but unresponsive patients require partial gastrectomy.
Peptic ulcer disease 
Peptic ulcers are most commonly located in the stomach or duodenum, 
but can also occur in the lower oesophagus, in the jejunum after surgical 
anastomosis to the stomach or, rarely, in the ileum adjacent to a Meckel’s 
diverticulum. Ulcers in the stomach or duodenum may be acute or chronic; 
both penetrate the muscularis mucosae, but the acute ulcer shows no 
evidence of brosis. Erosions do not penetrate the muscularis mucosae.
Gastric and duodenal ulcer 
The lifetime prevalence of peptic ulcer is around 5%–10%. The incidence 
is decreasing in many high-income societies as a result of widespread 
use of Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy. The male-to-female ratio 
for duodenal ulcer varies from 5:1 to 2:1, while that for gastric ulcer is 
2:1 or less. Chronic gastric ulcer is usually single; 90% are situated on 
the lesser curve within the antrum or at the junction between body and 
antral mucosa. Chronic duodenal ulcer usually occurs in the rst part of 
the duodenum and 50% are on the anterior wall. Gastric and duodenal 
ulcers coexist in 10% of patients and more than one peptic ulcer is found 
in 10%–15% of patients.
Time (secs)
LOS
D
O
A
B
Fig. 23.34 Achalasia. 
= 
failure of relaxation on swallowing (white arrow). Compare with normal appearances in Figure 23.1

[[p868]]
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum     813
23
Pathophysiology 
Helicobacter pylori
Peptic ulceration is strongly associated with H. pylori infection. The prev-
alence of the infection in high-income societies rises with age and in the 
UK approximately 50% of people over the age of 50 years are infected. In 
low- and middle-income countries, infection is more common, affecting 
up to 90% of adults. These infections are probably acquired in childhood 
by person-to-person contact. The vast majority of colonised people 
remain healthy and asymptomatic, and only a minority develop clinical 
disease. Around 90% of duodenal ulcer patients and 70% of gastric ulcer 
patients are infected with H. pylori
H. pylori is Gram-negative and spiral, and has multiple agella at one 
end, which make it motile, allowing it to burrow and live beneath the 
mucus layer adherent to the epithelial surface. It uses an adhesin molecule 
(BabA) to bind to the Lewis b antigen on epithelial cells. Here the surface 
pH is close to neutral and any acidity is buffered by the organism’s produc-
tion of the enzyme urease. This produces ammonia from urea and raises 
the pH around the bacterium and between its two cell membrane layers. 
H. pylori exclusively colonises gastric-type epithelium and is found in the 
duodenum only in association with patches of gastric metaplasia. It causes 
chronic gastritis by provoking a local inammatory response in the under-
lying epithelium (Fig. 23.36). This depends on numerous factors, notably 
expression of bacterial CagA and VacA genes. The CagA gene product is 
injected into epithelial cells, interacting with numerous cell-signalling path-
ways involved in cell replication and apoptosis. H. pylori strains expressing 
Adventitia
Muscle layer
Mucosa
Oesophagus
Endoscope
Needle/knife
Stomach
A
Clip
D
Mucosa
Endoscope
Needle/knife
Submucosa
Mucosa
Adventitia
Muscle layer
B
Mucosa
Endoscope
Endoscope
Needle/knife
Submucosa
Submucosa
Mucosa
Mucosa
Adventitia
Adventitia
Muscle layer
Muscle layer
Muscle layer
Dissected muscle
C
Fig. 23.35 Per-oral endoscopic myotomy.  
23.32  Common causes of gastritis
Acute gastritis (often erosive and haemorrhagic)
 Aspirin, NSAIDs
 Helicobacter pylori (initial infection)
 Alcohol
 Other drugs, e.g. iron preparations
 Severe physiological stress, e.g. burns, multi-organ failure, central nervous 
system trauma
 Bile reux, e.g. following gastric surgery
 Viral infections, e.g. CMV, herpes simplex virus in HIV/AIDS (Ch. 14)
Chronic non-specic gastritis
 H. pylori infection
 Autoimmune (pernicious anaemia)
 Post-gastrectomy
Chronic ‘specic’ forms (rare)
 Infections, e.g. CMV, tuberculosis
 Gastrointestinal diseases, e.g. Crohn’s disease
 Systemic diseases, e.g. sarcoidosis, graft-versus-host disease
 Idiopathic, e.g. granulomatous gastritis
(CMV = cytomegalovirus; HIV/AIDS = human immunodeciency virus/acquired 
immunodeciency syndrome; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
Flagella
Urease
Urea
H2O
2CO2
NH3
Ammonia
'cloud'
Other factors
 Vacuolating cytotoxin (vacA)
 Cytotoxin-associated gene (cagA)
 Adhesins (babA)
 Outer inflammatory protein A (oipA)
Type IV secretion
system
Fig. 23.36 Factors that inuence the virulence of Helicobacter pylori.

[[p869]]
814    GASTROENTEROLOGY
CagA (CagA+) are more often associated with disease than CagA  strains. 
Most strains also secrete a large pore-forming protein called VacA, which 
causes increased cell permeability, efux of micronutrients from the epithe-
lium, induction of apoptosis and suppression of local immune cell activity. 
Several forms of VacA exist and pathology is most strongly associated with 
the s1/ml form of the toxin.
The distribution and severity of H. pylori-induced gastritis determine the 
clinical outcome. In most people, H. pylori causes a mild pangastritis with 
little effect on acid secretion and the majority develop no signicant clini-
cal outcomes. In a minority (up to 10% in the West), the infection causes 
an antral-predominant pattern of gastritis characterised by hypergastri-
naemia and a very exaggerated acid production by parietal cells, which 
could lead to duodenal ulceration (Fig. 23.37). In a much smaller number 
of infected people, H. pylori causes a corpus-predominant pattern of 
gastritis leading to gastric atrophy and hypochlorhydria. This phenotype 
is much more common in Asian countries, particularly Japan, China and 
Korea. The hypochlorhydria allows other bacteria to proliferate within the 
stomach; these other bacteria continue to drive the chronic inammation 
and produce mutagenic nitrites from dietary nitrates, predisposing to the 
development of gastric cancer (Fig. 23.38). The effects of H. pylori are 
more complex in gastric ulcer patients compared to those with duodenal 
ulcers. The ulcer probably arises because of impaired mucosal defence 
resulting from a combination of H. pylori infection, NSAIDs and smoking, 
rather than excess acid.
NSAIDs 
There has been an increase in the use of NSAIDs and aspirin; these 
drugs account for 10% of peptic ulcers. NSAIDs increase the risk of 
complication of peptic ulcer disease four-fold, due to impairment of 
mucosal defences, as discussed on page 1009.
Smoking 
Smoking confers an increased risk of gastric ulcer and, to a lesser extent, 
duodenal ulcer. Once the ulcer has formed, it is more likely to cause 
complications and less likely to heal if the patient continues to smoke.
Clinical features 
Peptic ulcer disease is a chronic condition with spontaneous relapses and 
remissions lasting for decades, if not for life. The most common presenta-
tion is with recurrent abdominal pain that has three notable characteristics: 
localisation to the epigastrium, relationship to food and episodic occurrence. 
Occasional vomiting occurs in about 40% of ulcer subjects; persistent daily 
vomiting suggests gastric outlet obstruction. In one-third, the history is less 
characteristic, especially in older people or those taking NSAIDs (Box 23.33). 
In this situation, pain may be absent or so slight that it is experienced only 
as a vague sense of epigastric unease. Occasionally, the only symptoms are 
anorexia and nausea, or early satiety after meals. In some patients, the ulcer 
is completely ‘silent’, presenting for the rst time with anaemia from chronic 
undetected blood loss, as abrupt haematemesis or as acute perforation; in 
others, there is recurrent acute bleeding without ulcer pain. The diagnostic 
value of individual symptoms for peptic ulcer disease is poor; the history is 
therefore a poor predictor of the presence of an ulcer.
Investigations 
Endoscopy is the preferred investigation (Fig. 23.39). Gastric ulcers may 
occasionally be malignant and therefore must always be biopsied and 
followed up to ensure healing. Patients should be tested for H. pylori
infection. The current options available are listed in Box 23.34. Some 
are invasive and require endoscopy; others are non-invasive. They vary 
in sensitivity and specicity. Breath tests or faecal antigen tests are best 
because of accuracy, simplicity and non-invasiveness.
Management 
The aims of management are to relieve symptoms, induce healing and 
prevent recurrence. H. pylori eradication is the cornerstone of therapy for 
peptic ulcers, as this will successfully prevent relapse and eliminate the 
need for long-term therapy in the majority of patients.
H. pylori eradication 
All patients with proven ulcers who are H. pylori-positive should be 
offered eradication as primary therapy. Treatment is based on a PPI taken 
simultaneously with two antibiotics (from amoxicillin, clarithromycin and 
metronidazole) for at least 7 days. High-dose, twice-daily PPI therapy 
G
D
3
2
1
4
5
HCl
Further
inflammation
and eventual
ulceration
Depletion of
antral D-cell
somatostatin
Increased
gastrin release
from G cells
Increased acid
load in duodenum
leads to gastric
metaplasia
Increased
acid
secretion
Fig. 23.37 Sequence of events in the pathophysiology of duodenal ulceration.
Host factors
(IL-1β
and TNF-α
polymorphisms)
Other
environmental
factors
(NSAIDs, smoking)
Helicobacter
pylori factors
(VacA, CagA)
Gastric
ulcer
Duodenal
ulcer
Gastric
cancer
Antral gastritis
Pangastritis
Fig. 23.38 Consequences of Helicobacter pylori infection. (CagA = cytotoxin-
associated gene; IL-1β = interleukin-1 beta; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha; VacA = vacuolating cytotoxin)
23.33  Peptic ulcer disease in old age
 Gastroduodenal ulcers: have a greater incidence, admission rate and 
mortality.
 Causes: high prevalence of Helicobacter pylori, use of non-steroidal anti-
inammatory drugs and impaired defence mechanisms.
 Atypical presentations: pain and dyspepsia are frequently absent or atypical. 
Older people often develop complications, such as bleeding or perforation, 
without a dyspeptic history.
 Bleeding: older patients require more intensive management because they 
have more limited reserve to withstand hypovolaemia.

[[p870]]
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum     815
23
increases efcacy of treatment, as does extending treatment to 10–14 
days. Success used to be achieved in greater than 90% of patients, 
but this has now fallen to below 70% in many countries as a result of 
antibiotic resistance. In addition, adherence and side effects (Box 23.35) 
may inuence success of eradication.
H. pylori and NSAIDs are independent risk factors for ulcer disease and 
patients requiring long-term NSAID therapy should rst undergo eradication 
therapy to reduce ulcer risk. Subsequent co-prescription of a PPI along 
with the NSAID is advised, but is not always necessary for patients being 
given low-dose aspirin, in whom the risk of ulcer complications is lower.
Other indications for H. pylori testing are shown in Box 23.36. 
Eradication of the infection has proven benets in several extragastric 
disorders, including unexplained B12 deciency and iron deciency anae-
mia, once sources of gastrointestinal bleeding have been looked for and 
excluded. Platelet counts improve and may normalise after eradication 
therapy in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (p. 981); 
the mechanism for this is unclear.
General measures 
Cigarette smoking, aspirin and NSAIDs should be avoided. Alcohol in 
moderation is not harmful and no special dietary advice is required.
Maintenance treatment 
Continuous maintenance treatment should not be necessary after suc-
cessful H. pylori eradication. For the minority who do require it, the lowest 
effective dose of PPI should be used.
Surgical treatment 
Surgery is now rarely required for peptic ulcer disease, but it is needed in 
some cases (Box 23.37).
Complications of gastric resection or vagotomy 
Up to 50% of patients who undergo gastric surgery for peptic ulcer expe-
rience long-term adverse effects. In most cases these are minor, but in 
10% they signicantly impair quality of life.
Dumping 
Symptoms of dumping syndrome can be either early or late. Early dump-
ing is more common, and occurs within 30 minutes following a meal. 
Rapid gastric emptying leads to distension of the proximal small intes-
tine as the hypertonic contents draw uid into the lumen. This leads to 
23.34  Methods for the diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori 
infection
Test
Advantages
Disadvantages
Non-invasive
Serology
Rapid ofce kits available
Good for population 
studies
Lacks specicity
Cannot differentiate 
current from past 
infection
13C-urea breath test
High sensitivity and 
specicity
Requires expensive 
mass spectrometer
Faecal antigen test
Cheap, specic (> 95%)
Acceptability
Invasive (antral biopsy)
Histology
Specicity
False negatives
Takes several days  
to process
Rapid urease test
Cheap, quick, specic  
(> 95%)
Sensitivity 85%
Microbiological 
culture
‘Gold standard’
Denes antibiotic 
sensitivity
Slow and laborious
Lacks sensitivity
Fig. 23.39 Endoscopic identication of a duodenal ulcer. The ulcer has a clean 
base and there are no stigmata of recent haemorrhage.
23.35  Common side-effects of Helicobacter pylori eradication 
therapy
 Diarrhoea: 30%–50% of patients; usually mild, but Clostridioides difcile
associated diarrhoea can occur
 Flushing and vomiting when taken with alcohol (metronidazole)
 Nausea, vomiting
 Abdominal cramps
 Headache
 Rash
23.36  Indications for Helicobacter pylori testing
Denite
 Active or past history of peptic ulcer disease
 Extranodal marginal-zone lymphomas of MALT type
 Previous endoscopic resection for early gastric cancer
 Dyspepsia
 Long-term NSAID or low-dose aspirin users
 Extragastric disorders:
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Unexplained iron deciency anaemia
 Unexplained Vitamin B12 deciency
Not indicated
 Gastro-oesophageal reux disease
 Asymptomatic people
(MALT = mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug)
23.37  Indications for surgery in peptic ulcer
Emergency
 Perforation
 Haemorrhage
Elective
 Gastric outow obstruction
 Persistent ulceration despite adequate medical therapy
 Recurrent ulcer following gastric surgery

[[p871]]
816    GASTROENTEROLOGY
abdominal discomfort and diarrhoea after eating. Autonomic reexes 
release a range of gastrointestinal hormones that provoke vasomotor 
features, such as ushing, palpitations, sweating, tachycardia and hypo-
tension. Patients should therefore avoid large meals with high carbohy-
drate content. Late dumping occurs 1–3 hours following a meal, with 
symptoms related to reactive hypoglycaemia, such as nausea, tremor 
and sweating, which are relieved by eating more food.
Chemical (bile reux) gastropathy 
Duodenogastric bile reux leads to chronic gastropathy. Treatment with 
ursodeoxycholic acid may be effective. A few patients require revisional 
surgery with creation of a Roux en Y loop to prevent bile reux.
Diarrhoea and maldigestion 
Diarrhoea may develop after any peptic ulcer operation and usually 
occurs 1–2 hours after eating. Poor mixing of food in the stomach, 
with rapid emptying, inadequate mixing with pancreaticobiliary secre-
tions, rapid transit and bacterial overgrowth, may lead to malabsorption. 
Diarrhoea often responds to small, dry meals with a reduced intake of 
rened carbohydrates. Antidiarrhoeal drugs, such as codeine phosphate 
(15–30 mg 4–6 times daily) or loperamide (2 mg after each loose stool), 
are helpful.
Weight loss 
Most patients lose weight shortly after surgery and 30%–40% are unable 
to regain all the weight that is lost. The usual cause is reduced intake 
because of a small gastric remnant, but diarrhoea and mild steatorrhoea 
also contribute.
Anaemia 
Anaemia is common many years after subtotal gastrectomy. Iron de-
ciency is the most common cause; folic acid and B12 deciency are much 
less frequent. Inadequate dietary intake of iron and folate, lack of acid 
and intrinsic factor secretion, mild chronic low-grade blood loss from the 
gastric remnant and recurrent ulceration are responsible.
Metabolic bone disease 
Both osteoporosis and osteomalacia can occur as a consequence of 
calcium and vitamin D malabsorption.
Gastric cancer 
An increased risk of gastric cancer has been reported from several epi-
demiological studies. Surgery itself is an independent risk factor for late 
development of malignancy in the gastric remnant, but the risk is higher 
in those with hypochlorhydria, duodenogastric reux of bile, smoking and 
H. pylori infection. Although the relative risk is increased, the absolute 
risk of cancer remains low and endoscopic surveillance is not indicated 
following gastric surgery.
Complications of peptic ulcer disease 
Perforation 
When perforation occurs, the contents of the stomach escape into the 
peritoneal cavity, leading to peritonitis. This is more common in duodenal 
than in gastric ulcers and is usually found with ulcers on the anterior 
wall. About one-quarter of all perforations occur in acute ulcers and 
NSAIDs are often incriminated. Perforation can be the rst sign of ulcer 
and a history of recurrent epigastric pain is uncommon. The most striking 
symptom is sudden, severe pain; its distribution follows the spread of the 
gastric contents over the peritoneum. The pain initially develops in the 
upper abdomen and rapidly becomes generalised; shoulder tip pain is 
caused by irritation of the diaphragm. The pain is accompanied by shal-
low respiration, due to limitation of diaphragmatic movements, and by 
shock. The abdomen is held immobile and there is generalised ‘board-
like’ rigidity. Bowel sounds are absent and liver dullness to percussion 
decreases due to the presence of gas under the diaphragm. After some 
hours, symptoms may improve, although abdominal rigidity remains. 
Later, the patient’s condition deteriorates as general peritonitis develops. 
In at least 50% of cases, an erect chest X-ray shows free air beneath the 
diaphragm (see Fig. 23.11B). If not, a water-soluble contrast swallow 
will conrm leakage of gastroduodenal contents. After resuscitation, the 
acute perforation should be treated surgically, either by simple closure or 
by conversion of the perforation into a pyloroplasty if it is large. On rare 
occasions, a ‘Polya’ partial gastrectomy is required. Following surgery, 
H. pylori should be treated (if present) and NSAIDs avoided. Perforation 
carries a mortality of around 25%, reecting the advanced age and sig-
nicant comorbidity of the population that are affected.
Gastric outlet obstruction 
The causes are shown in Box 23.38. The most common is an ulcer in 
the region of the pylorus. The presentation is with nausea, vomiting and 
abdominal distension. Large quantities of gastric content are often vom-
ited and food eaten 24 hours or more previously may be recognised. 
Physical examination may show evidence of wasting and dehydration. A 
succussion splash may be elicited 4 hours or more after the last meal or 
drink. Visible gastric peristalsis is diagnostic of gastric outlet obstruction. 
Endoscopy should be performed after the stomach has been emptied 
using a wide-bore nasogastric tube. Intravenous correction of dehydra-
tion is undertaken and, in severe cases, at least 4 L of isotonic saline and 
80 mmol of potassium may be necessary during the rst 24 hours. In 
some patients, PPIs heal ulcers, relieve pyloric oedema and overcome 
the need for surgery. Endoscopic balloon dilatation of benign stenoses 
may be possible in some patients, but in others partial gastrectomy is 
necessary; this is best done after a 7-day period of nasogastric aspiration, 
which enables the stomach to return to normal size. A gastroenterostomy 
is an alternative operation but, unless this is accompanied by vagotomy, 
patients will require long-term PPI therapy to prevent stomal ulceration.
Bleeding 
See page 797.
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 
This is a rare disorder characterised by gastric acid hypersecretion and 
severe peptic ulceration, caused by a gastrin-secreting neuro-endocrine 
tumour (‘gastrinoma’) (Ch. 21). It probably accounts for about 0.1% of 
all cases of duodenal ulceration. The syndrome occurs in either sex at 
any age, although it is most common between 30 and 50 years of age.
Pathophysiology 
Elevated gastrin stimulates acid secretion to its maximal capacity and 
increases the parietal cell mass three- to sixfold. The acid output may 
be so great that it reaches the upper small intestine, reducing the lumi-
nal pH to 2 or less. Pancreatic lipase is inactivated and bile acids are 
precipitated. Diarrhoea and steatorrhoea result. Around 90% of tumours 
occur in the pancreatic head or proximal duodenal wall. Between 20% 
and 60% of patients have multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1 
(p. 700). In sporadic disease, the tumours are usually unifocal, but in MEN 
1 there are invariably multifocal tumours. Individual tumour size can vary 
from 1 mm to 20 cm; approximately one-half to two-thirds are malignant, 
but like many neuro-endocrine tumours they are often slow-growing.
23.38  Differential diagnosis and management of gastric outlet 
obstruction
Cause
Management
Fibrotic stricture from duodenal ulcer 
(pyloric stenosis)
Balloon dilatation or surgery
Oedema from pyloric channel or 
duodenal ulcer
Proton pump inhibitor therapy
Carcinoma of antrum
Surgery
Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Surgery

[[p872]]
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum     817
23
Clinical features 
The presentation is with severe and often multiple peptic ulcers in unu-
sual sites, such as the post-bulbar duodenum, jejunum or oesophagus. 
There is a poor response to standard ulcer therapy. The history is usually 
short, and bleeding and perforations are common. Diarrhoea is seen in 
one-third or more of patients and can be the presenting feature.
Investigations 
Serum gastrin levels are normally grossly elevated (10- to 1000-fold). 
Injection of the hormone secretin normally causes no change or a slight 
decrease in circulating gastrin concentrations, but in Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome it produces a paradoxical and dramatic increase in gastrin. 
Tumour localisation (and staging) is best achieved by a combination 
of CT and EUS; radio-labelled somatostatin receptor scintigraphy and 
68gallium DOTATATE PET scanning may also be used for tumour detec-
tion and staging.
Management 
Unifocal tumours may be resected, but surgery may not be appropriate 
when there are multi-focal tumours or if there is metastatic disease. In 
this situation, continuous therapy with a PPI in high dose can be suc-
cessful in healing ulcers and alleviating diarrhoea. Somatostatin ana-
logue therapy may reduce gastrin secretion and have an anti-tumour 
effect; other treatment options for pancreatic neuro-endocrine tumours 
are discussed on page 700). Overall 5-year survival is 60%–75% and all 
patients should undergo genetic screening for MEN 1.
Tumours of the stomach 
Gastric carcinoma 
Around 90% of gastric cancers are adenocarcinomas. Gastric cancer 
is the fth most common cancer, with marked geographical variation in 
incidence. It is most common in China, Japan, South Korea, Eastern 
Europe and parts of South America. In most countries the incidence is 
50% lower in women. In both sexes it rises sharply after 50 years of age. 
Studies of Japanese migrants to the United States have revealed a much 
lower incidence in the second generation, conrming the importance of 
environmental factors. The overall prognosis is poor, with less than 30% 
surviving 5 years, except in Japan where there are much higher survival 
rates. The best hope for improved survival lies in more efcient detection 
of tumours at an earlier stage, with screening for early gastric cancers 
performed in Japan and South Korea.
Pathophysiology 
Infection with H. pylori plays a key pathogenic role and the infec-
tion has been classied by the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC) as a denite human carcinogen. It is associated with 
chronic atrophic gastritis, gastric mucosal atrophy and gastric cancer 
(Fig. 23.40). It has been estimated that H. pylori infection may contribute 
to the occurrence of gastric cancer in 70% of cases. Although the majority 
of H. pylori-infected individuals have normal or increased acid secretion, 
a few become hypo- or achlorhydric and these people are thought to be 
at greatest risk. H. pylori-induced chronic inammation with generation 
of reactive oxygen species and depletion of the normally abundant anti-
oxidant ascorbic acid are also important. There is strong evidence that 
H. pylori eradication, especially if achieved before irreversible pre-
neoplastic changes (atrophy and intestinal metaplasia) have developed, 
reduces the risk of cancer development in high-risk populations and is 
cost-effective.
Diets rich in salted, smoked or pickled foods and the consumption of 
nitrites and nitrates may increase cancer risk. Carcinogenic N-nitroso-
compounds are formed from nitrates by the action of nitrite-reducing 
bacteria that colonise the achlorhydric stomach. Diets lacking in fresh 
fruit and vegetables, as well as vitamins C and A, may also contribute. 
Other risk factors are listed in Box 23.39. Genetic risk factors also play 
a role, with 10%-20% of gastric cancers showing familial history of the 
disease. Rarely, gastric cancer may be inherited in an autosomal dom-
inant manner in association with mutations of the E-cadherin (CDH1) 
gene. There are eight genomic regions associated with an increased risk 
of gastric cancer.
Virtually all tumours are adenocarcinomas arising from mucus-secret-
ing cells in the base of the gastric crypts. Most develop on a background 
of chronic atrophic gastritis with intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia. 
Cancers are either ‘intestinal’, arising from areas of intestinal metaplasia 
with histological features reminiscent of intestinal epithelium, or ‘diffuse’, 
arising from normal gastric mucosa. Intestinal-type carcinomas are more 
common and arise against a background of chronic mucosal injury. 
Diffuse cancers tend to be poorly differentiated and occur in younger 
patients. In low- and middle-income countries, 50% of gastric cancers 
develop in the antrum; 20%–30% occur in the gastric body, often on the 
greater curve; and 20% are found in the cardia. In Western populations, 
however, proximal gastric tumours are more common than those arising 
in the body and distal stomach. This change in disease pattern may be a 
reection of changes in lifestyle or the decreasing prevalence of H. pylori
in high-income countries. Diffuse submucosal inltration by a scirrhous 
cancer (linitis plastica) is uncommon. Early gastric cancer is dened as 
cancer conned to the mucosa or submucosa. It is more often recog-
nised in Japan, where widespread screening is practised. Some cases 
can be cured by endoscopic mucosal or submucosal resection. The 
majority of patients (> 80%) in the West, however, present with advanced 
gastric cancer.
Helicobacter
pylori
Diet
Smoking
Nitrosamines
Dietary
nitrates
Helicobacter
pylori
CagA
Carcinoma
Normal gastric
epithelium
Chronic atrophic
gastritis
Intestinal
metaplasia
Dysplasia
Bacterial
colonisation
of stomach
Achlorhydria
Fig. 23.40 Gastric carcinogenesis: a possible mechanism. (CagA = cytotoxin-
associated gene)
23.39  Risk factors for gastric cancer
 Helicobacter pylori
 Smoking
 Alcohol
 Dietary associations (see text)
 Autoimmune gastritis (pernicious anaemia)
 Adenomatous gastric polyps
 Previous partial gastrectomy (> 20 years)
 Ménétrier’s disease
 Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer families (CDH1 mutations)
 Familial adenomatous polyposis (p. 831)

[[p873]]
818    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Clinical features 
Early gastric cancer is usually asymptomatic, but may be discovered 
during endoscopy for investigation of dyspepsia. Two-thirds of patients 
with advanced cancers have weight loss and 50% have ulcer-like pain. 
Anorexia and nausea occur in one-third, while early satiety, haematem-
esis, melaena and dyspepsia alone are less common. Dysphagia occurs 
in tumours of the gastric cardia that obstruct the gastro-oesophageal 
junction. Anaemia from occult bleeding is also common. Examination 
may reveal no abnormalities, but signs of weight loss, anaemia and a 
palpable epigastric mass may be present. Jaundice or ascites signies 
metastatic spread. Occasionally, tumour spread occurs to the supraclav-
icular lymph nodes (Virchow’s node), umbilicus (Sister Joseph’s nodule) 
or ovaries (Krukenberg tumour). Paraneoplastic phenomena, such as 
acanthosis nigricans, thrombophlebitis (Trousseau’s sign) and dermato-
myositis may rarely occur. Metastases arise most commonly in the liver, 
lungs, peritoneum and bone marrow.
Investigations 
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is the investigation of choice (Fig. 23.41) 
and should be performed promptly in any dyspeptic patient with ‘alarm fea-
tures’ (see Box 23.15). Multiple biopsies from the edge and base of a gastric 
ulcer are required. Once the diagnosis is made, further imaging is neces-
sary for staging and assessment of resectability. EUS and CT can be used 
to stage locally advanced gastric cancer; laparoscopy may be required to 
assess for peritoneal metastatic disease if resection is being contemplated.
Management 
Surgery 
Resection offers the only hope of cure and this can be achieved in about 
90% of patients with early gastric cancer. While surgery is the gold stand-
ard, endoscopic mucosal resection or endoscopic submucosal dissec-
tion can be considered for very early tumours. For the majority of patients 
with locally advanced disease, total gastrectomy with lymphadenectomy 
is the operation of choice, preserving the spleen if possible. Proximal 
tumours involving the oesophago-gastric junction also require a distal 
oesophagectomy. Small tumours sited distally can be managed by a par-
tial gastrectomy with lymphadenectomy and either a Billroth I or a Roux-
en-Y reconstruction. More extensive lymph node resection may increase 
survival rates, but carries greater morbidity. Even for those who cannot 
be cured, palliative resection may be necessary when patients present 
with bleeding or gastric outow obstruction. Perioperative chemotherapy 
is recommended for patients with locally advanced disease (e.g. epiru-
bicin, cisplatin and 5-uorouracil). For individuals who did not receive 
pre-operative chemotherapy, post-operative chemoradiotherapy (e.g. 
5-urouracil and leucovorin with radiotherapy) or adjuvant chemotherapy 
(e.g. 5-uorouracil) is recommended.
Palliative treatment 
Metastatic gastric cancer has a poor outlook, with survival around 
4 months with best supportive care. Patients with inoperable locally 
advanced disease, or metastatic disease should be considered for pal-
liative chemotherapy depending upon tness, which may extend sur-
vival to 12 months. The biologic agent trastuzumab is recommended 
in conjunction with chemotherapy for patients whose tumours over-
express HER2 (p. 137). Endoscopic laser ablation for control of dys-
phagia or recurrent bleeding benets some patients. Carcinomas at 
the cardia or pylorus may require endoscopic dilatation or insertion of 
expandable metallic stents for relief of dysphagia or vomiting. A naso-
gastric tube may offer temporary relief of vomiting due to gastric outlet 
obstruction (Box 23.40).
Gastric lymphoma 
This is a rare tumour, accounting for less than 5% of all gastric malig-
nancies. The stomach is, however, the most common site for extranodal 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and 60% of all primary gastrointestinal lympho-
mas occur at this site. Gastric lymphoma is 2 to 3 times more common in 
males than females. Lymphoid tissue is not found in the normal stomach, 
but lymphoid aggregates develop in the presence of H. pylori infection. 
Indeed, H. pylori infection is closely associated with the development of 
a low-grade lymphoma (classied as extranodal marginal-zone lympho-
mas of MALT type). EUS plays an important role in staging these lesions 
by accurately dening the depth of invasion into the gastric wall.
The clinical presentation is similar to that of gastric cancer and endo-
scopically the tumour appears as a polypoid or ulcerating mass. While 
initial treatment of low-grade lesions conned to the supercial layers 
Fig. 23.41 Gastric carcinoma. Endoscopic nding of an early gastric cancer.
23.40  How to insert a nasogastric tube
Equipment
 8–9 F ‘ne-bore’ tube for feeding or 16–18 F ‘wide-bore’ tube for drainage
 Lubricant jelly
 Cup of water and straw for sipping
 Adhesive tape
 pH (not litmus) paper
 Sickness bowl and tissues
 Catheter drainage bag and clamp (for drainage)
Technique
 A clear explanation and a calm patient are essential
 Establish a ‘stop signal’ for the patient to use, if needed
 Ask the patient to sit semi-upright
 Examine the nose for deformity or blockage to determine which side to use
 Measure the distance from ear to xiphoid process via the nose and mark the 
position on the tube
 Advance the lubricated tube tip slowly along the oor of the nasal passage to 
the oropharynx
 Ask the patient to sip water and advance the tube 2–3 cm with each swallow
 Stop, withdraw and retry if the patient is distressed or coughing, as the tube 
may have entered the larynx
 Advance until the mark on the tube reaches the tip of the nose and secure with 
tape
 Aspirate the contents and check pH (gastric acid conrmed if pH < 5). If in 
doubt, perform a chest X-ray to conrm tube position (usually necessary with 
feeding tubes)
 Attach the catheter drainage bag, if necessary, and clamp
Aftercare
 Flush the tube daily after feeding or drug dosing
 Check position regularly and look for signs of displacement
 Check with the pharmacist what drugs, if any, can be safely given via the tube

[[p874]]
Disorders of the small intestine     819
23
of the gastric wall consists of H. pylori eradication and close observa-
tion, 25% contain t(11:18) chromosomal translocations. In these cases, 
additional radiotherapy or chemotherapy is usually necessary. High-
grade B-cell lymphomas should be treated by a combination of ritux-
imab, chemotherapy (p. 971), surgery and radiotherapy. The choice 
depends on the site and extent of tumour, the presence of comorbid 
illnesses, and other factors, such as symptoms of bleeding and gastric 
outow obstruction. The prognosis depends on the stage at diagnosis. 
Features predicting a favourable prognosis are stage I or II disease, 
small resectable tumours, tumours with low-grade histology and age 
below 60 years.
Other tumours of the stomach 
Gastrointestinal stromal cell tumours (GISTs), arising from the intersti-
tial cells of Cajal, are occasionally found incidentally at endoscopy and 
account for 1%–2% of gastrointestinal neoplasms. They are differ-
entiated from other mesenchymal tumours by expression of the c-kit
proto-oncogene, which encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor. These 
tumours, particularly the smaller lesions of less than 2 cm, are usually 
benign and asymptomatic, but larger ones may have malignant poten-
tial and may occasionally be responsible for dyspepsia, ulceration and 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Small lesions (< 2 cm) are usually monitored 
by endoscopy, while larger ones require surgical resection. Very large 
lesions should be treated pre-operatively with imatinib (a tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor) to reduce their size and make surgery easier. Imatinib can also 
provide prolonged control of metastatic GISTs. Sunitinib and regorafenib 
are used as second-line agents.
A variety of different types of gastric polyps occur. Fundic gland pol-
yps are common and usually not associated with an increased risk of 
malignancy, other than in the context of familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP) (see p. 834). Hyperplastic polyps are also common, with regression 
generally occurring after H. pylori eradication. Adenomatous polyps are 
rare but have malignant potential and should be removed endoscopically 
with subsequent surveillance by periodic endoscopy.
Occasionally, gastric neuro-endocrine (carcinoid) tumours are seen in 
the fundus and body in patients with long-standing pernicious anaemia. 
These benign tumours arise from ECL or other endocrine cells, and are 
often multiple, but rarely invasive. Unlike carcinoid tumours arising else-
where in the gastrointestinal tract, they usually run a benign and favour-
able course. Large (> 2 cm) carcinoids may, however, metastasise and 
should be removed. Rarely, small nodules of ectopic pancreatic exocrine 
tissue are found. These ‘pancreatic rests’ may be mistaken for gastric 
neoplasms and usually cause no symptoms. EUS is the most useful 
investigation.
Gastric motility disorders 
Gastroparesis 
Defective gastric emptying without mechanical obstruction of the 
stomach or duodenum can occur as a primary event, due to inherited 
or acquired disorders of the gastric pacemaker, or can be secondary 
to disorders of autonomic nerves (particularly diabetic neuropathy) or 
the gastroduodenal musculature (systemic sclerosis, myotonic dys-
trophies and amyloidosis). Drugs such as opiates, calcium channel 
antagonists and those with anticholinergic activity (tricyclics, pheno-
thiazines) can also cause gastroparesis. Early satiety and recurrent 
vomiting are the major symptoms; abdominal fullness and a suc-
cussion splash may be present on examination. Symptoms may 
overlap with functional dyspepsia (postprandial distress syndrome). 
Treatment is based on small, frequent, low-fat meals and the use of 
metoclopramide and domperidone. In severe cases, nutritional failure 
can occur and long-term jejunostomy feeding or total parenteral nutri-
tion is required. Surgical insertion of a gastric neurostimulator may be 
considered in refractory cases, especially those complicating diabetic 
autonomic neuropathy.
Disorders of the small intestine 
Disorders causing malabsorption 
Coeliac disease 
Coeliac disease is an inammatory disorder of the small bowel occurring 
in genetically susceptible individuals, which results from intolerance to 
wheat gluten and similar proteins found in rye, barley and, to a lesser 
extent, oats. It can result in malabsorption and responds to a gluten-free 
diet. The condition occurs worldwide, but is more common in northern 
Europe. The prevalence in the UK is approximately 1%, although 50% of 
these people are asymptomatic. These include both undiagnosed ‘silent’ 
cases of the disease and cases of ‘latent’ coeliac disease – genetically 
susceptible people who may later develop clinical coeliac disease.
Pathophysiology 
The precise mechanism of mucosal damage is unclear, but immunolog-
ical responses to gluten play a key role (Fig. 23.42). There is a strong 
genetic component, with around 8% of rst-degree relatives of an index 
case affected, and there is strong (approximately 80%) concordance in 
monozygotic twins. There is a strong association with human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-DQ2/DQ8. Dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota has been 
identied, but it is unclear if this is pathological or a response to the 
underlying mucosal changes.
Clinical features 
Coeliac disease can present at any age. In infancy, it occurs after wean-
ing on to cereals and typically presents with diarrhoea, malabsorption 
and failure to thrive. In older children, it may present with non-specic 
features, such as delayed growth. Features of malnutrition are found on 
examination and mild abdominal distension may be present. Affected 
children have growth and pubertal delay, leading to short stature in 
adulthood.
In adults, the disease usually presents during the third or fourth dec-
ade and females are affected twice as often as males. The presentation 
is highly variable, depending on the severity and extent of small bowel 
involvement. Some have orid malabsorption, while others develop 
non-specic symptoms, such as tiredness, weight loss, folate deciency 
or iron deciency anaemia. Other symptoms include oral ulceration, dys-
pepsia and bloating; such non-specic symptomatology is more com-
mon in older people (see Box 23.41). Unrecognised coeliac disease is 
associated with mild under-nutrition and osteoporosis.
Coeliac disease is associated with other HLA-linked autoimmune dis-
orders and with certain other diseases (Box 23.42). In some centres, 
individuals at higher risk of developing coeliac disease, e.g. people with 
type 1 diabetes, undergo periodic antibody screening. This may identify 
people with asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic disease.
Investigations 
These are performed to conrm the diagnosis and to look for conse-
quences of malabsorption.
Duodenal biopsy 
Endoscopic small bowel biopsy is the gold standard. Endoscopic 
appearances should not preclude biopsy, as the mucosa usually looks 
normal. As the histological changes can be patchy, an adequate number 
of biopsies (four biopsies from the second part of the duodenum plus 
one from the duodenal bulb) should be taken. The histological features 
are usually characteristic, but other causes of villous atrophy should be 
considered (Box 23.43 and Fig. 23.43).
Antibodies 
Antibody tests constitute a valuable screening tool in patients with diarrhoea 
or other suggestive symptoms, but are not a diagnostic substitute for small 
bowel biopsy at present. Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) is now recognised 

[[p875]]
820    GASTROENTEROLOGY
as the autoantigen for anti-endomysial antibodies. If the antibody screen 
is positive, adult patients should remain on a gluten-containing diet until 
duodenal biopsies are taken. High-titre serology in symptomatic children 
can be considered diagnostic without the need for endoscopy and biopsy. 
The use of this approach for diagnosis in adults is currently being explored.
Anti-endomysial antibodies of the IgA class are detectable by immu-
nouorescence in most untreated cases. They are sensitive (85%–95%) 
and specic (approximately 99%) for the diagnosis, except in very young 
infants. IgG antibodies, however, must be measured in patients with 
coexisting IgA deciency. Measurement of the concentration of tTG anti-
bodies has become the serological test of choice in many countries, as it 
is easier to perform, is semi-quantitative, has more than 95% sensitivity 
and specicity, and is more accurate in patients with IgA deciency.
Haematology and biochemistry 
A full blood count may show microcytic or macrocytic anaemia from iron 
or folate deciency and features of hyposplenism (target cells, sphero-
cytes and Howell–Jolly bodies). Biochemical tests may reveal reduced 
concentrations of calcium, magnesium, total protein, albumin or vitamin 
D. Serum IgA measurement is required to ensure an appropriate IgA 
response and to allow accurate analysis of serological testing.
Other investigations 
Measurement of bone density should be considered to look for osteo-
penia or osteoporosis, especially in older patients and post-menopausal 
women.
Management 
The aims are to correct existing deciencies of micronutrients, such as iron, 
folate, calcium and/or vitamin D, and to achieve mucosal healing through 
a life-long gluten-free diet. This requires the exclusion of wheat, rye, barley 
and initially oats, although oats may be re-introduced safely in most patients 
after 6–12 months. Initially, frequent dietary counselling is required to make 
sure the diet is being observed, as the most common reason for failure to 
improve with dietary treatment is accidental or unrecognised gluten inges-
tion. Mineral and vitamin supplements are also given when indicated, but 
are seldom necessary when a strict gluten-free diet is adheredto. Booklets 
Antigen-
presenting
cell
CD4+
T cell
HLA-DQ2
Deamidation
Th1 response
 IL-1
 IFN-γ
 TNF-α
Lumen
Brush border
Epithelium
Tissue
transglutaminase
Gluten peptides
IEL
IEL
Fig. 23.42 Pathophysiology of coeliac disease. After being taken up by epithelial cells, gluten peptides are deamidated by the enzyme tissue transglutaminase 
in the subepithelial layer. They are then able to fit the antigen-binding motif on human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ2-positive antigen-presenting cells. Recognition by 
CD4+ T cells triggers a Th1 immune response with generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines: interleukin-1 (IL-1), interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and tumour 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). Lymphocytes infiltrate the lamina propria and an increase in intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IELs), crypt hyperplasia and villous 
atrophy ensue.
23.41  Malabsorption in old age
 Coeliac disease: symptoms such as dyspepsia tend to be vague; only 25% 
present classically with diarrhoea and weight loss. Metabolic bone disease, 
folate or iron deciency, coagulopathy and small bowel lymphoma are more 
common.
 Small bowel bacterial overgrowth: more common due to atrophic gastritis, 
resulting in hypo- or achlorhydria, increased prevalence of jejunal diverticulosis 
and long-term adverse effects of gastric surgery for ulcer disease.
23.43  Important causes of subtotal villous atrophy
 Coeliac disease
 Tropical sprue
 Dermatitis herpetiformis
 Lymphoma
 HIV-related enteropathy
 Giardiasis
 Hypogammaglobulinaemia
 Radiation
 Whipple’s disease
 Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus)
23.42  Disease associations of coeliac disease
 Type 1 diabetes mellitus (2%–8%)
 Thyroid disease (5%)
 Primary biliary cholangitis (3%)
 Sjögren syndrome (3%)
 Immunoglobulin A deciency (2%)
 Pernicious anaemia
 Sarcoidosis
 Neurological complications:
 
Encephalopathy
 
Cerebellar atrophy
 
Peripheral neuropathy
 
Epilepsy
 Myasthenia gravis
 Dermatitis herpetiformis
 Down syndrome
 Enteropathy-associated T-cell 
lymphoma
 Small bowel carcinoma
 Squamous carcinoma of oesophagus
 Ulcerative jejunitis
 Pancreatic insufciency
 Microscopic colitis
 Splenic atrophy

[[p876]]
Disorders of the small intestine     821
23
produced by ‘coeliac societies’ in many countries contain diet sheets and 
recipes using gluten-free our, and are of great value. Dietetic follow-up 
is key to management. Patients should be followed up after initiation of a 
gluten-free diet, with assessment of symptoms, weight and nutritional sta-
tus, and blood should be taken for measurement of tTG or anti-endomysial 
antibodies. There are currently no effective non-invasive tests to assess 
small bowel mucosal healing. Repeat small bowel biopsies should be con-
sidered in patients whose symptoms fail to improve and those in whom 
antibody levels remain high. In these circumstances, if the diet is satisfac-
tory, then other conditions, such as pancreatic insufciency or microscopic 
colitis, should be sought, as should complications of coeliac disease, such 
as ulcerative jejunitis or enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. Some 
patients who fail to respond adequately to a gluten-free diet may require 
therapy with glucocorticoids or immunosuppressive drugs, and may be 
classied as refractory coeliac disease (RCD). RCD can be classied as 
type 1, characterised as a normal intraepithelial lymphocyte phenotype, 
or type 2, characterised by an abnormal expansion of a subset of small 
intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes. Type 2 RCD has a 5-year survival of 
around 50%, compared to 90% in type 1 RCD.
Complications 
A twofold-increased risk of malignancy, particularly of enteropathy-
associated T-cell lymphoma, small bowel carcinoma and squamous car-
cinoma of the oesophagus, has been reported.
A few patients develop ulcerative jejuno-ileitis. This may present with 
fever, pain, obstruction or perforation. This diagnosis can be made by 
barium studies or enteroscopy but laparotomy and full-thickness biopsy 
may be required. Treatment is difcult. Glucocorticoids are used with 
mixed success and some patients require surgical resection and paren-
teral nutrition. The course is often progressive.
Osteoporosis and osteomalacia may occur in patients with 
long-standing, poorly controlled coeliac disease. These complications 
are less common in those who adhere strictly to a gluten-free diet.
Dermatitis herpetiformis 
This is characterised by crops of intensely itchy blisters over the elbows, 
knees, back and buttocks (Ch. 27). Immunouorescence shows granu-
lar or linear IgA deposition at the dermo-epidermal junction. Almost all 
patients have partial villous atrophy on duodenal biopsy, identical to that 
seen in coeliac disease, even though they usually have no gastrointes-
tinal symptoms. In contrast, fewer than 10% of coeliac patients have 
evidence of dermatitis herpetiformis, although both disorders are asso-
ciated with the same histocompatibility antigen groups. The rash usually 
responds to a gluten-free diet, but some patients require additional treat-
ment with dapsone (100–150 mg daily).
Tropical sprue 
Tropical sprue is dened as chronic, progressive malabsorption in a 
patient in or from a tropical country, associated with abnormalities of 
small intestinal structure and function. The disease occurs mainly in the 
West Indies and in southern India, Malaysia and Indonesia.
Pathophysiology 
The epidemiological pattern and occasional epidemics suggest that an 
infective agent may be involved. Although no single bacterium has been 
isolated, the condition often begins after an acute diarrhoeal illness. 
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth with Escherichia coli, Enterobacter
and Klebsiella is frequently seen. The changes closely resemble those 
of coeliac disease.
Clinical features 
There is diarrhoea, abdominal distension, anorexia, fatigue and weight 
loss. In visitors to the tropics, the onset of severe diarrhoea may be sud-
den and accompanied by fever. When the disorder becomes chronic, 
the features of megaloblastic anaemia (vitamin B12 and folic acid malab-
sorption) and other deciencies, including ankle oedema, glossitis and 
stomatitis, are common. Remissions and relapses may occur. The differ-
ential diagnosis in the indigenous tropical population is an infective cause 
of diarrhoea. The important differential diagnosis in visitors to the tropics 
is giardiasis (Ch. 13).
Management 
Tetracycline (250 mg 4 times daily for 28 days) is the treatment of choice 
and brings about long-term remission or cure. In most patients, phar-
macological doses of folic acid (5 mg daily) improve symptoms and jeju-
nal morphology. In some cases, treatment must be prolonged before 
improvement occurs and occasionally patients must leave the tropics.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
The normal duodenum and jejunum contain fewer than 104/mL organisms 
and these are usually derived from saliva. The count of coliform organisms 
never exceeds 103/mL. In bacterial overgrowth, there may be 108–1010/mL 
organisms, most of which are normally found only in the colon. Disorders 
that impair the normal physiological mechanisms controlling bacterial pro-
liferation in the intestine predispose to bacterial overgrowth (Box 23.44). 
The most important are loss of gastric acidity, impaired intestinal motility 
and structural abnormalities that allow colonic bacteria to gain access to 
the small intestine or provide a secluded haven from the peristaltic stream.
Pathophysiology 
Bacterial overgrowth can occur in patients with small bowel diverticuli 
or following surgery that creates ‘blind loops’ of bowel, e.g. Billroth II 
or Roux-en-Y reconstructions. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy reduces 
small bowel motility and affects enterocyte secretion. In systemic scle-
rosis, bacterial overgrowth arises because the circular and longitudinal 
layers of the intestinal muscle are brosed and motility is abnormal. 
In idiopathic hypogammaglobulinaemia, bacterial overgrowth occurs 
because the IgA and IgM levels in serum and jejunal secretions are 
reduced. Chronic diarrhoea and malabsorption occur because of 
A
B
H
B
I
Fig. 23.43 Jejunal mucosa. 
lamina propria (I).

[[p877]]
822    GASTROENTEROLOGY
bacterial overgrowth and recurrent gastrointestinal infections (particularly 
giardiasis, Ch. 13).
Clinical features 
Patients commonly present with bloating, abdominal pain, distension 
and diarrhoea. Nutritional deciencies can occur in severe cases, e.g. vita-
min B12 deciency can arise as the bacteria utilise vitamin B12. Nutritional 
deciencies are more commonly seen in patients with structural abnor-
malities, such as ‘blind loop syndrome’ or systemic sclerosis. Symptoms 
can commonly overlap with other diagnoses such as IBS and functional 
dyspepsia. There may also be symptoms from any underlying intestinal 
cause.
Investigations 
Culture of small bowel aspirate, obtained at endoscopy, is the gold 
standard for diagnosis. However, this is a time-consuming, invasive 
and expensive technique. Bacterial overgrowth can also be diag-
nosed non-invasively using hydrogen breath tests, although they lack 
sensitivity. These simple, non-radioactive tests involve serial measure-
ment of breath samples for hydrogen after oral ingestion of 75 g glu-
cose or 10 g lactulose. If bacteria are present within the small bowel, 
they rapidly metabolise the glucose/lactulose, causing an early rise in 
exhaled hydrogen, in advance of that normally resulting from metab-
olism by colonic ora. Lactulose breath tests have a higher sensitivity 
than glucose, although may be less specic, as a rise in hydrogen 
can coincide with the arrival of lactulose in the caecum, leading to a 
false-positive result.
Management 
The underlying cause of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth should 
be addressed, where possible. A course of broad-spectrum antibiotic 
for 2 weeks is the rst-line treatment, although there is no consensus 
on agent or dose. Examples include rifaximin (which is not absorbed 
from the gut after oral administration), as well as systemic antibi-
otics such as ciprooxacin, metronidazole and amoxicillin. Around 
30%–40% of patients do not respond adequately and relapse rates 
are high. Some patients require up to 4 weeks of treatment and, 
in a few, continuous rotating courses of antibiotics are necessary. 
Consideration needs to be given to the risk of emerging antimicro-
bial resistance. Intramuscular vitamin B12 supplementation may be 
needed in chronic cases. Patients with motility disorders, such as 
diabetes and systemic sclerosis, can sometimes benet from antidi-
arrhoeal drugs (diphenoxylate or loperamide orally). Giardiasis should 
be controlled in patients with hypogammaglobulinaemia, using met-
ronidazole or tinidazole, but if symptoms fail to respond adequately, 
immunoglobulin infusions may be required.
Whipple’s disease 
This rare condition is characterised by inltration of small intestinal 
mucosa by ‘foamy’ macrophages, which stain positive with periodic 
acid–Schiff (PAS) reagent. The disease is a multisystem one and almost 
any organ can be affected, sometimes long before gastrointestinal 
involvement becomes apparent (Box 23.45).
Pathophysiology 
Whipple’s disease is caused by infection with the Gram-positive bacillus 
Tropheryma whipplei, which becomes resident within macrophages in 
the bowel mucosa. Villi are widened and attened, containing densely 
packed macrophages in the lamina propria, which obstruct lymphatic 
drainage and cause fat malabsorption. Between 50% and 70% of the 
individuals have antibodies against Tropheryma whipplei worldwide, 
indicating prior environmental exposure, and yet Whipple’s disease 
only occurs in a minority. This is presumably because host, bacterial 
and environmental factors are contributory in its pathogenesis.
Clinical features 
Middle-aged men of European descent are most frequently affected 
and presentation depends on the pattern of organ involvement. Low-
grade fever is common and most patients have joint symptoms to some 
degree, often as the rst manifestation. Occasionally, neurological mani-
festations may predominate, due to CNS infection. Endocarditis can also 
occur, but usually only in a late phase.
Investigations 
Diagnosis is made by the characteristic features on small bowel biopsy, 
with characterisation of the bacillus by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Management 
Whipple’s disease is often fatal if untreated but responds well, at least 
initially, to intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g daily for 2 weeks), followed by oral 
co-trimoxazole for at least 1 year. Symptoms usually resolve quickly and 
biopsy changes revert to normal in a few weeks. Long-term follow-up is 
essential, as clinical relapse occurs in up to one-third of patients, often 
within the CNS; in this case, the same therapy is repeated or else treat-
ment with doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine is necessary.
23.44  Causes of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Mechanism
Examples
Hypo- or achlorhydria
Pernicious anaemia
Partial gastrectomy
Long-term proton pump inhibitor 
therapy
Impaired intestinal motility
Systemic sclerosis
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Structural abnormalities
Gastric surgery (e.g. blind loop after 
Billroth II operation)
Jejunal diverticulosis
Enterocolic stulae*
Extensive small bowel resection
Strictures*
Impaired immune function
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
*Most commonly caused by Crohn’s disease.
23.45  Clinical features of Whipple’s disease
Gastrointestinal (> 70%)
 Diarrhoea (75%)
 Steatorrhoea
 Weight loss (90%)
 Protein-losing enteropathy
 Ascites
 Hepatosplenomegaly (< 5%)
Musculoskeletal (65%)
 Seronegative large joint arthropathy
 Sacroiliitis
Cardiac (10%)
 Pericarditis
 Myocarditis
 Endocarditis
 Coronary arteritis
Neurological (10%–40%)
 Apathy
 Fits
 Dementia
 Myoclonus
 Meningitis
 Cranial nerve lesions
Pulmonary (10%–20%)
 Chronic cough
 Pleurisy
 Pulmonary inltrates
Haematological (60%)
 Anaemia
 Lymphadenopathy
Other (40%)
 Fever
 Pigmentation

[[p878]]
Disorders of the small intestine     823
23
Bile acid diarrhoea 
Causes of bile acid diarrhoea are shown in Box 23.46. The population 
prevalence is estimated at around 1% and it is often under-diagnosed. 
It is now appreciated that up to a third of patients diagnosed with diar-
rhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome have evidence of bile acid 
diarrhoea. A common scenario is in patients with Crohn’s disease who 
have undergone ileal resection, which can also lead to other malab-
sorptive manifestations (Fig. 23.44). Unabsorbed bile salts pass into the 
colon, stimulating water and electrolyte secretion and causing diarrhoea. 
If hepatic synthesis of new bile acids cannot keep pace with faecal 
losses, fat malabsorption occurs. Another consequence is the forma-
tion of lithogenic bile, leading to gallstones. Renal calculi, rich in oxalate, 
develop. Normally, oxalate in the colon is bound to and precipitated by 
calcium. Unabsorbed bile salts preferentially bind calcium, leaving oxa-
late to be absorbed, with development of urinary oxalate calculi.
Patients have urgent watery diarrhoea or mild steatorrhoea. Contrast stud-
ies and tests of B12 and bile acid absorption, such as the 75Se-homocholic 
acid taurine (SeHCAT) test (see Box 23.12), are useful investigations but 
are not available throughout the world due to use of synthetic radio-labelled 
compound. An elevated serum 7α-hydroxycholestenone is a useful non-
invasive marker of bile acid diarrhoea. Diarrhoea usually responds well to 
bile acid sequestrants, such as colestyramine or colesevelam, which bind 
bile salts in the intestinal lumen. Bile acid sequestrants can also be used as 
a diagnostic trial, where investigations are unavailable.
Short bowel syndrome 
This is discussed in detail in Chapter 22
Radiation enteropathy 
Intestinal damage occurs in 10%–15% of patients undergoing radiother-
apy for abdominal or pelvic malignancy. The risk varies with total dose, 
dosing schedule and the use of concomitant chemotherapy.
Pathophysiology 
The rectum, sigmoid colon and terminal ileum are most frequently 
involved. Radiation causes acute inammation, shortening of villi, 
oedema and crypt abscess formation. These usually resolve completely, 
but some patients develop an obliterative endarteritis affecting the 
endothelium of submucosal arterioles over 2–12 months. In the longer 
term, this can provoke a brotic reaction, leading to adhesions, ulcera-
tion, strictures, obstruction or stula to adjacent organs.
Clinical features 
In the acute phase, there is nausea, vomiting, cramping abdominal pain 
and diarrhoea. When the rectum and colon are involved, rectal mucus, 
bleeding and tenesmus occur. The chronic phase develops after 3 or 
more months in some patients and produces one or more of the prob-
lems listed in Box 23.47
Investigations 
In the acute phase, the rectal changes at sigmoidoscopy resemble ulcer-
ative proctitis (see Fig. 23.64). The extent of the lesion can be assessed 
by colonoscopy. Barium follow-through or MRI enterography can be of 
diagnostic value in showing small bowel strictures, ulcers and stulae.
Management 
Diarrhoea in the acute phase should be treated with codeine phosphate, 
diphenoxylate or loperamide. Antibiotics may be required for bacterial 
23.46  Classication of bile acid diarrhoea
Type
Cause
Type 1
Terminal ileal disease leading to malabsorption of bile acids from 
terminal ileum, e.g. Crohn’s disease, terminal ileal resection
Type 2
Primary or idiopathic – no anatomical abnormalities or risk factors 
present
Type 3
Other conditions that affect GI absorption, e.g. chronic 
pancreatitis, coeliac disease, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Decreased bile salt
pool, lithogenic bile
leading to gallstones
Impaired bile salt
absorption leading
to watery diarrhoea
B12 malabsorption
Increased
absorption
of oxalate
Oxalate calculi
Impaired micelle
formation and fat
malabsorption
Fig. 23.44 Consequences of ileal resection.
23.47  Chronic complications of intestinal irradiation
 Proctocolitis
 Bleeding from telangiectasia
 Small bowel strictures
 Fistulae: rectovaginal, colovesical, enterocolic
 Adhesions
 Malabsorption: bacterial overgrowth, bile acid diarrhoea (ileal damage)

[[p879]]
824    GASTROENTEROLOGY
overgrowth. Nutritional supplements are necessary when malabsorption 
is present. Colestyramine or colesevelam is useful for associated bile 
acid diarrhoea. In radiation enteropathy, the underlying pathophysiology 
is tissue ischaemia rather than inammation; glucocorticoid enemas are 
therefore not effective. Treatments include sucralfate enema and hyper-
baric oxygen. Different endoscopic techniques may also be used, includ-
ing argon plasma coagulation, radiofrequency ablation and heater probe 
thermocoagulation. Surgery should be avoided, if possible, because the 
injured intestine is difcult to resect and anastomose, but may be neces-
sary if there is obstruction, perforation or stula.
Abetalipoproteinaemia 
This rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by deciency of apoli-
poprotein B, which results in failure of chylomicron formation. It leads to 
fat malabsorption and deciency of fat-soluble vitamins. Jejunal biopsy 
reveals enterocytes distended with resynthesised triglyceride and normal 
villous morphology. Serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels are low. A 
number of other abnormalities occur in this syndrome, including acan-
thocytosis, retinitis pigmentosa and a progressive neurological disorder 
with cerebellar and dorsal column signs. Symptoms may be improved 
by a low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglycerides and vita-
mins A, D, E and K.
Miscellaneous disorders of the small intestine 
Protein-losing enteropathy 
This term is used when there is excessive loss of protein into the gut 
lumen, sufcient to cause hypoproteinaemia. Protein-losing enteropa-
thy occurs in many gut disorders but is most common in those where 
ulceration occurs (Box 23.48). In other disorders, protein loss can result 
from increased mucosal permeability or obstruction of intestinal lymphatic 
vessels. Patients present with peripheral oedema and hypoproteinaemia 
(reduced serum albumin and immunoglobulins), in the context of normal 
liver function and absent proteinuria.. The diagnosis can be conrmed by 
measurement of faecal clearance of α1-antitrypsin or 51Cr-labelled albumin 
after intravenous injection. Other investigations should be performed to 
determine the underlying cause. Treatment is that of the underlying disor-
der, with nutritional support and measures to control peripheral oedema.
Intestinal lymphangiectasia 
This may be primary, resulting from congenital malunion of lymphatics, or 
secondary to lymphatic obstruction due to lymphoma, lariasis or constric-
tive pericarditis. Impaired drainage of intestinal lymphatic vessels leads to 
discharge of protein and fat-rich lymph into the gastrointestinal lumen. The 
condition presents with peripheral lymphoedema, pleural effusions or chy-
lous ascites, and steatorrhoea. Investigations reveal hypoalbuminaemia, 
lymphopenia and reduced serum immunoglobulin concentrations. The 
diagnosis can be made by CT or MRI scanning and by enteroscopy with 
jejunal biopsy, which shows greatly dilated lacteals. Treatment consists of 
a low-fat diet with medium-chain triglyceride supplements.
Ulceration of the small intestine 
Small bowel ulcers are uncommon and are either idiopathic or second-
ary to underlying intestinal disorders (Box 23.49). Ulcers are more com-
mon in the ileum and cause bleeding, perforation, stricture formation or 
obstruction. Capsule endoscopyand enteroscopy conrm the diagnosis.
NSAID-associated small intestinal toxicity 
NSAIDs cause a spectrum of small intestinal lesions, ranging from ero-
sions and ulcers to mucosal webs, strictures and, rarely, a condition 
known as ‘diaphragm disease’, in which intense submucosal brosis 
results in circumferential stricturing. The condition can present with pain, 
obstruction, bleeding or anaemia, and may mimic Crohn’s disease, car-
cinoma or lymphoma. Enteroscopy or capsule endoscopy can reveal 
the diagnosis but sometimes this is discovered only at laparotomy.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis 
This disorder of unknown aetiology can affect any part of the gastroin-
testinal tract, with the stomach and small intestine being the areas most 
commonly affected; it is characterised by eosinophil inltration involving 
the gut wall, in the absence of parasitic infection or eosinophilia of other 
tissues. It may be mucosal, muscular or subserosal. Peripheral blood 
eosinophilia is present in around 70% of cases.
Clinical features 
There are features of obstruction and inammation, such as colicky pain, 
nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea and weight loss. Protein-losing enterop-
athy occurs and up to 50% of patients have a history of other allergic dis-
orders. Steatorrhoea may be present in around 30% of patients. Serosal 
involvement may produce eosinophilic ascites.
Investigations and management 
The diagnosis is made by histological assessment of multiple endoscopic 
biopsies, although full-thickness biopsies are occasionally required. Other 
investigations should be performed to exclude parasitic infection and 
other causes of eosinophilia. Serum IgE concentration is raised in around 
two-thirds of cases. Dietary manipulations can be considered as an initial 
strategy, but are rarely effective, although elimination diets (especially of 
milk) may benet a few patients. Severe symptoms are treated with pred-
nisolone (20–40 mg daily) and/or sodium cromoglicate, which stabilises 
mast cell membranes. The prognosis is good in the majority of patients.
Meckel’s diverticulum 
This is the most common congenital anomaly of the gastrointestinal tract 
and occurs in 0.3%–3% of people, but the vast majority of affected indi-
viduals are asymptomatic throughout life. The diverticulum results from 
failure of closure of the vitelline duct, with persistence of a blind-ending 
sac arising from the anti-mesenteric border of the ileum; it usually 
occurs within 100 cm of the ileocaecal valve and is up to 5 cm long. 
Approximately 50% contain ectopic gastric mucosa; rarely, colonic, 
23.48  Causes of protein-losing enteropathy
With mucosal erosions or ulceration
 Crohn’s disease
 Ulcerative colitis
 Radiation damage
 Oesophageal, gastric or colonic 
cancer
 Lymphoma
Without mucosal erosions or ulceration
 Ménétrier’s disease
 Bacterial overgrowth
 Coeliac disease
 Tropical sprue
 Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
With lymphatic obstruction
 Intestinal lymphangiectasia
 Constrictive pericarditis
 Lymphoma
 Whipple’s disease
23.49  Causes of small intestinal ulcers
 Idiopathic
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
 Ulcerative jejuno-ileitis
 Lymphoma and carcinoma
 Infections (tuberculosis, typhoid, Yersinia enterocolitica)
 Others (radiation, vasculitis)

[[p880]]
Disorders of the small intestine     825
23
pancreatic or endometrial tissue is present. Complications most com-
monly occur in the rst 2 years of life, but are occasionally seen in young 
adults. Bleeding can result from ulceration of ileal mucosa adjacent to the 
ectopic parietal cells and presents as recurrent melaena or altered blood 
per rectum. The diagnosis can be made by scanning the abdomen using 
a gamma camera following an intravenous injection of 99mTc-pertechnetate, 
which is concentrated by ectopic parietal cells. Other complications 
include intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, intussusception and perfora-
tion. Intervention is unnecessary unless complications occur.
Adverse food reactions 
Adverse food reactions are common and are subdivided into food intoler-
ance and food allergy, the former being much more common. In food intol-
erance, there is an adverse reaction to food that is not immune-mediated 
and results from pharmacological (histamine, tyramine or monosodium 
glutamate), metabolic (lactase deciency) or other mechanisms (toxins or 
chemical contaminants in food). Food allergies (discussed in the section 
on ‘Allergy’ in Chapter 4) are immune-mediated disorders, most com-
monly due to type I hypersensitivity reactions with production of IgE anti-
bodies, although type IV delayed hypersensitivity reactions are also seen.
Lactose intolerance 
Human milk contains around 200 mmol/L (68 g/L) of lactose, which is 
normally digested to glucose and galactose by the brush border enzyme 
lactase prior to absorption. In most populations, enterocyte lactase activity 
declines throughout childhood. The enzyme is decient in up to 90% of adult 
Africans, Asians and South Americans, but only 5% of northern Europeans.
In cases of genetically determined (primary) lactase deciency, jejunal 
morphology is normal. ‘Secondary’ lactase deciency occurs as a con-
sequence of disorders that damage the jejunal mucosa, such as coeliac 
disease and viral gastroenteritis. Unhydrolysed lactose enters the colon, 
where bacterial fermentation produces volatile short-chain fatty acids, 
hydrogen and carbon dioxide.
Clinical features 
In most people, lactase deciency is completely asymptomatic. However, 
some complain of colicky pain, abdominal distension, increased a-
tus, borborygmi and diarrhoea after ingesting milk or milk products. 
Irritable bowel syndrome may be suspected, but the correct diagnosis 
is suggested by clinical improvement on lactose withdrawal. The lactose 
hydrogen breath test is a useful non-invasive investigation.
Dietary exclusion of lactose is recommended, although most sufferers 
are able to tolerate small amounts of milk (up to 250 mL milk, 12 g lac-
tose) without symptoms. Addition of commercial lactase preparations to 
milk may be effective, but is costly.
Infections of the small intestine 
Infections of the small intestine are discussed in other chapters. For trav-
ellers’ diarrhoea, giardiasis and amoebiasis, see Chapter 13. Abdominal 
tuberculosis is discussed on page 520. Cryptosporidiosis and other 
protozoal infections, including cystoisosporiasis (Cystoisospora belli) and 
microsporidiosis, are covered Chapters  13 and 14.
Tumours of the small intestine 
The small intestine is rarely affected by neoplasia and fewer than 5% of 
all gastrointestinal tumours occur at this site.
Benign tumours 
The most common are adenomas, GISTs, lipomas and hamartomas. 
Adenomas are most often found in the periampullary region and are 
usually asymptomatic, although occult bleeding or obstruction due to 
intussusception may occur. Transformation to adenocarcinoma is rare. 
Multiple adenomas are common in the duodenum of patients with famil-
ial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), who require regular endoscopic sur-
veillance. Hamartomatous polyps with almost no malignant potential 
occur in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (p. 832).
Malignant tumours 
These are rare and include, in decreasing order of frequency, neuro-
endocrine tumours, adenocarcinoma, malignant GIST and lymphoma. 
The majority occur in middle age or later. Kaposi’s sarcoma of the 
small bowel may arise in patients with HIV/AIDS.
Adenocarcinomas 
Adenocarcinomas occur with increased frequency in patients with FAP, 
coeliac disease, small bowel Crohn’s disease and Peutz–Jeghers syn-
drome. This rare cancer accounts for fewer than 5% of all gastrointestinal 
malignancies. The non-specic presentation and rarity of these lesions 
often lead to a delay in diagnosis. Most are noted during assessment of 
anaemia or obscure GI bleeding. Capsule endoscopy or device-assisted 
enteroscopy, and small bowel enterography studies (CT or MRI) can be 
used to identify lesions. Treatment is by surgical resection.
Neuro-endocrine tumours 
These are discussed in detail on page 691.
Lymphoma 
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (Ch. 25) may involve the gastrointestinal tract 
as part of more generalised disease or may rarely arise in the gut, the 
small intestine being most commonly affected. Lymphomas occur with 
increased frequency in patients with coeliac disease, HIV/AIDS and other 
immunodeciency states. Most are of B-cell origin, although lymphoma 
associated with coeliac disease is derived from T cells (enteropathy-
associated T-cell lymphoma).
Colicky abdominal pain, obstruction and weight loss are the present-
ing features and perforation is also seen occasionally. Malabsorption is 
a feature of diffuse bowel involvement and hepatosplenomegaly is rare.
The diagnosis is made by small bowel biopsy, radiological contrast 
studies and CT. Staging investigations should be performed as for lym-
phomas occurring elsewhere (p. 133). Surgical resection, where pos-
sible, is the treatment of choice, with radiotherapy and combination 
chemotherapy reserved for those with advanced disease. The prognosis 
depends largely on the stage at diagnosis, cell type, patient age and the 
presence of ‘B’ symptoms (fever, weight loss, night sweats).
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease 
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID), also known as alpha 
heavy chain disease, is a rare condition occurring mainly in Mediterranean 
countries, the Middle East, India, Pakistan and North America. It is a 
variant of B-cell lymphoma of MALT type and often associated with 
Campylobacter jejuni infection. The condition varies in severity from rela-
tively benign to frankly malignant.
The small intestinal mucosa is diffusely affected, especially proximally, 
by a dense lymphoplasmacytic inltrate. Enlarged mesenteric lymph 
nodes are also common. Most patients are young adults who present 
with malabsorption, anorexia and fever. Serum electrophoresis con-
rms the presence of alpha heavy chains (from the Fc portion of IgA). 
Prolonged remissions can be obtained with long-term antibiotic therapy, 
but chemotherapy is required for those who fail to respond or who have 
aggressive disease.
Small intestine motility disorders 
Chronic small intestine pseudo-obstruction 
Small intestinal motility is disordered in conditions that affect the smooth 
muscle or nerves of the intestine. Many cases are ‘primary’ (idiopathic), 
while others are ‘secondary’ to a variety of disorders or drugs (Box 23.50).

[[p881]]
826    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Clinical features 
There are recurrent episodes of nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort 
and distension, often worse after food. Alternating constipation and diar-
rhoea occur and weight loss results from malabsorption (due to bacterial 
overgrowth) and fear of eating. There may also be symptoms of dysmo-
tility affecting other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, such as dysphagia, 
and features of bladder dysfunction in primary cases. Some patients 
develop severe abdominal pain for reasons that are poorly understood 
and this can be difcult to manage.
Investigations 
The diagnosis is often delayed and a high index of suspicion is needed. 
Plain X-rays show distended loops of bowel and air–uid levels, with 
abdominal CT and small bowel MRI used to exclude mechanical obstruc-
tion. Laparotomy is sometimes required to exclude obstruction and to 
obtain full-thickness biopsies of the intestine. Examination of biopsy 
material using specialised techniques, such as electron microscopy and 
immunohistochemistry can diagnose the many rare diseases of enteric 
smooth muscle and nerves that can cause this syndrome.
Management 
This is often difcult. Underlying causes should be addressed and further 
surgery avoided. Metoclopramide or domperidone may enhance motility 
and antibiotics are given for bacterial overgrowth. Nutritional and psy-
chological support is also necessary.
Disorders of the colon and rectum 
Colorectal polyps 
Types of colorectal polyps 
In the colon, polyps usually arise from the mucosal layer. These can 
vary in number and size, from a few millimetres to several centimetres. 
They are commonly described based on their appearance as sessile, 
pedunculated, at, elevated or depressed (Fig. 23.45). In addition, they 
are classied histologically, as neoplastic or non-neoplastic polyps (Box 
23.51). This is important to help predict their malignant potential.
Non-neoplastic polyps include hamartomas, inammatory polyps and 
hyperplastic polyps, which harbour no malignant potential. Hyperplastic 
polyps are the commonest type of colorectal polyp, and are a subgroup 
of so-called serrated polyps, often small in size, and frequently found 
in the distal colon. Hamartomas can occur sporadically, or as part of 
a polyposis syndrome. Inammatory polyps are commonly seen in the 
context of IBD and are due to inammation within the colon with dis-
torted mucosa.
The most well-known neoplastic polyps are conventional adenomas, 
which harbour malignant potential and are extremely common in the 
Western world. The prevalence of adenomas increases with age; 50% 
of people over 60 years of age have colorectal adenomas and in half 
of these the polyps are multiple. Adenomas can be found throughout 
the colon, although larger polyps, harbouring a higher risk of malig-
nancy, tend to be more common in the rectum and distal colon. They 
can be further sub-classied histologically, as either tubular, villous or 
tubulovillous, according to the glandular architecture. Features asso-
ciated with a higher risk of subsequent malignancy are listed in Box 
23.52. Adenomas are usually asymptomatic and discovered inciden-
tally. Larger adenomas can occasionally cause bleeding and anae-
mia. Rarely, large villous adenomas can secrete signicant amounts 
of mucus, causing diarrhoea and hypokalaemia (McKittrick-Wheelock 
syndrome).
Traditionally, it was thought that adenomas were the only type of neo-
plastic polyp. However, it is now known that sessile serrated lesions and 
traditional serrated adenomas, further subgroups of serrated polyps, 
bear malignant potential. Sessile serrated lesions are more common in 
the right colon, tend to be atter than conventional adenomas and are 
often covered with a mucus cap, making them hard to detect. They are 
now thought to account for between 15%–30% of colorectal cancers. 
Traditional serrated adenomas are relatively rare, accounting for <1% 
of all polyps, commonly found in the distal colon and can also harbour 
malignant potential.
Assessment and treatment of colorectal polyps 
Colonic polyps are commonly found incidentally during endoscopy. If a 
polyp is found during sigmoidoscopy, a colonoscopy should be sub-
sequently performed, as up to 40%–50% of affected individuals have 
further polyps more proximally in the colon. As neoplastic colonic polyps 
have malignant potential, these should be removed via colonoscopic 
polypectomy, as this considerably reduces subsequent colorectal cancer 
risk (Fig. 23.46). When cancer cells are found within 2 mm of the resec-
tion margin of the polyp, when the polyp cancer is poorly differentiated 
23.50  Causes of chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
Primary or idiopathic
 Rare familial visceral myopathies or neuropathies
 Congenital aganglionosis
Secondary
 Drugs (opiates, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines)
 Smooth muscle disorders (systemic sclerosis, amyloidosis, mitochondrial 
myopathies)
 Myenteric plexus disorders, e.g. paraneoplastic syndrome in small-cell lung 
cancer
 Central nervous system disorders (Parkinson’s disease, autonomic neuropathy)
 Endocrine and metabolic disorders (hypothyroidism, diabetic autonomic 
neuropathy, phaeochromocytoma, acute intermittent porphyria)
Sessile polyp
Polyp
Mucosa
A
Pedunculated polyp
B
Flat polyp
C
Elevated polyp
D
Depressed polyp
E
Fig. 23.45 Polyp morphology.
23.51  Neoplastic and non-neoplastic polyps
Neoplastic polyps
Non-neoplastic polyps
 Conventional adenoma
 Hamartoma
 Sessile serrated lesion
 Inammatory
 Traditional serrated adenoma
 Hyperplastic

[[p882]]
Disorders of the colon and rectum     827
23
or when lymphatic invasion is present, segmental colonic resection is 
recommended because residual tumour or lymphatic spread (in up to 
10%) may be present. Malignant polyps without these features can be 
followed up by surveillance colonoscopy.
Very large sessile polyps can sometimes be removed safely by endo-
scopic mucosal resection (EMR), but many require surgery. Endoscopic 
submucosal dissection (ESD) can be used for some lesions with a high 
suspicion of limited submucosal invasion, although this is a technically 
challenging procedure that is not routinely performed. Once all polyps 
have been removed, surveillance colonoscopy should be undertaken 
in individuals with high-risk ndings, as new polyps develop in 50% of 
patients. Patients over 75 years of age tend not to require repeated colo-
noscopies, as their subsequent lifetime cancer risk is low.
Colorectal cancer 
Globally, colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer 
in males and second in females. High-income countries have the highest 
incidence of colorectal cancer, while Africa and South Asia have the low-
est incidence. Worldwide incidence is continuing to increase, although 
incidence rates have stabilised in high-income countries. In the UK, the 
incidence is around 70 per 100 000 of the population. The condition 
becomes increasingly common over the age of 50 years.
Pathophysiology 
Both environmental and genetic factors are important in colorectal car-
cinogenesis. The majority (75%) of colorectal cancers are sporadic, with 
20% of patients having genetic predisposition and a small minority (5%) 
being hereditary. Figure 23.47 outlines the key pathophysiological factors.
Genetics 
Colorectal cancer development results from the accumulation of multi-
ple genetic mutations. There are also associated epigenetic inuences, 
such as microRNA expression signature, and potential inuences from 
non-coding genetic variation. Currently, there are three main pathways 
of genetic instability and each is associated with histological, clinical and 
prognostic parameters:
 Chromosomal instability. Mutations or deletions of portions of chro-
mosomes arise, with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and inactivation 
of specic tumour suppressor genes. In LOH, one allele of a gene is 
deleted, but gene inactivation occurs only when a subsequent unre-
lated mutation affects the other allele. Chromosomal instability (CIN) 
occurs in around 85% of colorectal cancers.
 Microsatellite instability. This involves germline mutations in one of 
six genes encoding enzymes involved in repairing errors that occur 
normally during DNA replication (DNA mismatch repair); these 
genes are designated hMSH2, hMSH6, hMLH1, hMLH3, hPMS1
and hPMS2. Replication errors accumulate and can be detected 
in ‘microsatellites’ of repetitive DNA sequences. They also occur in 
important regulatory genes, resulting in a genetically unstable phen-
otype and accumulation of multiple somatic mutations throughout 
the genome that eventually lead to cancer. Around 15% of sporadic 
cancers develop this way, as do most cases of hereditary non- 
polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC).
 CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). This phenotype is found 
in approximately 20%–30% of colorectal cancers and results in 
widespread gene hypermethylation. The result is functional loss of 
tumour suppressor genes.
There are two distinct pathways of carcinogenesis: the classical ade-
noma–carcinoma pathway and the more recently discovered alternate 
serrated neoplasia pathway. The classical adenoma–carcinoma pathway 
is characterised by an adenoma as the precursor lesion. Adenomas tend 
to result in carcinoma through the sequential acquisition of mutations, 
through chromosomal and microsatellite instability (Fig. 23.48). The time 
period for an adenoma to develop into a carcinoma is thought to take 
between 5 and 10 years. The serrated neoplasia pathway is characterised 
by a serrated polyp as a precursor lesion. Serrated polyps (hyperplastic, 
sessile serrated lesions, traditional serrated adenomas) were all thought 
to be non-neoplastic previously. However, it is now thought that sessile 
serrated lesions and traditional serrated adenomas are precursor lesions 
for malignancy. While hyperplastic polyps are generally still viewed as non-
neoplastic, some subtypes are thought to be precursors of sessile serrated 
lesions. There are two pathways of carcinoma formation via the serrated 
neoplasia pathway, through the traditional serrated and sessile routes, with 
genetic instability through microsatellite instability and CIMP (Fig. 23.49), 
although molecular pathways are still not well understood. The serrated 
neoplasia pathway is associated with faster carcinoma development in 
comparison to the classical adenoma–carcinoma pathway.
23.52  Risk factors for malignant change in colonic polyps
 Large size (> 2 cm)
 Multiple polyps
 Serrated polyps (excluding small rectal hyperplastic polyps)
 Villous architecture
 High-grade dysplasia
B
A
Fig. 23.46 Large rectal adenomatous polyp. 

[[p883]]
828    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Genetic
Others
Medical conditions
Diet
Colorectal
cancer
risk
 Accumulation of
   multiple somatic
   mutations
 Multiple susceptibility
   genes
Increased risk
 Obesity and sedentary
   lifestyle
 Smoking
 Alcohol
 Cholecystectomy
 Type 2 diabetes
Reduced risk
 Aspirin or NSAIDs
 Possibly statins
 Colorectal neoplastic
   polyps
 Long-standing extensive
   UC or Crohn’s colitis
 Ureterosigmoidostomy
 Acromegaly
 Pelvic radiotherapy
Increased risk
 Red meat*
 Saturated animal fat*
Decreased risk
 Dietary fibre*
 Fruits and vegetables
 Calcium
 Folic acid
 Omega-3 fatty acids
* Evidence is inconsistent
and a clear relationship is
unproven
Fig. 23.47 Risk factors for colorectal cancer. (NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drigs; UC = ulcerative colitis)
Late adenoma
Carcinoma
Key gene(s)
Chromosome
Alteration
Normal
function
Effect
APC
(adenomatous
polyposis coli)
5q
Truncating
mutations
Inhibits
translocation
of β-catenin to
nucleus and
suppresses
cell growth
Progression to
early adenoma
development
KRAS
12p
Gain-of-function
mutations
Transmembrane
GTP-binding
protein mediating
mitogenic
signals (p21)
Cell
proliferation
DCC (deleted in
colon cancer)
SMAD4
18q
Allelic deletion or
silencing (DCC)
Gain-of-function
mutations (SMAD4)
DCC regulates
apoptosis and has a
tumour suppressor
function
SMAD4 regulates
cell growth
Enhanced tumour
growth, invasion
and metastasis
TP53
17p
Allelic deletion;
gain-of-function
mutations
Up-regulated during
cell damage to
arrest cell cycle and
allow DNA repair or
apoptosis to occur
Cell proliferation;
impaired apoptosis
Further mutations
 Anchorage
   independence
 Protease
   synthesis
 Telomerase
   synthesis
 Multidrug
   resistance
 Evasion of
   immune system
Intermediate
adenoma
Early adenoma
Normal
Fig. 23.48 The multistep origin of cancer: molecular events implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis. (GTP = guanine triphosphate)
Environment 
The majority of colorectal cancers are sporadic, with the development of 
carcinoma being dependent upon the penetrance of a genetic predispo-
sition and the severity of environmental insult. It is thought that up to 50% 
of cases of colorectal cancer may potentially be preventable by lifestyle 
modications. Several risks factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer, 
such as smoking, alcohol and type 2 diabetes. In addition, dietary factors 
are also key in the pathophysiology of colorectal cancer, such as fruit and 
vegetable intake (see Fig. 23.47).
Clinical features 
Symptoms vary, depending on the site of the carcinoma. However, the 
disease is largely aymptomatic until at an advanced stage. In tumours of 
the left colon, fresh rectal bleeding is common and obstruction occurs 
early. Tumours of the right colon present with anaemia from occult 
bleeding or with altered bowel habit, but obstruction is a late feature. 
Colicky lower abdominal pain is present in two-thirds of patients and 
rectal bleeding occurs in 50%. A minority present with features of either 
obstruction or perforation, leading to peritonitis, localised abscess or 

[[p884]]
Disorders of the colon and rectum     829
23
IGFBP7
BRAF
MLH1
KRAS
BRAF
MGMT
Sessile serrated
lesion
Traditional serrated
lesion
Key genes
mutated
Key genes
mutated
Gene
IGFBP7
Chromosome
4q
BRAF
7q
KRAS
12p
MLH1
3p
MGMT
10q
Normal
function
Interacts with
insulin-like
growth factors
that are involved
in preventing
apoptosis
Regulates cell
proliferation,
differentiation,
migration and
apoptosis
Transmembrane
GTP-binding
protein mediating
mitogenic signals
(p 21)
Mismatch repair
gene that repairs
errors made
during DNA
replication
DNA-repair
protein involved
in defence
against
mutagenesis
and toxicity
Key gene
mutated
Key gene
mutated
Normal mucosa
Carcinoma
Fig. 23.49 The serrated neoplasia pathway.
stula formation. Carcinoma of the rectum usually causes early bleeding, 
mucus discharge or a feeling of incomplete emptying. Between 10% 
and 20% of patients present with iron deciency anaemia or weight loss. 
On examination, there may be a palpable mass, signs of anaemia or 
hepatomegaly from metastases. Low rectal tumours may be palpable on 
digital examination.
Investigations 
Colonoscopy is the investigation of choice because it is more sensitive 
and specic than barium enema. Furthermore, lesions can be biopsied 
and polyps removed. Patients in whom colonoscopy is incomplete and 
those who are at high risk of complications can be investigated by CT 
colono graphy (virtual colonoscopy). This is a sensitive and non-invasive 
technique for diagnosing tumours and polyps of more than 6 mm diame-
ter. When the diagnosis of colon cancer has been made, CT of the chest, 
abdomen and pelvis should be performed as a staging investigation, 
particularly to detect hepatic metastases, with an increasing role of MRI 
for further characterisation of liver lesions. Pelvic MRI or endoanal ultra-
sound should be used for local staging of rectal cancer. Measurement 
of serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels is of limited value in 
diagnosis, since values are normal in many patients, but CEA testing 
can be helpful during follow-up to monitor for recurrence. FDG PET-CT 
is being increasingly used, although its exact role is still debated. Tumour 
stage (TNM) at diagnosis is the most important determinant of prognosis 
(Fig. 23.50).
Management 
Endoscopy 
Early colorectal cancers may be amenable to endoscopic treatment, using 
techniques such as endoscopic mucosal resection, endoscopic submu-
cosal dissection and endoscopic full-thickness resection. Endoscopic 
submucosal dissection and endoscopic full-thickness resection tend to 
be used when there is suspicion of supercial submucosal invasion and 
needs a highly skilled endoscopist. In addition to such a procedure, sur-
gical mesenteric lymphadenectomy may be required.
Surgery 
Surgery for colorectal cancer remains the cornerstone of treatment with 
curative intent. Rectal cancers can be complex to operate on due to the 
anatomy of the pelvis. Neoadjuvant radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy 
should be offered to individuals with high-risk rectal cancers to increase 
the subsequent chance of a complete (R0) subsequent surgical resection. 
Colorectal cancer may present as an emergency with obstruction or perfo-
ration. Obstruction can be treated by either a decompressing colostomy or 
endoscopic stenting. Metastatic disease conned to liver or lung should be 
considered for resection, as this can be potentially curative if there is truly no 
disease at other sites. Metastatic disease conned to the peritoneum can 
be considered for cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy, which shows benet in survival in a subset of patients. Post-
operatively, patients should undergo colonoscopy after 1 year and then 3 
years later to search for local recurrence or development of new lesions.
Adjuvant therapy 
About 30%–40% of patients have lymph node involvement at presenta-
tion and are therefore at risk of recurrence. Most recurrences are within 
3 years of diagnosis and affect the liver, lung, distant lymph nodes and 
peritoneum. Adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-uorouracil/folinic acid or 
capecitabine, preferably in combination with oxaliplatin, can reduce the 
risk of recurrence.
Palliation of advanced disease 
Surgical resection of the primary tumour is appropriate for some patients 
with metastases to treat obstruction, bleeding or pain. RAS and BRAF
V600E mutations are tested for in metastatic colorectal cancer in individ-
uals being considered for systemic anti-cancer treatment, with outcomes 
worse if these mutations are present. Palliative chemotherapy with 

[[p885]]
830    GASTROENTEROLOGY
5-uorouracil/folinic acid, capecitabine, oxaliplatin or irinotecan improves 
survival. Patients with advanced metastatic disease may be treated with 
monoclonal antibodies such as panitumumab or cetuximab, which bind 
to and inhibit the epidermal growth factor receptor. They are often given 
together with chemotherapy. Pelvic radiotherapy is sometimes useful for 
distressing rectal symptoms, such as pain, bleeding or severe tenesmus. 
Endoscopic laser therapy or insertion of an expandable metal stent can 
be used to relieve obstruction.
Prevention and screening 
Secondary prevention aims to detect and remove lesions at an early or 
pre-malignant stage by screening the asymptomatic general population. 
Several potential methods exist:
 Population-based screening of people between the age of 50 to 
74 years by regular faecal immunochemical testing (FIT) reduces 
colorectal cancer mortality and increases the proportion of early 
cancers detected. Serial stool testing with or without subsequent 
colonoscopy is the screening method of choice in the UK.
 Colonoscopy remains the gold standard and allows preventative 
polypectomy, but is expensive, requires bowel preparation and car-
ries risks (perforation approximately 1:1000). Many countries lack 
the resources to offer this form of screening.
 Flexible sigmoidoscopy is an alternative option and has been shown 
to reduce overall colorectal cancer mortality by approximately 35% 
(70% for cases arising in the rectosigmoid). It is recommended in 
England, where available, as a one-off test in individuals aged 55 
years, with subsequent FIT from age 60 years.
 CT colonography is fast and low-risk, and offers equivalent sensi-
tivity to colonoscopy. Disadvantages include reduced sensitivity to 
detect polyps of less than 6 mm, the requirement for bowel prepara-
tion, exposure to ionising radiation and its inability to offer therapeu-
tic intent.
Lamina propria
Muscularis mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis propria
Subserosa
Serosa
Epithelium
T1
Tumour grown
into submucosa
T2
Tumour grown into
muscularis propria
T3
Tumour grown
into subserosa
T4
Tumour grown
into visceral
peritoneum/other
structures
Few lymph
nodes involved
N1a/b
Spread to one
part of the body
M1a
Spread to more than
one part of the body
M1b
Spread to
peritoneal
surface
M1c
Nodules near
the colon
N1c
Several lymph
nodes involved
N2a/b
Fig. 23.50 TNM classication in colorectal cancer.
Hereditary syndromes predisposing to colorectal 
cancer 
Whilst hereditary syndromes are rare, collectively accounting for 3%–5% 
of colorectal carcinomas, they are important to identify, as the risk of 
colorectal carcinoma is high in these individuals.
Non-polyposis syndromes 
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), also known as 
Lynch syndrome, has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, with 
a positive family history of colon cancer occurring at a young age. It 
is the commonest hereditary cancer syndrome, accounting for 1%–3% 
of all colorectal cancer cases. The lifetime risk in affected individuals is 
80%, with a mean age at cancer development of 45 years. In contrast 
to sporadic colon cancer, two-thirds of tumours occur proximally. The 
clinical diagnostic criteria are listed in Box 23.53, with diagnosis now 
shifting from such criteria to testing of tumour material by microsatel-
lite instability polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry 
for mismatch repair proteins. In a subset of patients, there is also an 
increased incidence of cancers of the endometrium, ovary, urinary tract, 
stomach, pancreas, small intestine and CNS, related to inheritance of 
different mismatch repair gene mutations. Those who full the criteria 
for HNPCC should be referred for pedigree assessment, genetic testing 
(see above) and colonoscopy. These should begin at either 25 years or 
35 years (dependent upon the specic genetic abnormalities detected). 
Colonoscopy needs to be repeated every 2 years, but despite this, 
interval cancers can still occur. Regular daily use of aspirin is thought to 
reduce colorectal cancer risk.
Polyposis syndromes 
Polyposis syndromes are classied by histopathology (Box 23.54). It 
is important to note that, while the hamartomatous polyps in Peutz–
Jeghers syndrome and juvenile polyposis are not themselves neoplastic, 

[[p886]]
Disorders of the colon and rectum     831
23
these disorders are associated with an increased risk of malignancy of 
the breast, colon, ovary and thyroid.
Familial adenomatous polyposis 
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an uncommon autosomal dom-
inant disorder affecting 1 in 14 000 of the population and accounting for 
0.07% of colorectal cancers. It results from germline mutation of the tumour 
suppressor APC gene, followed by acquired mutation of the remaining 
allele (Ch. 3). The APC gene is large and over 1400 different mutations 
have been reported, but most are loss-of-function mutations resulting in 
a truncated APC protein. This protein normally binds to and sequesters 
β-catenin, but is unable to do so when mutated, allowing β-catenin to 
translocate to the nucleus, where it up-regulates the expression of many 
genes. Gene mutations are detected in around 95% of FAP cases. Around 
25% of cases arise as new mutations and have no family history.
Hundreds to thousands of adenomatous colonic polyps develop in 
80% of patients by age 15 (Fig. 23.51), with symptoms such as rec-
tal bleeding beginning a few years later. In those affected, cancer will 
develop within 10–15 years of the appearance of adenomas and 90% of 
patients will develop colorectal cancer by the age of 50 years. Despite 
surveillance, approximately 1 in 4 patients with FAP have cancer by the 
time they undergo colectomy. There appears to be phenotypic variability 
in FAP, with an attenuated form resulting in fewer than 100 adenomatous 
polyps and later onset of polyposis and cancer.
A second gene involved in base excision repair (MutY homolog, 
MUTYH) has been identied and may give rise to colonic polyposis. 
MUTYH displays autosomal recessive inheritance and leads to tens to 
hundreds of polyps and proximal colon cancer. This variant is referred to 
as MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP).
In FAP, non-neoplastic cystic fundic gland polyps occur in the stom-
ach, but adenomatous polyps also arise uncommonly. Duodenal adeno-
mas are found in over 90% and are most common around the ampulla of 
Vater. Malignant transformation to adenocarcinoma takes place in 10% 
and is the leading cause of death in those who have had prophylactic 
colectomy. Many extra-intestinal features are also seen (Box 23.55).
Desmoid tumours occur in up to one-third of patients and usually 
arise in the mesentery or abdominal wall. Although benign, they may 
become very large, causing compression of adjacent organs, intestinal 
obstruction or vascular compromise and are difcult to remove. They 
sometimes respond to hormonal therapy with tamoxifen, and the NSAID 
sulindac may bring about regression in some, by unknown mechanisms. 
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) occurs 
in some cases and is seen as dark, round, pigmented retinal lesions. 
When present in an at-risk individual, these are 100% predictive of the 
presence of FAP. A variant, Turcot syndrome, is characterised by FAP 
with primary CNS tumours (astrocytoma or medulloblastoma).
23.54 Gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes
Neoplastic
Non-neoplastic1
Familial adenomatous 
polyposis
Peutz–Jeghers 
syndrome
Juvenile polyposis
Cronkhite–Canada 
syndrome
Cowden disease
Inheritance
Autosomal dominant2
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal dominant in 
one-third
None
Autosomal dominant
Oesophageal polyps
−
−
−
+
+
Gastric polyps
+
+
+
+++
+++
Small bowel polyps
++
+++
++
++
++
Colonic polyps
+++
++
++
+++
+
Other features
Colorectal cancer, 
bleeding, extra-
intestinal features (see 
Box 23.55)
Pigmentation, bleeding, 
intussusception, bowel 
and other cancers
Colorectal cancer
Hair loss, pigmentation, 
nail dystrophy, 
malabsorption
Many congenital 
anomalies, oral and 
cutaneous hamartomas, 
thyroid and breast 
tumours
1The polyps themselves are not neoplastic but cancer risk is increased in several syndromes. 2Rare autosomal recessive variant MUTYH (see text).
(− = absent; + = may occur; ++ = common; +++ = very common)
23.53  Modied Amsterdam criteria* for hereditary non-
polyposis colon cancer
 Three or more relatives with colon cancer (at least one rst-degree)
 Colorectal cancer in two or more generations
 At least one member affected under 50 years of age
 Familial adenomatous polyposis excluded
*These criteria are strict and may miss some families with mutations. Hereditary non-polyposis 
colon cancer should also be considered in individuals with colorectal or endometrial cancer 
under 45 years of age.
Fig. 23.51 Familial adenomatous polyposis. There are hundreds of adenomatous 
polyps throughout the colon.
23.55  Extra-intestinal features of familial adenomatous 
polyposis
 Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE, 70%–80%)
 Epidermoid cysts (extremities, face, scalp)* (50%)
 Benign osteomas, especially skull and angle of mandible* (50%–90%)
 Dental abnormalities (15%–25%)*
 Desmoid tumours (10%–15%)
 Other malignancies (brain, thyroid, liver, adrenal, 1%–3%)
*Gardner syndrome.

[[p887]]
832    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Early identication of affected individuals before symptoms develop 
is essential. The diagnosis can be excluded if sigmoidoscopy is normal. 
In newly diagnosed cases, genetic testing should be carried out to con-
rm the diagnosis and identify the causal mutation. Subsequently, all 
rst-degree relatives should undergo genetic testing (Ch. 3). In families 
with known FAP, adolescents should undergo mutation testing at 13–14 
years of age and patients who are found to have the mutation should 
be offered colectomy after school or college education has been com-
pleted. The operation of choice is total proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–
anal anastomosis. Ileoanal pouch construction may be associated with 
reduced fertility in women, which may be due to fallopian tube scar-
ring post surgery. Therefore, colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis can 
be used, but is associated with a risk of cancer in the retained rectum. 
Periodic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy every 1–3 years is recom-
mended to detect and monitor duodenal and periampullary adenomas. If 
large, these may be amenable to endoscopic resection.
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome 
Puetz-Jeghers syndrome occurs in around 1 in 120 000 of the popula-
tion, accounting for less than 0.01% of colorectal cancer cases. Multiple 
hamartomatous polyps occur in the small intestine and colon, as well 
as melanin pigmentation of the lips, mouth and digits (Fig. 23.52). Most 
cases are asymptomatic, although chronic bleeding, anaemia or intus-
susception can occur. There is a signicant risk of small bowel or colonic 
adenocarcinoma and of cancer of the pancreas, lung, testis, ovary, 
breast and endometrium. Peutz–Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal 
dominant disorder with high penetrance, most commonly resulting from 
truncating mutations in a serine–threonine kinase gene on chromosome 
19p (STK11). Diagnosis requires two of the three following features:
 small bowel polyposis
 mucocutaneous pigmentation
 a family history suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance.
The diagnosis can be made by genetic testing, but this may be 
inconclusive, since mutations in genes other than STK11 can cause 
the disorder. Affected people should undergo regular upper endoscopy, 
colonoscopy and small bowel and pancreatic imaging. Polyps greater 
than 1 cm in size should be removed. Testicular examination is essen-
tial for men, while women should undergo pelvic examination, cervical 
smears and regular mammography (lifetime risk of breast cancer of 
50%). Asymptomatic relatives of affected patients should also undergo 
screening.
Juvenile polyposis 
In juvenile polyposis, tens to hundreds of mucus-lled hamartomatous 
polyps are found in the colorectum. One-third of cases are inherited in 
an autosomal dominant manner and up to one-fth develop colorectal 
cancer before the age of 40. The criteria for diagnosis are:
 ten or more colonic juvenile polyps
 juvenile polyps elsewhere in the gut, or
 any polyps in those with a family history.
Germline mutations in the SMAD4 gene are often found, as well as 
mutations in the BMPR1A gene. SMAD4 mutations may have a more 
aggressive clinical phenotype, while BMPR1A is particularly implicated 
in European populations. Colonoscopy with polypectomy should be per-
formed every 1–2 years and colectomy considered for extensive involve-
ment. Periodic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy should be performed 
every 1–2 years, in view of the risk of gastric and duodenal cancer.
Diverticulosis 
Diverticula are acquired and are most common in the sigmoid and 
descending colon of middle-aged people. Asymptomatic diverticula 
(diverticulosis) are present in over 50% of people above the age of 
70years. Symptomatic diverticular disease supervenes in 10%–25% 
of cases, while complicated diverticulosis (acute diverticulitis, pericolic 
abscess, bleeding, perforation or stricture) is uncommon.
Pathophysiology 
A life-long rened diet with a relative deciency of bre is thought 
to be responsible and the condition is rare in populations with a 
high dietary bre intake, such as in Asia, where it more often affects 
the right side of the colon. It is postulated that small-volume stools 
require high intracolonic pressures for propulsion and this leads to 
herniation of mucosa between the taeniae coli (Fig. 23.53). Whilst the 
pathophysiology of diverticular disease is thought to be mainly due to 
environmental risk factors, recent evidence suggests the involvement 
of predisposing genetic factors. Diverticula consist of protrusions of 
mucosa covered by peritoneum. There is commonly hypertrophy of 
the circular muscle coat. Inammation is thought to result from impac-
tion of diverticula with faecoliths. This may resolve spontaneously or 
progress to cause haemorrhage, perforation, local abscess forma-
tion, stula and peritonitis. Repeated attacks of inammation lead to 
thickening of the bowel wall, narrowing of the lumen and eventual 
obstruction.
Fig. 23.52 Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. Typical lip pigmentation.
Mesocolon
Circular muscle
Diverticulum
Taenia
(longitudinal muscle)
Fig. 23.53 The human colon in diverticulosis. The colonic wall is weak between 
the taeniae. The blood vessels that supply the colon pierce the circular muscle and 
weaken it further by forming tunnels. Diverticula usually emerge through these points 
of least resistance.

[[p888]]
Disorders of the colon and rectum     833
23
Clinical features 
Symptoms are usually the result of associated constipation or spasm. 
Colicky pain is suprapubic or felt in the left iliac fossa. The sigmoid colon 
may be palpable and, in attacks of diverticulitis, there is local tenderness, 
guarding, rigidity (‘left-sided appendicitis’) and sometimes a palpable 
mass. During these episodes, there may be diarrhoea, rectal bleeding 
or fever. The differential diagnosis includes colorectal cancer, ischae-
mic colitis, IBD and infection. Diverticular disease may be complicated 
by perforation, pericolic abscess, stula formation (usually colovesical), 
acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding and obstruction. These complica-
tions are more common in patients who take NSAIDs or aspirin. After 
one attack of diverticulitis, the recurrence rate is around 3% per year. 
Over 10–30 years, perforation, obstruction or bleeding may occur, each 
affecting 5% of patients.
Investigations 
Investigations are usually performed to exclude colorectal neoplasia. 
Diverticula can be seen during colonoscopy or on imaging modalities such 
as CT scan, CT colonography or barium enema (see Fig. 23.12C). In severe 
diverticulosis, colonoscopy requires expertise and carries a risk of perforation. 
CT is used to assess complications, such as perforation or pericolic abscess.
Management 
Diverticular disease that is asymptomatic and discovered coincidentally 
requires no treatment. Constipation can be relieved by a high-bre diet, 
with or without a bulking laxative (ispaghula husk, 1–2 sachets daily), 
taken with plenty of uids. Stimulant laxatives (see Box 23.56) should 
be avoided. Antispasmodics may sometimes help. Acute attacks of 
diverticulitis can be treated with antibiotics active against Gram-negative 
and anaerobic organisms. Severe cases require intravenous uids, intra-
venous antibiotics, analgesia and nasogastric suction, but randomised 
trials show no benet from acute resection compared to conservative 
management. Emergency surgery is reserved for severe haemorrhage or 
perforation. Percutaneous drainage of acute paracolic abscesses can be 
effective and avoids the need for emergency surgery. Patients who have 
repeated attacks of obstruction should undergo elective surgery once 
the acute episode has settled, in order to resect the affected segment of 
bowel with restoration of continuity by primary anastomosis.
Colonic motility disorders 
The clinical approach to patients with constipation and its aetiology have 
been described on page 803.
Simple constipation 
Simple constipation is extremely common and does not signify 
underlying organic disease. It usually responds to increased dietary 
bre or the use of bulking agents; an adequate uid intake is also 
essential. Many types of laxative are available, and these are listed 
in Box 23.56
Severe idiopathic constipation 
This occurs almost exclusively in young women and often begins in 
childhood or adolescence. The cause is unknown, but some have ‘slow 
transit’ with reduced motor activity in the colon. Others have ‘dyssyner-
gic defecation’, resulting from inappropriate contraction of the external 
anal sphincter and puborectalis muscle (anismus). The condition is often 
resistant to treatment. Bulking agents may exacerbate symptoms, but 
prokinetic agents or balanced solutions of polyethylene glycol ‘3350’ 
benet some patients with slow transit. Glycerol suppositories and bio-
feedback techniques are used for those with dyssynergic defecation. 
Others benet from agents such as prucalopride or linaclotide. Rarely, 
subtotal colectomy may be necessary as a last resort.
Faecal impaction 
In faecal impaction, a large, hard mass of stool lls the rectum. This tends 
to occur in disabled, immobile or institutionalised patients, especially frail 
older adults or those with dementia (see Box 23.57). Constipating drugs, 
autonomic neuropathy and painful anal conditions also contribute. 
Megacolon, intestinal obstruction and urinary tract infections may super-
vene. Perforation and bleeding from pressure-induced ulceration are 
occasionally seen. Overow diarrhoea may also be a presenting feature, 
sometimes leading to worsening of symptoms with the incorrect use of 
antidiarrhoeal medication. Treatment should involve adequate hydration 
and careful digital disimpaction after softening the impacted stool with 
arachis oil enemas. Stimulants should be avoided.
Melanosis coli and laxative misuse syndromes 
Long-term consumption of stimulant laxatives leads to accumulation of 
lipofuscin pigment in macrophages in the lamina propria. This imparts a 
brown discoloration to the colonic mucosa, often described as resem-
bling ‘tiger skin’. The condition is benign and resolves when the laxatives 
are stopped. Prolonged laxative use may rarely result in megacolon or 
‘cathartic colon’, in which barium enema demonstrates a featureless 
mucosa, loss of haustra and shortening of the bowel. Surreptitious 
laxative misuse is a psychiatric condition seen in young women, some 
of whom have a history of bulimia or anorexia nervosa (Ch. 31). They 
complain of refractory watery diarrhoea. Laxative use is usually denied 
and may continue, even when patients are undergoing investigation. 
Screening of urine for laxatives may reveal the diagnosis.
Hirschsprung’s disease 
This disease is characterised by constipation and colonic dilatation 
(megacolon) due to congenital absence of ganglion cells in the large intes-
tine. Incidence is approximately 1:5000. About one-third of patients have 
a positive family history and, in these families, the disease is inherited in 
23.56  Laxatives
Class
Examples
Bulk-forming laxatives
Ispaghula husk, methylcellulose
Stimulants
Bisacodyl, dantron (only for terminally 
ill patients), docusate, senna
Faecal softeners
Docusate, arachis oil enema
Osmotic laxatives
Lactulose, lactitol, magnesium salts
Serotonergic agents
Prucalopride
Prosecretory agents
Linaclotide, lubiprostone, plecanatide
Others
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)*, 
phosphate enema*
*Also used for bowel preparation prior to investigation or surgery.
23.57  Constipation in old age
 Evaluation: particular attention should be paid to immobility, dietary uid and 
bre intake, drugs and depression.
 Immobility: predisposes to constipation by increasing the colonic transit time; 
the longer this is, the greater the uid absorption and the harder the stool.
 Bulking agents: can make matters worse in patients with slow transit times 
and should be avoided.
 Overow diarrhoea: if faecal impaction develops, paradoxical overow 
diarrhoea may occur. If antidiarrhoeal agents are given, the underlying impaction 
may worsen and result in serious complications, such as stercoral ulceration 
and bleeding.

[[p889]]
834    GASTROENTEROLOGY
an autosomal dominant manner with incomplete penetrance. About 50% 
of familial cases and 15% of sporadic cases have mutations affecting the 
RET proto-oncogene, which is also implicated in multiple endocrine neo-
plasia (MEN) types 2a and 2b (p. 700). Unlike MEN 2a and 2b, which are 
caused by activating RET mutations, Hirschsprung’s disease is caused 
by loss-of-function mutations. In some kindreds, Hirschsprung’s disease 
and MEN can actually co-segregate and this presumably represents both 
‘switch off’ and ‘switch on’ of RET in different tissues. Although RET is 
the most important susceptibility gene, some patients with RET mutations 
do not develop clinical Hirschsprung’s disease and mutations in other 
genes have been identied that interact to cause the disease. All of the 
genes implicated in Hirschsprung’s disease are involved in the regulation 
of enteric neurogenesis and the mutations cause failure of migration of 
neuroblasts into the gut wall during embryogenesis. Ganglion cells are 
absent from nerve plexuses, most commonly in a short segment of the 
rectum and/or sigmoid colon. As a result, the internal anal sphincter fails 
to relax. Constipation, abdominal distension and vomiting usually develop 
immediately after birth but a few cases do not present until childhood or 
adolescence. The rectum is empty on digital examination.
A plain abdominal X-ray or barium enema shows a small rectum and 
colonic dilatation above the narrowed segment. Full-thickness biopsies are 
required to demonstrate nerve plexuses and conrm the absence of ganglion 
cells. Histochemical stains for acetylcholinesterase are also used. Anorectal 
manometry demonstrates failure of the internal sphincter to relax with bal-
loon distension. Treatment involves resection of the affected segment.
Acquired megacolon 
This may develop in childhood as a result of voluntary withholding of 
stool during toilet training and can present with faecal impaction and 
soiling. In such cases, it presents after the rst year of life and is distin-
guished from Hirschsprung’s disease by the urge to defecate and the 
presence of stool in the rectum. It usually responds to osmotic laxatives.
In adults, acquired megacolon has several causes. It is seen in patients 
with depression or dementia, either as part of the condition or as a 
side-effect of antidepressant drugs. Prolonged misuse of stimulant laxa-
tives may cause degeneration of the myenteric plexus, while interruption 
of sensory or motor innervation may be responsible in a number of neur-
ological disorders. Patients taking large doses of opioid analgesics can 
develop a megacolon: so-called ‘narcotic bowel syndrome’. Systemic 
sclerosis and hypothyroidism are other recognised causes.
Most patients can be managed conservatively by treatment of the 
underlying cause, high-residue diets, laxatives and the judicious use of 
enemas. Prokinetics are helpful in a minority of patients. Opioid-induced 
constipation can be treated with the specic peripheral opioid recep-
tor antagonists, such as naloxegol, methylnaltrexone and naldemedine. 
Subtotal colectomy is a last resort for the most severely affected patients.
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction 
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie syndrome) has many causes 
(Box 23.58) and is characterised by sudden onset of painless, massive 
enlargement of the proximal colon; there are no features of mechanical 
obstruction. Bowel sounds are normal or high-pitched, rather than absent. 
Left untreated, it may progress to perforation, peritonitis and death.
Abdominal X-rays show colonic dilatation with air extending to the rectum. 
Caecal diameter greater than 10 cm is associated with a high risk of perfora-
tion. CT with contrast demonstrates the absence of mechanical obstruction.
Management consists of treating the underlying disorder and cor-
recting any biochemical abnormalities. The anticholinesterase neostig-
mine is effective in enhancing parasympathetic activity and gut motility. 
Decompression, with either a rectal tube or colonoscope, may be effec-
tive but needs to be repeated until the condition resolves. In severe 
cases, surgical or uoroscopic defunctioning caecostomy is necessary.
Anorectal disorders 
Haemorrhoids 
Haemorrhoids (commonly known as piles) arise from congestion of the 
internal and/or external venous plexuses around the anal canal. They 
are extremely common in adults. The aetiology is unknown, although 
they are associated with constipation and straining, and may develop 
for the rst time during pregnancy. First-degree piles bleed, while 
second-degree piles prolapse but retract spontaneously. Third-degree 
piles are those that require manual replacement after prolapsing. Bright 
red rectal bleeding occurs after defecation. Other symptoms include 
pain, pruritus ani and mucus discharge; thrombosis can occur in pro-
lapsed piles, which can be very painful (Fig. 23.54). Treatment involves 
measures to prevent constipation and straining. Band ligation is effective 
for many, but a minority of patients require haemorrhoidectomy, which 
is usually curative. Haemorrhoidal artery ligation operation (HALO) pro-
cedures have been developed and may replace surgery. HALO involves 
using Doppler ultrasound to identify all the arteries feeding the haemor-
rhoids and subsequent ligation.
Pruritus ani 
This is common and can stem from many causes (Box 23.59), most of 
which result in contamination of the perianal skin with faecal contents.
Itching may be severe and results in an itch–scratch–itch cycle that 
exacerbates the problem. When no underlying cause is found, all local 
barrier ointments and creams must be stopped. Good personal hygiene 
is essential, with careful washing after defecation. The perineal area must 
be kept dry and clean. Bulk-forming laxatives may reduce faecal soiling.
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome 
This is most common in young adults and occurs on the anterior rectal 
wall. It is thought to result from localised chronic trauma and/or ischaemia 
23.58  Causes of acute colonic pseudo-obstruction
 Trauma, burns
 Recent surgery
 Drugs (opiates, phenothiazines)
 Respiratory failure
 Electrolyte and acid–base disorders (e.g. hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia)
 Diabetes mellitus – autonomic dysfunction
 Uraemia
Fig. 23.54 Thrombosed prolapsed haemorrhoids.

[[p890]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     835
23
associated with disordered puborectalis function and mucosal prolapse. 
The ulcer is seen at sigmoidoscopy and biopsies show a characteristic 
accumulation of collagen.
Symptoms include minor bleeding and mucus per rectum, tenesmus 
and perineal pain. Treatment is often difcult, but avoidance of strain-
ing at defecation is important and treatment of constipation may help. 
Marked mucosal prolapse is treated surgically.
Anal ssure 
In this common problem, traumatic or ischaemic damage to the anal 
mucosa results in a supercial mucosal tear, most commonly in the midline 
posteriorly. Spasm of the internal anal sphincter exacerbates the condi-
tion. Severe pain occurs on defecation and there may be minor bleed-
ing, mucus discharge and pruritus. The skin may be indurated and an 
oedematous skin tag, or ‘sentinel pile’, adjacent to the ssure is common.
Avoidance of constipation with bulk-forming laxatives and increased 
uid intake is important. Relaxation of the internal sphincter is normally 
mediated by nitric oxid and 0.2% glyceryl trinitrate, which donates nitric 
oxide and improves mucosal blood ow, is effective in 60%–80% of 
patients. Diltiazem cream (2%) can be used as an alternative. Resistant 
cases may respond to injection of botulinum toxin into the internal anal 
sphincter to induce relaxation. Manual dilatation under anaesthesia leads 
to long-term incontinence and should not be considered. The majority 
of cases can be treated without surgery, but where these measures fail, 
healing can be achieved surgically by lateral internal anal sphincterotomy 
or advancement anoplasty.
Anorectal abscesses and stulae 
Perianal abscesses develop between the internal and external anal 
sphincters and may point at the perianal skin. Ischiorectal abscesses 
occur lateral to the sphincters in the ischiorectal fossa. They usually result 
from infection of anal glands by normal intestinal bacteria. Crohn’s dis-
ease (see  below) is sometimes responsible.
Patients complain of extreme perianal pain, fever and/or discharge 
of pus. Spontaneous rupture may lead to the development of stulae. 
These may be supercial or track through the anal sphincters to reach 
the rectum. Abscesses are drained surgically and supercial stulae are 
laid open with care to avoid sphincter damage.
Faecal incontinence 
The normal control of anal continence is described on page 788. 
Common causes of incontinence are listed in Box 23.60. High-risk 
patients include frail older people, women after childbirth and those 
with severe neurological/spinal disorders, learning disabilities or cog-
nitive impairment.
Patients are often embarrassed to admit to incontinence and may 
complain only of ‘diarrhoea’. A careful history and examination, especially 
of the anorectum and perineum, may help to establish the underlying 
cause. Endoanal ultrasound is valuable for dening the integrity of the 
anal sphincters, while anorectal physiology and MR proctography are 
also useful investigations.
Management 
This is often very difcult. Underlying disorders should be treated and diar-
rhoea managed with loperamide, diphenoxylate or codeine phosphate. 
Attention must be paid to a proper diet and adequate uid intake. Pelvic 
oor exercises, biofeedback and bowel retraining techniques help some 
patients, and those with conrmed anal sphincter defects may benet 
from sphincter repair operations. Where sphincter repair is not appropri-
ate, a trial of sacral nerve stimulation is undertaken with a view to insertion 
of a permanent stimulator but, if unsuccessful, creation of a neo-sphincter 
may be possible, by graciloplasty or by an articial anal sphincter.
Inammatory bowel disease 
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are chronic inammatory bowel 
diseases that pursue a protracted relapsing and remitting course, usually 
extending over years. The diseases have many similarities and it is some-
times impossible to differentiate between them. One crucial distinction 
is that ulcerative colitis involves only the colonic mucosa, while Crohn’s 
disease can involve any part of the gastrointestinal tract from mouth to 
anus. A summary of the main features of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s 
disease is provided in Box 23.61
The incidence of inammatory bowel disease (IBD) varies widely 
between populations. The highest incidence is in North America, Europe 
and Oceania. A rapid increase in incidence in the 21st century has been 
seen in newly industrialised countries in Asia, Africa and South America, 
with the adoption of an increasingly Westernised lifestyle.
Both diseases most commonly start in the second and third decades 
of life, with a second smaller incidence peak in the seventh decade. The 
number of people with IBD over the age of 65 years, however, is increas-
ing, and it is becoming more common in younger children. Approximately 
620 000 people are affected by IBD in the UK, with a prevalence of 
0.5%–1%. Life expectancy in patients with IBD is similar to that of the 
general population. Although many patients require surgery and admis-
sion to hospital for other reasons, with substantial associated morbidity, 
the majority have an excellent work record and pursue a normal life.
Pathophysiology 
IBD has both environmental and genetic components, and evidence 
from genome-wide association studies suggests that genetic variants 
that predispose to Crohn’s disease may have undergone positive selec-
tion by protecting against infectious diseases, including tuberculosis 
(Box 23.62). It is thought that IBD develops because these genetically 
susceptible individuals mount an abnormal inammatory response to 
environmental triggers, such as intestinal bacteria. This leads to inam-
mation of the intestine with involvement of a wide array of innate and 
adaptive immune cell responses, with release of inammatory media-
tors, including tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-12 
and IL-23, which cause tissue damage (Fig. 23.55). There appears to 
be an association between microbial dysbiosis and IBD. For example, 
there is a reduced diversity, primarily of Firmicutes and Bacteroides, 
23.59  Causes of pruritus ani
Local anorectal conditions
 Haemorrhoids
 Fistula, ssures
 Poor hygiene
Infections
 Threadworms
 Candidiasis
Skin disorders
 Contact dermatitis
 Psoriasis
 Lichen planus
Other
 Diarrhoea or incontinence of any 
cause
 Irritable bowel syndrome
 Anxiety
23.60  Causes of faecal incontinence
 Obstetric trauma: childbirth, hysterectomy
 Severe diarrhoea
 Faecal impaction
 Congenital anorectal anomalies
 Anorectal disease: haemorrhoids, rectal prolapse, Crohn’s disease
 Neurological disorders: spinal cord or cauda equina lesions, dementia

[[p891]]
836    GASTROENTEROLOGY
and a relative increase in Enterobaceteriaceae. Functional changes in 
the bacteria are important and include a reduction of anti-inamma-
tory metabolites, such as butyrate and other short-chain fatty acids. 
While microbial dysbiosis has been recognised in IBD, a causal role 
has yet to be established. There is emerging evidence that the virome 
and mycobiome (fungal species) may be important in the development 
of IBD. In both diseases, the intestinal wall is inltrated with acute and 
chronic inammatory cells, but there are important differences between 
the conditions in the distribution of lesions and in histological features 
(Fig. 23.56).
Ulcerative colitis 
Inammation invariably involves the rectum (proctitis) and spreads 
proximally in a continuous manner to involve the entire colon in some 
cases (pancolitis). In long-standing pancolitis, the bowel can become 
23.61  Comparison of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease
Ulcerative colitis
Crohn’s disease
Age group
Any
Any
Gender
M = F
Slight female preponderance
Incidence
Stable
Increasing
Ethnic group
Any
Any; more common in Ashkenazi Jews
Genetic factors
HLA-DR*103; colonic epithelial barrier function 
(HNF4α, LAMB1, CDH1)
Defective innate immunity and autophagy (NOD2, 
ATG16L1, IRGM)
Risk factors
More common in non-/ex-smokers
Appendicectomy protects
More common in smokers
Anatomical distribution
Colon only; begins at anorectal margin with variable 
proximal extension
Any part of gastrointestinal tract; perianal disease 
common; patchy distribution, skip lesions
Extra-intestinal manifestations
Common
Common
Presentation
Bloody diarrhoea
Variable; pain, diarrhoea, weight loss all common
Histology
Inammation limited to mucosa; crypt distortion, 
cryptitis, crypt abscesses, loss of goblet cells
Submucosal or transmural inammation common; 
deep ssuring ulcers, stulae; patchy changes; 
granulomas
Management
5-ASA; glucocorticoids; azathioprine; biologic 
therapy (anti-TNF, anti-α4β7 integrin, anti-p40, 
Janus kinase inhibitor); colectomy is curative
Glucocorticoids; azathioprine; methotrexate; biologic 
therapy (anti-TNF, anti-α4β7 integrin, anti-p40); 
nutritional therapy; smoking cessation; surgery for 
complications is not curative; 5-ASA is not effective
(5-ASA = 5-aminosalicylic acid; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)
M cell
APC
Macrophage
Type 1
Th cell
IL-12
IL-23
IFN-γ
IL-1
IL-6
TNF-α
release
4
3
2
1
Fig. 23.55 Pathogenesis of inammatory bowel disease. (1) Bacterial antigens 
are taken up by specialised M cells, pass between leaky epithelial cells or enter the 
lamina propria through ulcerated mucosa. (2) After processing, they are presented 
to type 1 T-helper cells by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the lamina propria. 
(3) T-cell activation and differentiation results in a Th1 T cell-mediated cytokine 
response (4) with secretion of cytokines, including interferon gamma (IFN-γ). Further 
amplication of T cells perpetuates the inammatory process with activation of non-
immune cells and release of other important cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-12, 
IL-23, IL-1, IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). These pathways occur 
in all normal individuals exposed to an inammatory insult and this is self-limiting in 
healthy subjects. In genetically predisposed persons, dysregulation of innate immunity 
may trigger inammatory bowel disease.
23.62  Factors associated with the development of 
inammatory bowel disease
Genetic
 Both CD and UC are common in Ashkenazi Jews
 10% have rst-degree relative/one or more close relative with IBD
 High concordance in identical twins (40%–50% CD; 20%–25% UC)
 163 susceptibility loci identied at genome-wide levels of signicance; most 
confer susceptibility to both CD and UC; many are also susceptibility loci for 
other inammatory conditions (especially ankylosing spondylosis and psoriasis)
 UC and CD are both associated with genetic variants at HLA locus, and with 
multiple genes involved with immune signalling (especially IL-23 and IL-10 
pathways)
 CD is associated with genetic defects in innate immunity and autophagy (NOD2, 
ATG16L1 and IRGM genes)
 UC is associated with genetic defects in barrier function
 NOD2 is associated with ileal and stricturing disease, and hence a need for 
resectional surgery
 HLA-DR*103 is associated with severe UC
Environmental
 UC is more common in non-smokers and ex-smokers
 CD is more common in smokers (relative risk = 3)
 CD is associated with a low-residue, high-rened-sugar diet
 Commensal gut microbiota are altered (dysbiosis) in CD and UC
 Appendicectomy protects against UC
(CD = Crohn’s disease; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; IBD = inammatory bowel disease;  
IL = interleukin; UC = ulcerative colitis)

[[p892]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     837
23
shortened and post-inammatory ‘pseudopolyps’ develop; these 
are normal or hypertrophied residual mucosa within areas of atrophy 
(Fig. 23.57). The inammatory process is limited to the mucosa and 
spares the deeper layers of the bowel wall (Fig. 23.58). Both acute and 
chronic inammatory cells inltrate the lamina propria and the crypts 
(‘cryptitis’). Crypt abscesses are typical. Goblet cells lose their mucus 
and, in long-standing cases, glands become distorted. Dysplasia, char-
acterised by heaping of cells within crypts, nuclear atypia and increased 
mitotic rate, may herald the development of colon cancer.
Crohn’s disease 
The sites most commonly involved, in order of frequency, are the terminal 
ileum and right side of the colon, the small intestine, the colon alone, and 
the perianal region (Fig. 23.56). The entire wall of the bowel is oedema-
tous and thickened, and there are deep ulcers that often appear as linear 
ssures; thus the mucosa between them is described as ‘cobblestone’. 
These may penetrate through the bowel wall to initiate abscesses or 
stulae involving the bowel, bladder, uterus, vagina and skin of the per-
ineum. The mesenteric lymph nodes are enlarged and the mesentery is 
thickened. Crohn’s disease has a patchy distribution and the inamma-
tory process is interrupted by islands of normal mucosa, resulting in ‘skip 
lesions’. On histological examination, the bowel wall is thickened with a 
chronic inammatory inltrate throughout all layers (Fig. 23.59).
Clinical features 
Ulcerative colitis 
The cardinal symptoms are rectal bleeding with passage of mucus 
and bloody diarrhoea. The presentation varies, depending on the site 
and severity of the disease (see Fig. 23.56), as well as the presence of 
extra-intestinal manifestations. The rst attack is usually the most severe 
and is followed by relapses and remissions. Emotional stress, intercur-
rent infection, gastroenteritis, antibiotics or NSAID therapy may all pro-
voke a relapse. Proctitis causes rectal bleeding and mucus discharge, 
accompanied by tenesmus. Some patients pass frequent, small-volume 
uid stools, while others pass pellety stools due to constipation upstream 
of the inamed rectum. Constitutional symptoms rarely occur. Left-sided 
and extensive colitis causes bloody diarrhoea with mucus, often with 
abdominal cramps. In severe cases, anorexia, malaise, weight loss and 
abdominal pain occur and the patient is toxic, with fever, tachycardia and 
signs of peritoneal inammation (Box 23.63).
Left-sided colitis
30–40%
Perianal disease alone
< 10%
Crohn's
disease
Ileal or ileocolonic
40%
Small intestinal
30–40%
Crohn's colitis
c. 20%
Ulcerative
colitis
Proctitis
40–50%
Extensive colitis
(up to pancolitis)
20%
Fig. 23.56 Common patterns of disease distribution in inammatory bowel disease.
Fig. 23.57 Pseudopolyposis in ulcerative colitis.
SM
Fig. 23.58 Histology of ulcerative colitis. There is surface ulceration and 
inammation is conned to the mucosa with excess inammatory cells in the lamina 
propria, loss of goblet cells and crypt abscesses (arrows). (SM = submucosa)

[[p893]]
838    GASTROENTEROLOGY
SM
A
B
Fig. 23.59 Histology of Crohn’s disease. 
ssuring ulceration (arrow), with inammation extending into the submucosa (SM). 
23.63 Assessment of disease severity in ulcerative colitis
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Daily bowel frequency
< 4
4–6
≥ 6*
Blood in stools
+/−
+/++
+++
Stool volume
< 200 g/24 hrs
200–400 g/24 hrs
> 400 g/24 hrs
Pulse
< 90 beats/min
< 90 beats/min
≥ 90 beats/min*
Temperature
Normal
Normal
≥ 37.8°C*
Haemoglobin
Normal
Normal
< 100 g/L (< 10 g/dL)*
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Normal
Normal
> 30 mm/hr* (or equivalent 
C-reactive protein)
Serum albumin
> 35 g/L (> 3.5 g/dL)
< 30 g/L (< 3 g/dL)
Abdominal X-ray
Normal
Normal
Dilated bowel, mucosal islands, 
thumb-printing of mucosa, or absence 
of features
Sigmoidoscopy
Normal or erythema/granular mucosa
Severe mucosal inammatory 
changes; ulceration; blood in lumen
*The Truelove–Witts criteria for acute severe ulcerative colitis are ≥ 6 bloody stools/24 hrs plus one or more of: anaemia, fever, tachycardia and high inammatory markers.
Fig. 23.60 Ileal Crohn’s disease. Small bowel magnetic resonance image showing 
a terminal ileum that is thickened, narrowed and enhancing (arrow), with dilatation 
immediately proximal to this.
of Crohn’s disease. Many patients present with symptoms of both small 
bowel and colonic disease. A few patients present with isolated perianal 
disease, vomiting from jejunal strictures or severe oral ulceration.
Physical examination often reveals evidence of weight loss, anaemia 
with glossitis and angular stomatitis. There is abdominal tenderness, 
most marked over the inamed area. An abdominal mass may be palpa-
ble and is due to matted loops of thickened bowel or an intra-abdominal 
abscess. Perianal skin tags, ssures or stulae are found in at least 50% 
of patients.
Differential diagnosis 
The differential diagnosis is summarised in Box 23.64. The most impor-
tant issue is to distinguish the rst attack of acute colitis from infection. 
In general, diarrhoea lasting longer than 10 days in Western countries is 
unlikely to be the result of infection, whereas a history of foreign travel, 
antibiotic exposure (Clostridioides difcile/pseudomembranous coli-
tis) or homosexual contact increases the possibility of infection, which 
should be excluded by the appropriate investigations (see below). The 
Crohn’s disease 
The major symptoms are abdominal pain, diarrhoea and weight loss. 
Ileal Crohn’s disease (Figs. 23.60 and 23.61) may cause subacute or 
even acute intestinal obstruction. Patients can occasionally present with 
a perforated abscess. Abdominal pain is often associated with diarrhoea, 
which is usually watery and does not contain blood or mucus. Patients 
may lose weight because they avoid food, since eating provokes pain. 
Weight loss may also be due to malabsorption and some patients pres-
ent with features of fat, protein or vitamin deciencies. Crohn’s colitis 
presents in an identical manner to ulcerative colitis, but rectal sparing 
and the presence of perianal disease are features that favour a diagnosis 

[[p894]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     839
23
diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is usually more straightforward and is 
made on the basis of imaging and clinical presentation, but in atypical 
cases biopsy or surgical resection is necessary to exclude other dis-
eases (Box 23.65).
Complications 
Life-threatening colonic inammation 
This can occur in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s colitis. In the most 
extreme cases, the colon dilates (toxic megacolon) and bacterial toxins 
pass freely across the diseased mucosa into the portal and then sys-
temic circulation. This complication arises most commonly during the 
rst attack of colitis and is recognised by the features described in Box 
23.63. An abdominal X-ray should be taken daily because, when the 
transverse colon is dilated to more than 6 cm (Fig. 23.62), there is a high 
risk of colonic perforation, although this complication can also occur in 
the absence of toxic megacolon. Severe colonic inammation with toxic 
dilatation is a surgical emergency and often requires colectomy.
Haemorrhage 
Haemorrhage due to erosion of a major artery is rare, but can occur in 
both conditions. This is more common in Crohn’s disease, where deep 
ulceration erodes larger vessels.
A
B
Fig. 23.61 Barium follow-through showing terminal ileal Crohn’s disease. 
A long stricture is present (arrow A), and more proximally there is ulceration with 
characteristic ‘rose thorn’ ulcers (arrow B).
23.64  Conditions that can mimic ulcerative or Crohn’s colitis
Infective
Bacterial
 Salmonella
 Shigella
 Campylobacter jejuni
 Escherichia coli O157
 Gonococcal proctitis
 Pseudomembranous colitis
 Chlamydia proctitis
Viral
 Herpes simplex proctitis
 Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
 Amoebiasis
Non-infective
 Ischaemic colitis
 Collagenous colitis
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs
 Diverticulitis
 Radiation proctitis
 Behçet’s disease
 Colonic carcinoma
23.65  Differential diagnosis of small bowel Crohn’s disease
 Other causes of right iliac fossa mass:
Caecal carcinoma
Appendix abscess*
 Infection (tuberculosis, Yersinia, actinomycosis)
 Mesenteric adenitis
 Pelvic inammatory disease
 Lymphoma
*Common; other causes are rare.
Fig. 23.62 Plain abdominal X-ray showing a grossly dilated colon due to 
severe ulcerative colitis. There is also marked mucosal oedema and ‘thumb-
printing’ (arrows).
Fistulae 
These are specic to Crohn’s disease. Enteroenteric stulae can cause 
diarrhoea and malabsorption due to blind loop syndrome. Enterovesical 
stulation causes recurrent urinary infections and pneumaturia. An enter-
ovaginal stula causes a faeculent vaginal discharge. Fistulation from the 
bowel may also cause perianal or ischiorectal abscesses, ssures and 
stulae.
Cancer 
Colorectal cancer accounts for one in six deaths in ulcerative coli-
tis. The risk of dysplasia and cancer increases with the duration and 
extent of uncontrolled colonic inammation. Thus patients who have 
long-standing, extensive colitis are at highest risk. 5-ASA therapy 
may reduce the risk of dysplasia and neoplasia in ulcerative colitis. 
Thiopurines also seem to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer in ulcer-
ative colitis, but not Crohn’s disease. However, these benets must 
be weighed against the very small increase in lymphoma, especially in 
older patients. The cumulative incidence for IBD-associated colorectal 
cancer has been reported at 1% at 10 years after diagnosis, which 
increases to 7% after 30 years. For unknown reasons, the risk is par-
ticularly high in patients who have concomitant primary sclerosing chol-
angitis. Tumours develop in areas of dysplasia and may be multiple. 
Patients with long-standing colitis are therefore entered into surveil-
lance programmes beginning 8 years after diagnosis, with patients with 
primary sclerosing cholangitis having annual surveillance colonoscopy 
from diagnosis. Targeted biopsies of areas that show abnormalities on 

[[p895]]
840    GASTROENTEROLOGY
staining with indigo carmine or methylene blue increase the chance 
of detecting dysplasia and this technique (termed pancolonic chromo-
endoscopy) has replaced colonoscopy with random biopsies taken 
every 10 cm in screening for malignancy. The procedure allows patients 
to be stratied into high-, medium- or low-risk groups to determine 
the interval between surveillance procedures. Family history of colon 
cancer is also an important factor to consider. If high-grade dysplasia 
is found, panproctocolectomy is usually recommended because of the 
high risk of colon cancer.
Extra-intestinal complications 
Extra-intestinal complications are common in IBD and may dominate the 
clinical picture. Some of these occur during relapse of intestinal disease; 
others appear to be unrelated to intestinal disease activity (Fig. 23.63).
Investigations 
Investigations are necessary to conrm the diagnosis, dene disease 
distribution and activity, and identify complications. Full blood count may 
show anaemia resulting from bleeding or malabsorption of iron, folic acid 
or vitamin B12. Platelet count can also be high as a marker of chronic 
inammation. Serum albumin concentration falls as a consequence of 
protein-losing enteropathy, inammatory disease or poor nutrition. ESR 
and CRP are elevated in exacerbations and in response to abscess 
formation. Faecal calprotectin has a high sensitivity for detecting gas-
trointestinal inammation and may be elevated, even when the CRP is 
normal. It is particularly useful for distinguishing inammatory bowel dis-
ease from irritable bowel syndrome at diagnosis, and for subsequent 
monitoring of disease activity.
Bacteriology 
At initial presentation, stool microscopy, culture and examination for 
Clostridiodes difcile toxin or for ova and cysts, blood cultures and 
serological tests should be performed. These investigations should be 
repeated in established disease to exclude superimposed enteric infec-
tion in patients who present with exacerbations of IBD. During acute 
ares necessitating hospital admission, three separate stool samples 
should be sent for bacteriology to maximise sensitivity.
Endoscopy 
Patients who present with diarrhoea plus raised inammatory markers 
or alarm features, such as weight loss, rectal bleeding and anaemia, 
should undergo ileocolonoscopy. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is occasion-
ally performed to make a diagnosis, especially during acute severe 
presentations when ileocolonoscopy may confer an unacceptable risk; 
ileocolonoscopy should still be performed at a later date, however, in 
order to evaluate disease extent. In ulcerative colitis, there is loss of vas-
cular pattern, granularity, friability and contact bleeding, with or without 
ulceration (Fig. 23.64). In Crohn’s disease, patchy inammation, with 
discrete, deep ulcers, strictures and perianal disease (ssures, stulae 
and skin tags), is typically observed, often with rectal sparing. In estab-
lished disease, colonoscopy may show active inammation with pseudo-
polyps or a complicating carcinoma. Biopsies should be taken from each 
anatomical segment (terminal ileum, right colon, transverse colon, left 
colon and rectum) to conrm the diagnosis and dene disease extent, 
and also to seek dysplasia in patients with long-standing colitis guided 
by pancolonic chromo-endoscopy. In Crohn’s disease, wireless capsule 
Unrelated to inflammatory
bowel disease activity
Autoimmune hepatitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
and cholangiocarcinoma
(ulcerative colitis)
Gallstones
Amyloidosis and oxalate calculi
Sacroiliitis/ankylosing spondylitis
(Crohn’s with HLA-B27)
Metabolic bone disease
Occur during the active phase of
inflammatory bowel disease
Mouth ulcers
Conjunctivitis
Iritis
Episcleritis
Mesenteric or portal vein thrombosis
Fatty liver
Liver abscess/portal pyaemia
Venous thrombosis
Large-joint arthritis
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Fig. 23.63 Systemic complications of inammatory bowel disease. See also Chapters 24 and 26. (HLA = human leucocyte antigen)

[[p896]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     841
23
endoscopy has a greater sensitivity for detecting small bowel disease 
in comparison to radiological techniques and is useful when there is a 
high suspicion of Crohn’s despite normal imaging. Enteroscopy may be 
required to make a histological diagnosis of small bowel Crohn’s disease, 
when the inamed segment is out of reach of standard endoscopes, or 
for a therapeutic indication, such as dilatation of strictures. In individuals 
with upper gastrointestinal symptoms, an upper gastrointestinal endos-
copy may be useful. However, this is not routinely used in adults with 
suspected or proven Crohn’s disease.
Radiology 
Where colonoscopy is incomplete, a CT colonogram is preferred. Small 
bowel imaging is essential to complete staging of Crohn’s disease. 
Traditional contrast imaging by barium follow-through demonstrates 
affected areas of the bowel as narrowed and ulcerated, often with mul-
tiple strictures (see Fig. 23.61). This has largely been replaced by MRI 
enterography, which does not involve exposure to radiation and is a sen-
sitive way of detecting extra-intestinal manifestations and of assessing 
pelvic and perineal involvement. These studies use an orally adminis-
tered small bowel-distending agent and intravenous contrast to provide 
transmural imaging that can usefully distinguish between predominantly 
inammatory strictures (that should respond to anti-inammatory medi-
cal strategies) and brotic strictures (that require a mechanical solution, 
such as surgical resection, stricturoplasty or endoscopic balloon dilata-
tion). A plain abdominal X-ray is essential in the management of patients 
who present with severe active disease. Dilatation of the colon (see 
Fig. 23.62), mucosal oedema (thumb-printing) or evidence of perfora-
tion may be found. Patients with proctitis may have features of proximal 
faecal loading. In small bowel Crohn’s disease, there may be evidence 
of intestinal obstruction or displacement of bowel loops by a mass. 
Ultrasound is a very powerful tool to detect small bowel inammation 
and stricture formation, but it is operator-dependent. The role of CT is 
limited to screening for complications, such as perforation or abscess 
formation, in the acutely unwell.
Management 
Medical therapy plays an important role in the management of IBD. 
However, optimal management depends on establishing a multidiscipli-
nary team-based approach involving physicians, surgeons, radiologists, 
nurse specialists and dietitians. Both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s dis-
ease are life-long conditions and have important psychosocial implica-
tions; specialist nurses, counsellors and patient support groups have key 
roles in education, reassurance and coping. The key aims of medical 
therapy are to:
 treat acute attacks (induce remission)
 prevent relapses (maintain remission)
 prevent bowel damage
 detect dysplasia and prevent carcinoma
 select appropriate patients for surgery.
Medical therapy 
Several medical treatment options exist in the management for IBD. 
Whilst traditional management for IBD has been through the use of 
non-biologic treatments, there has been a rapid expansion in the use of 
biologics, with common treatments described below.
Non-biologic therapies 
Non-biologics used in IBD are summarised in Box 23.66
Aminosalicylates (5-ASA) 
5-ASAs are more commonly used in ulcerative colitis than in Crohn’s 
disease. 5-ASAs are thought to have multiple anti-inammatory effects, 
including inhibition of mediatiors of lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase, 
modulating cytokine release from the mucosa. Several types are availa-
ble, with different means of delivery to the colon; pH-dependent (Asacol, 
Salofalk), time-dependent (Pentasa) or bacterial breakdown by colonic 
bacteria from a carrier molecule (sulfasalazine, balsalazide). While sul-
fasalazine was the rst 5-ASA to be used in IBD, side-effects are com-
mon, such as headache, nausea, diarrhoea and blood dyscrasias. Other 
5-ASAs are better tolerated. 5-ASAs can be administered orally or top-
ically (suppositories or enema). Patients commencing a 5-ASA should 
have their urea and electrolytes checked at baseline, after 2–3 months 
and then annually, as nephrotoxicity can occur rarely (1 in 4000 patient 
years).
Glucocorticoids 
Glucocorticoids such as prednisolone, hydrocortisone, budesonide and 
beclomethasone can be used to induce clinical remission in both ulcer-
ative colitis and Crohn’s disease, but have no role in preventing relapse. 
They can be administered orally, topically (suppositories or enema) or 
intravenously and have powerful anti-inammatory effects. When admin-
istered, it is important to have high vigilance for complications, such as 
Fig. 23.64 Sigmoidoscopic view of moderately active ulcerative colitis. 
Mucosa is erythematous and friable with contact bleeding. Submucosal blood vessels 
are no longer visible.
23.66  Non-biologic agents used in the treatment of 
inammatory bowel disease
Class
Drug
Indication
Aminosalicylates
Mesalazine
Olsalazine
Sulfasalazine
Balsalazide
Induce remission or 
maintenance in mild/
moderate ulcerative 
colitis
Glucocorticoids
Prednisolone
Hydrocortisone
Budesonide
Beclomethasone
Methylprednisolone
Induce remission in 
acute ulcerative colitis 
or Crohn’s disease
Anti-metabolites
Azathioprine
Mercaptopurine
Methotrexate
Maintenance therapy 
in ulcerative colitis or 
Crohn’s disease
Maintenance therapy in 
Crohn’s disease
Calcineurin inhibitors
Ciclosporin
Severe ulcerative 
colitis refractory to 
glucocorticoids
Antibiotics
Ciprooxacin
Metronidazole
Peri-anal Crohn’s 
disease and pouchitis

[[p897]]
842    GASTROENTEROLOGY
osteoporosis, diabetes and weight gain. Simultaneous calcium and vita-
min D supplementation should be given for bone protection. Budesonide 
is a potent glucocorticoid, which is efciently cleared from circulation by 
the liver, thereby minimising adrenocortical suppression and side-effects. 
It is commonly considered for active ileitis and ileocolitis.
Thiopurines 
Thiopurines used in IBD are azathioprine and mercaptopurine. They are 
immunmodulators that induce T-cell apoptosis. Azathioprine and mer-
captopurine are administered orally and metabolised to thioguanine 
nucleotides (TGNs). Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) methylates thi-
opurine metabolites away from TGNs and affects drug levels. Leucopenia 
can occur in 3%, particularly in inherited TPMT deciency. TPMT levels 
are checked prior to starting treatment and thiopurines are avoided if 
decient/very low due to risk of toxicity. Thiopurines take around 6 weeks 
after starting treatment to be effective. Around 20% of patients will have 
complications leading to drug withdrawal. Complications include inuen-
za-like syndrome with myalgia, nausea and vomiting. Genetic variation of 
NUDT15 has been described in association with myelosuppression and 
testing is performed if available. Other adverse effects include hepatotox-
icity and pancreatitis. Patients are counselled on the increase lymphoma 
(approximately 2–3-fold) and non-melanoma skin cancer (life-long sun 
protection advised) risk. Caution is taken in prescribing thiopurines in 
patients presenting over the age of 60 years due to risk of malignancy.
Methotrexate 
Methotrexate can be used for maintanence therapy in Crohn’s disease, 
with no role in ulcerative colitis. It is commonly used in individuals who 
have failed to respond with thiopurines. It is a folic acid antagonist, which 
inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, preventing DNA synthesis. The bio-
availability of oral methotrexate is variable when compared to parental 
administration, with the subcutaneous injection being generally preferred 
to intramuscular due to ease of administration. Nausea, stomatitis, diar-
rhoea, hepatotoxicity and pneumonitis can occur with methotrexate. 
Folic acid should be given concurrently to reduce gastrointestinal and 
liver toxicity. Women of child-bearing potential must use a robust con-
traceptive method and should be counselled to plan pregnancy with a 
6-month methotrexate-free period prior to conception as it is teratogenic.
Ciclosporin 
Ciclosporin is a calcineurin inhibitor, inhibiting in particular the transcrip-
tion of interleukin-2. It is used in ulcerative colitis that has responded 
poorly to glucocorticoids and has no role in Crohn’s disease. Major 
side-effects include nephrotoxicity, infections and neurotoxicity (including 
ts). Minor complications include tremor, paraesthesiae, abnormal liver 
function tests and hirsutism. Acutely, ciclosporin is usually administered 
intravenously, with responders to treatment converted to oral admin-
istration, which is continued for several months as a bridging therapy. 
Thiopurine manintence therapy is commonly given as maintanence sub-
sequently, as ciclosporin has no benet as maintenance therapy.
Antibiotics 
Antibiotics are useful in perianal Crohn’s disease and pouchitis. There 
is little evidence comparing different antibiotics for acute pouchitis, 
although ciprooxacin is better tolerated with fewer adverse effects than 
metronidazole. The major concern is peripheral neuropathy with long-
term metronidazole, with tendon inammation and damage potentially 
occurring with ciprooxacin. Combination antibiotics may be needed for 
chronic pouchitis. Antibiotics tend to be used in combination with thio-
purines and anti-TNF therapy in perianal disease.
Biologic agents 
Several classes of biologic agents are used in the management of 
IBD, with their indication shown in Box 23.67 and site of action shown 
in Fig. 23.65. The majority of biologics are administered either intra-
venously or subcutaneously, with the exception of tofacitinib, which 
is administered orally.
Anti-TNF antibodies 
These include infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab and certolizumab. 
They are monoclonal antibodies that bind to TNF-α, preventing pro-
inflammatory and pathological cytokine release by TNF-α. Acute 
(anaphylactic) and delayed (serum sickness) infusion reactions can 
occur after multiple infusions. Anti-drug antibody titres and drug 
levels can be also measured to assess efficacy. Anti-TNF antibod-
ies are contraindicated in infection; reactivation of latent tubercu-
losis and moderate to severe cardiac failure can occur. In view of 
this, assessment for latent tuberculosis and hepatitis B and C prior 
to commencement is required. There is a possible increased risk 
of malignancy and, rarely, neurological adverse events. Treatment 
should occur until treatment failure, or should be reassessed after 
12 months.
Anti-α4β7 integrin 
Vedolizumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks α4β7 integrin 
expressed on leukocytes and inhibits leukocyte interaction with a 
gut-specic receptor on endothelium, reducing leukocyte migration into 
gut mucosa. It is a gut-selective biologic used in both ulcerative colitis 
and Crohn’s disease. Side-effects include nasopharyngitis, arthralgia and 
headache. Treatment is discontinued if there is no improvement after 
14 weeks. Treatment should occur until treatment failure, or should be 
reassessed after 12 months.
Janus kinase inhibitor 
Tofacitinib is a Janus kinase inhibitor that selectively inhibits the 
Janus-associated tyrosine kinases JAK1 and JAK3, blocking pro-
inammatory cytokine signalling via the STAT pathway. It has the 
advantage of oral administration in comparison to other biolog-
ics being used in ulcerative colits. High doses should be avoided 
in patients at risk of pulmonary embolism and it is contraindicated 
in pregnancy. Herpes zoster has been noted to occur more often on 
active treatment; zoster vaccination is therefore recommended in those 
over age of 70 years or high-risk individuals (recurrent shingles) over 
50 years.
Anti-p40 antibodies 
Ustekinumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to p-40 subunit of 
both IL-12 and IL-23 to prevent T-cell activation; it is used in both ulcer-
ative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Side-effects include nasopharyngitis, 
headache and arthralgia. Treatment should occur until treatment failure 
or should be reassessed after 12 months.
Therapeutic drug monitoring 
Up to one-third of patients do not respond to biologic therapy (pri-
mary non-response), with up to a half discontinuing biologic therapy 
after initial response due to secondary loss of response or adverse 
effects. This can be due to pharmokinetic or pharmodynamic issues 
of the drug. Favourable outcomes have been associated with good 
drug concentrations, with low levels leading to immunogenicity and 
drug failure. Therapeutic drug monitoring can be performed with bio-
logic therapy, ensuring patients have adequate drug levels, pre-emp-
tively preventing ares due to low drug levels. Combination treatment 
of biologics with thiopurines or methotrexate can be used to pre-
vent and reduce anti-drug antibodies. Drug monitoring can also be 
performed with thiopurines, with thiopurine metabolites measured to 
tailor therapy.
Ulcerative colitis 
Active ulcerative colitis 
Patients with active ulcerative colitis are initially treated with topical or oral 
5-aminosalicylate (5-ASA) therapy. Patients with left-sided or extensive 
ulcerative colitis should continue oral 5-ASA in the long term to prevent 
relapse and minimise the risk of dysplasia. Individuals with an incom-
plete response to 5-ASA treatment may require treatment with systemic 
glucocorticoids, immunomodulator or biologic therapy. Glucocorticoids 

[[p898]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     843
23
Dendritic
cell
Lumen
Epithelium
Lamina propria
Blood vessel
RBC
RBC
T cell
T cell
Antigen
MAdCAM-1
T cell
T cell
T cell
Multiple
cytokines
e.g. IL-21
Macrophage
Anti-p40
Janus
kinase
inhibitors
Anti-TNF
TNF
IL-12
IL-23
Anti-α4β7
integrin
Fig. 23.65 Site of action of biologics. (TNF = tumour necrosis factor; IL = interleukin; RBC = red blood cell)
23.67  Biologic agents used in the treatment of inammatory 
bowel disease
Class
Drug
Indication
Anti-TNF antibodies
Iniximab
Adalimumab
Golimumab
Certolizumab
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
Acute severe ulcerative 
colitis as rescue 
therapy
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
Moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease
Anti-α4β7 integrin
Vedolizumab
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
Janus kinase 
inhibitor
Tofacitinib
Moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis
Anti-p40 antibodies
Ustekinumab
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
should never be used for maintenance therapy. An algorithm for the man-
agement of active ulcerative colitis is shown in Fig. 23.66
Severe ulcerative colitis 
Patients who fail to respond to maximal oral therapy and those who pres-
ent with acute severe colitis (meeting the Truelove–Witts criteria; see Box 
23.63) are best managed in hospital and should be monitored jointly by 
a physician and surgeon:
 clinically: for the presence of abdominal pain, temperature, pulse 
rate, stool blood and frequency
Addition of oral 5-aminosalicylate
therapy. Consider glucocorticoid
suppository if intolerant of 5-ASA
suppository but less effective
Oral prednisolone
(40 mg daily, tapered
by 5 mg/week over
8-week course)
5-ASA suppository
(usually at night)
Incomplete
response
Incomplete
response
Incomplete
response
Incomplete
response
Proctitis
Active ulcerative colitis
Oral 5-ASA and
5-ASA enema
Left-sided or extensive
ulcerative colitis
Immunomodulator/
biologic therapy
Fig. 23.66 Medical management of active ulcerative colitis.

[[p899]]
844    GASTROENTEROLOGY
 by laboratory testing: haemoglobin, white cell count, albumin, elec-
trolytes, ESR and CRP, stool culture, including Clostridioides difcile
toxin assay
 radiologically: for colonic dilatation on plain abdominal X-rays.
All patients should be given supportive treatment with intravenous u-
ids to correct dehydration and enteral nutritional support should be pro-
vided for malnourished patients (Box 23.68). Intravenous glucocorticoids 
(methylprednisolone 60 mg every 24 hours or hydrocortisone 100 mg 
four times daily) should be given by infusion or bolus injection. Patients 
should receive prophylactic low-molecular weight heparin, as the risk 
of venous thromboembolism is 2–3-fold higher compared to inpatients 
without IBD. Topical and oral aminosalicylates have no role to play in 
the acute severe attack. Response to therapy is judged over the rst 3 
days. Patients who do not respond promptly to glucocorticoids should 
be considered for medical rescue therapy with ciclosporin (2 mg/kg daily 
by intravenous infusion followed by 5 mg/kg daily, then orally after 7 days) 
or iniximab (5 mg/kg), which can avoid the need for urgent colectomy in 
approximately 60% of cases.
Patients who develop colonic dilatation (> 6 cm), those whose clinical 
and laboratory measurements deteriorate and those who do not respond 
after 7–10 days’ maximal medical treatment usually require urgent sur-
gery. Subtotal colectomy with end ileostomy is the operation of choice 
and can be performed open or laparoscopically, dependent upon local 
expertise. The surgical and medical teams should liaise early in the dis-
ease course and, if possible, the patient should have the opportunity to 
speak with the stoma nurse prior to colectomy.
Maintenance of remission 
Life-long maintenance therapy is recommended for all patients 
with left-sided or extensive disease, but is not necessary in those 
with proctitis (although 20% of these patients will develop proximal 
‘extension’ over the lifetime of their disease). Once-daily oral 5-ami-
nosalicylates are the preferred rst-line agents. Sulfasalazine has a 
higher incidence of side-effects, but is equally effective and can be 
considered in patients with coexistent arthropathy. Patients who fre-
quently relapse despite aminosalicylate drugs have in the past always 
been offered thiopurines (azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine). While 
thiopurines still have an important role for treatment, other immuno-
suppressive drugs may also be used. Biologic therapy with anti-TNF 
antibodies (iniximab, adalimumab or golimumab) can be consid-
ered for maintenance treatment in patients with moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis. Combination therapy of iniximab with a thiopurine 
should be used, as it is more effective than monotherapy with inixi-
mab. In patients where anti-TNF treatment has failed, anti-α4β7 inte-
grin antibodies (vedolizumab), Janus kinase inhibitors (tofacitinib) and 
anti-p40 antibodies (ustekinumab), can be considered to maintain 
remission.
Crohn’s disease 
Principles of management 
Crohn’s disease is a progressive condition that may result in stricture or 
stula formation if suboptimally treated. It is therefore important to agree 
long-term treatment goals with the patient; these are to induce remission 
and then maintain glucocorticoid-free remission with a normal quality of 
life. Treatment should focus on monitoring the patient carefully for evi-
dence of disease activity and complications (Box 23.69), and ensuring 
that mucosal healing is achieved.
Induction of remission in mild to moderate disease 
Glucocorticoids remain the mainstay of treatment for active Crohn’s disease. 
The drug of rst choice in patents with ileal disease is budesonide, since it 
undergoes 90% rst-pass metabolism in the liver and has very little sys-
temic toxicity. A typical regimen is 9 mg once daily for 4 weeks, with a step-
wise reduction of 3 mg every 4 weeks until therapy is stopped. If there is no 
response to budesonide within 2 weeks, the patient should be switched to 
prednisolone, which has greater potency. This is typically given in a dose of 
40 mg daily, reducing by 5 mg/week over 8 weeks, at which point treatment 
is stopped. Oral prednisolone in the dose regimen described above is the 
treatment of choice for inducing remission in colonic Crohn’s disease.
As an alternative to glucocorticoid therapy, enteral nutrition with either 
an elemental (constituent amino acids) or polymeric (liquid protein) diet 
may induce remission. Both types of diet are equally effective, but the 
polymeric one is more palatable when taken by mouth, and this improves 
adherence. It is particularly effective in children, in whom equal efcacy to 
glucocorticoids has been demonstrated, and in extensive ileal disease in 
adults. As well as resting the gut and providing excellent nutritional sup-
port, it also has a direct anti-inammatory effect. It is an effective bridge 
to urgent staging investigations at rst presentation and can be given by 
mouth or by nasogastric tube. With sufcient explanation, encourage-
ment and motivation, most patients will tolerate it well.
Induction of remission in severe disease 
Patients with severe disease can be treated with systemic glucocorti-
coids. The early introduction of biologics can also be considered, pro-
viding that acute perforating complications, such as abscess, have not 
arisen. Anti-TNF (iniximab or adalimumab), anti-α4β7 integrin (ved-
olizumab) and anti-p40 (ustekinumab) therapy can be considered as 
rst-line biologics. Patients with evidence of persistently active disease 
require further maintenance treatment (see below).
Maintenance therapy 
Glucocorticoids are not effective at maintaining remission in Crohn’s dis-
ease. Immunosuppressive treatment with thiopurines (azathioprine and 
23.68  Medical management of fulminant ulcerative colitis
 Admit to hospital for intensive therapy and monitoring
 Give IV uids and correct electrolyte imbalance
 Consider transfusion if haemoglobin is < 100 g/L (< 10 g/dL)
 Give IV methylprednisolone (60 mg daily) or hydrocortisone (100 mg four times 
daily)
 Give antibiotics until enteric infection is excluded
 Arrange nutritional support
 Give subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin for prophylaxis of venous 
thromboembolism
 Avoid opiates and antidiarrhoeal agents
 Consider iniximab (5 mg/kg) or ciclosporin (2 mg/kg) in stable patients not 
responding to 3–5 days of glucocorticoids
(IV = intravenous)
23.69  Monitoring of inammatory bowel disease (IBD)
 Assess symptoms, including extra-intestinal manifestations
 Examine for abdominal mass or perianal disease
 Perform full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, albumin, 
C-reactive protein (CRP)
 Check haematinics (vitamin B12, folate, iron studies) at least annually
 Check faecal calprotectin (to monitor each disease are/change in therapy and 
assess response)
 Perform stool cultures (at each are to exclude infection)
 Assess mucosal healing: surrogate markers (CRP/calprotectin), small bowel 
capsule, ileocolonoscopy and/or small bowel magnetic resonance imaging
 Enrol patient in a dedicated IBD clinic (monitoring of stable, uncomplicated 
patients may be carried out by a nurse or phone clinic)
 Arrange IBD multidisciplinary meeting for acutely ill or complex patients
 Check vaccinations are up to date; live vaccinations may be given at least 4 
weeks before starting immunosuppressive therapy and at least 3 months after 
stopping immunosuppressive therapy. Patients on immunosuppressive therapy 
should receive inuenza and pneumococcal vaccination
 Ensure surveillance colonoscopy is scheduled where appropriate

[[p900]]
Inflammatory bowel disease     845
23
mercaptopurine) may be used as maintenance therapy, but methotrexate 
is also effective and can be given once weekly, either orally or by subcu-
taneous injection; subcutaneous administration has better bioavailability. 
Patients refractory to immunomodulator therapy should be considered 
for biologic therapy with anti-TNF (iniximab or adalimumab) (Box 23.70), 
anti-α4β7 integrin (vedolizumab) or anti-p40 (ustekinumab) therapies). 
Combination therapy of iniximab with a thiopurine should be used, as 
it is more effective than monotherapy with iniximab. Combination ther-
apy of iniximab with methotrexate may also be used to reduce immu-
nogenicity. In patients who still require glucocorticoids despite optimal 
treatment with biologics, other options must be considered including 
surgery.
Cigarette smokers with Crohn’s disease should be strongly coun-
selled to stop smoking at every possible opportunity. Those that do 
not manage to stop smoking fare much worse, with increased rates 
of relapse and surgical intervention, with adverse effects of smoking 
being more pronounced in women than in men. Careful monitoring 
of disease activity (see Box 23.69) is the key to maintaining sus-
tained remission and preventing the accumulation of bowel damage 
in Crohn’s disease.
Fistulae and perianal disease 
Fistulae may develop in relation to active Crohn’s disease and are 
often associated with sepsis. The rst step is to dene the site by 
imaging (usually MRI of the pelvis). Endoanal ultrasound is another 
option for assessment, but is limited in patients with luminal stenoses, 
as well as by local expertise. Surgical exploration by examination 
under anaesthetic is usually then required, to delineate the anatomy 
and drain abscesses. Seton sutures can be inserted through stula 
tracts to ensure adequate drainage and to prevent future sepsis. 
Glucocorticoids are ineffective. Use of antibiotics, such as metroni-
dazole and/or ciprooxacin, can aid healing as an adjunctive treat-
ment. Thiopurines can be used in chronic disease, but do not usually 
result in stula healing. Anti TNF therapy can heal stulae and peri-
anal disease in many patients and are indicated when the measures 
described above have been ineffective. Higher trough iniximab drug 
levels are aimed for in perianal Crohn’s disease. The evidence of ben-
et in perianal stulating disease for the newer biologics is presently 
unclear. Other options for refractory perianal disease are proctectomy 
or faecal diversion with an upstream stoma.
Surgical management 
Ulcerative colitis 
Up to 60% of patients with extensive ulcerative colitis eventually require 
surgery. The indications are listed in Box 23.71. Impaired quality of life, 
with its impact on occupation and social and family life, is the most 
important of these. Surgery involves removal of the entire colon and rec-
tum, and cures the patient. One-third of those with pancolitis undergo 
colectomy within 5 years of diagnosis. Before surgery, patients should 
be counselled by doctors, stoma nurses and patients who have under-
gone similar surgery. The procedure of choice is usually an initial subtotal 
colectomy with ileostomy and a subsequent ileorectal anastomosis, or a 
proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal anastomosis. The companion text 
to this book, Principles and Practice of Surgery, should be consulted for 
further details.
Crohn’s disease 
Operations are often necessary to deal with stulae, abscesses and per-
ianal disease, and may also be required to relieve small or large bowel 
obstruction. In contrast to ulcerative colitis, surgery is not curative and 
disease recurrence is the rule. The only method that has consistently 
been shown to reduce post-operative recurrence is smoking cessa-
tion. Antibiotics are effective in the short term only. Use of thiopurines 
post surgery is suggested if there are indicators of a high chance of 
recurrence, i.e. more than one resection or evidence of penetrating dis-
ease, such as stulae or abscess. Otherwise, it is common to undertake 
colonoscopy 6 months after surgery to inspect and biopsy the anas-
tomosis and neo-terminal ileum. Patients with endoscopic recurrence 
are then prescribed immunomodulators or biologics to prevent further 
complications.
Surgery should be as conservative as possible in order to minimise 
the loss of viable intestine and to avoid the creation of a short bowel 
syndrome (p. 771). Obstructing or stulating small bowel disease may 
require resection of affected tissue. Patients who have localised seg-
ments of Crohn’s colitis may be managed by segmental resection and/
or multiple stricturoplasties, in which the stricture is not resected but 
instead incised in its longitudinal axis and sutured transversely. Others 
who have extensive colitis require total colectomy but ileal pouch for-
mation should be avoided because of the high risk of recurrence within 
the pouch and subsequent stulae, abscess formation and pouch 
failure.
Historical datasets show that around 80% of Crohn’s patients 
undergo surgery at some stage and 70% of these require more than 
one operation during their lifetime. Clinical recurrence following resec-
tional surgery is present in 50% of all cases at 10 years. Emerging 
data demonstrate that aggressive medical therapy, coupled with 
intense monitoring, probably reduces the requirement for surgery 
substantially.
23.70  How to give anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) therapy in 
inammatory bowel disease
 Iniximab (5 mg/kg IV infusion) is given as three loading doses (at 0, 2 and 6 
weeks), with 8-weekly maintenance thereafter. Some patients may require dose 
escalation to 10 mg/kg up to 4 weekly
 Adalimumab is given as SC injections, which patients can be trained to give 
themselves. Loading dose is 160 mg, followed by 80 mg 2 weeks later and 
40 mg every second week thereafter; some patients require dose escalation to 
40 mg once weekly
 Concomitant immunosuppression with a thiopurine or methotrexate may be 
more efcacious than monotherapy but has more side-effects
 Anti-TNF therapy is contraindicated in the presence of active infection and 
latent tuberculosis without appropriate prophylaxis; it carries an increased risk 
of opportunistic infections and a possible increased risk of malignancy; rarely, 
multiple sclerosis may be unmasked in susceptible individuals. Counselling 
about the balance of risk and benet for each patient is important
 Prior to therapy, latent tuberculosis must be excluded, as well as checking 
immunisation status, as well as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV and VZV status
 Live vaccines should not be given
 Golimumab is effective for ulcerative colitis
 Certolizumab is effective for luminal Crohn’s disease, but is not licensed in 
Europe
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus; IV = intravenous; SC = subcutabeous; TNF = tumour 
necrosis factor; VZV = varicella zoster virus)
23.71  Indications for surgery in ulcerative colitis
Impaired quality of life
 Loss of occupation or education
 Disruption of family life
Failure of medical therapy
 Dependence on oral glucocorticoids
 Resistant to drug therapy
 Intolerable side-effects of drug therapy
Fulminant colitis
 Life-threatening bleeding
Toxic megacolon
 Perforation
Colon cancer or severe dysplasia

[[p901]]
846    GASTROENTEROLOGY
IBD in special circumstances 
Childhood 
Children developing IBD tend to have more extensive disease than adults. 
Chronic ill health in childhood or adolescence may result in impaired 
growth, metabolic bone disease and delayed puberty. Loss of schooling 
and social contact, as well as frequent hospitalisation, can have impor-
tant psychosocial consequences. Treatment is similar to that described 
for adults and may involve glucocorticoids, immunosuppressive drugs, 
biologic agents and surgery. However, exclusive enteral nutrition can also 
be used to induce disease remission in Crohn’s disease, as well as aid-
ing with growth and nutritional status. Monitoring of height, weight and 
sexual development is crucial. Children with IBD should be managed by 
specialised paediatric gastroenterologists and transitioned to adult care 
in dedicated clinics (Box 23.72).
Pregnancy 
Pregnant women with IBD are best managed in an MDT approach involv-
ing an IBD physician and an obstetrician. A woman’s ability to become 
pregnant is adversely affected by active IBD. Pre-conceptual counselling 
should focus on optimising disease control. During pregnancy, roughly 
one-third of women improve, one-third get worse and one-third remain 
stable with active disease. In the post-partum period, these changes 
sometimes reverse spontaneously, e.g. improvement during pregnancy 
is followed by post-partum relapse. Drug therapy, including aminosalicy-
lates, glucocorticoids, thiopurines and biologics can be safely continued 
throughout pregnancy, but methotrexate and tofacitinib must be avoided, 
both during pregnancy and pre-conception (Box 23.73). Biologics such 
as iniximab, adalimumab, vedolizumab and ustekinumab may pass 
across the placenta and concentrate in the fetus, especially in the last 
trimester. Some women who are in deep remission may therefore choose 
to omit their biologics in the last trimester. However, biologics can be 
safely continued throughout the pregnancy, especially in women with 
ongoing active disease, at high risk of relapse or when limited treatment 
options. Breast feeding is recommended in all women and the use of 
thiopurines and biologics does not preclude women from breastfeeding. 
Thiopurine drug levels in breast milk are very low, with negligible levels 
measured in breast-fed infants of mothers on thiopurines. Levels of bio-
logics are also very low in breastmilk and lead to negligible levels in the 
breast-fed infant due to normal gut digestion. Mode of delivery should be 
discussed with pregnant women and in the absence of active rectal or 
perianal stulating disease, where a caesarean section is recommended, 
a vaginal delivery is safe.
Metabolic bone disease 
Patients with IBD are prone to developing osteoporosis due to the effects 
of chronic inammation, glucocorticoids, weight loss, malnutrition and 
malabsorption. Osteomalacia can also occur in Crohn’s disease that is 
complicated by malabsorption, but is less common than osteoporosis. 
The risk of osteoporosis increases with age and with the dose and dura-
tion of glucocorticoid therapy. Patients should have their fracture risk 
assessed prior to glucocorticoid therapy. Individuals who receive pro-
longed (> 3 months) or repeated courses of oral glucocortocid therapy 
should have bone densitometry assessed. Oral bisphosphonates, in the 
form of alendronate and risedronate, are commonly used for treatment 
if required. Denosumab and high dose intravenous bisphosphonates 
should be avoided in women of childbearing age, due to their unknown 
effects on the fetus.
Microscopic colitis 
Microscopic colitis, which comprises two related conditions called lym-
phocytic colitis and collagenous colitis, has no known cause. Both forms 
are commoner in women with a mean age of presentation of around 60 
years. The presentation is with chronic non-bloody watery diarrhoea. The 
colonoscopic appearances are normal, but histological examination of 
23.72  Inammatory bowel disease in adolescence
 Delayed growth and pubertal development: chronic active inammation, 
malabsorption, malnutrition and long-term glucocorticoids contribute to 
short stature and delayed development, with physical and psychological 
consequences.
 Metabolic bone disease: more common with chronic disease beginning 
in childhood, resulting from chronic inammation, dietary deciency and 
malabsorption of calcium and vitamin D.
 Drug side-effects and adherence issues: young people are more likely to 
require azathioprine or biologic therapy than adults. Poor adherence to therapy 
is more common than with adults, as younger patients may feel well, lack 
self-motivation to adhere and believe that drugs are ineffective or cause side-
effects.
 Loss of time from education: physical illness, surgery, fatigue in chronic 
inammatory bowel disease, privacy and dignity issues, and social isolation may 
all contribute.
 Emotional difculties: may result from challenges in coping with illness, 
problems with forming interpersonal relationships, and issues relating to body 
image or sexual function.
23.73  Pregnancy and inammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Pre-conception
 Outcomes are best when pregnancy is carefully planned and disease is in 
remission
 Methotrexate must be stopped 6 months prior to conception; other IBD drugs 
should be continued until discussed with a specialist
 Aminosalicylates and azathioprine are safe in pregnancy
 Glucocorticoids are probably safe
 Biologic therapy (iniximab, adalimumab, vedolizumab, ustekinumab) in 
pregnancy can continue if established pre-pregnancy
 Tofacitinib should be avoided in pregnancy
 Folic acid (5 mg/day) is recommended pre-conception. Consider high-dose 
supplements in small bowel Crohn’s disease with low levels despite 5 mg dose
Pregnancy
 Two-thirds of patients in remission will remain so in pregnancy
 Active disease is likely to remain active
 Severe active disease carries an increased risk of premature delivery and low 
birth weight
 Perform endoscopy only when absolutely essential for clinical decision-making 
(ideally in second trimester)
 X-rays can be performed if clinically indicated, but discuss with the radiologist 
rst. Ultrasound is preferable but is operator-dependent. MRI small bowel can 
be performed without intravenous gadolinium and oral contrast
Labour
 This needs careful discussion between patient, gastroenterologist and 
obstetrician
 Normal labour and vaginal delivery are possible for most
 Caesarean section may be preferred for patients with perianal Crohn’s or an 
ileo-anal pouch to reduce risks of pelvic oor damage, stulation and late 
incontinence
 Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis is important if in hospital
Breastfeeding
 This is safe and does not exacerbate IBD
 Data on the risk to babies from drugs excreted in breast milk are limited; most 
of these drugs are probably safe
 Patients should discuss breastfeeding and drug therapy with their doctor
biopsies shows a range of abnormalities. It is therefore recommended 
that biopsies of the right and left colon plus the terminal ileum should 
be undertaken in all patients undergoing colonoscopy for diarrhoea. An 
increased number of intraepithelial and lamina propria lymphocytes is 
noted in both forms of microscopic colitis, with a thickened subepithe-
lial collagen band also noted in collagenous colitis. Microscopic colitis 
may be associated with autoimmune diseases such as coeliac disease, 

[[p902]]
Functional bowel disorders     847
23
rheumatoid arthritis and thyroid disease, and some drug therapies, such 
as NSAIDs and PPIs. Bile acid diarrhoea has also been reported to be 
more prevalent in this group. Treatment with budesonide is usually effec-
tive for inducing remission. Up to 70% of individuals can relapse and 
require further treatment, but others can remain symptom free.
Functional bowel disorders 
Functional gastrointestinal disorders are a common diagnosis in gas-
troenterology, accounting for around 40% of all referrals to gastroen-
terology. They are thought to be disorders of brain–gut interaction, with 
alterations in motility, visceral hypersensitivity, gut microbiota, immune 
and mucosal function, as well as alterations in central nervous system 
processing.
Functional dyspepsia 
Functional dyspepsia can be diagnosed in patients presenting with dys-
pepsia where organic disease has been excluded. Patients are usually 
young (< 40 years) and women are affected twice as commonly as men. 
There are subtypes of this condition, with individuals being classied as 
having postprandial distress syndrome, epigastric pain syndrome or a 
mixture of both.
Pathophysiology 
The cause is poorly understood, but probably covers a spectrum of 
mucosal, motility and psychological factors.
Clinical features 
Symptoms such as bloating, early satiety, loss of appetite, nausea, 
vomiting or retching may suggest a diagnosis of postprandial distress 
syndrome, whereas symptoms of epigastric pain or epigastric burn-
ing may suggest a diagnosis of epigastric pain syndrome. Symptoms 
seen in functional dyspepsia can signicantly overlap with symp-
toms of an organic disease, and alarm features should be sought (see 
Box 23.15). While patients with functional dyspepsia can experience 
vomiting, persistent vomiting may suggest an underlying organic disor-
der. Peptic ulcer disease must be considered, while in older people intra-
abdominal malignancy is a prime concern. There are no diagnostic 
signs, although there may be inappropriate tenderness on abdom-
inal palpation. A drug history should be taken and the possibility of 
a depressive illness should be considered. Pregnancy should be 
ruled out in young women before radiological studies are undertaken. 
Alcohol misuse should be suspected when early-morning nausea and 
retching are prominent.
Investigations 
The history will often suggest the diagnosis. All patients should be 
checked for H. pylori infection and patients with alarm features should 
undergo endoscopy to exclude mucosal disease. While an ultrasound 
scan may detect gallstones, these are rarely responsible for dyspeptic 
symptoms, unless the patient has features to suggest biliary pathology.
Management 
Up to 10% of patients benet from H. pylori eradication therapy and 
this should be offered to infected individuals. Eradication also removes 
a major risk factor for peptic ulcers and gastric cancer, but at the cost 
of a small risk of side-effects and worsening symptoms of underlying 
gastro-oesophageal reux disease. Idiosyncratic and restrictive diets are 
of little benet but smaller portions and fat restriction may help.
Drug treatment is targeted on the subtype of functional dyspepsia. 
Prokinetic drugs (e.g. metoclopramide), fundus-relaxing drugs (e.g. 
buspirone) or centrally acting neuromodulators (e.g. mirtazapine) can be 
used in postprandial distress syndrome. Acid suppression medication 
(e.g. PPI) and tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline) may be used 
in epigastric pain syndrome. Patients with major psychological disorders 
that result in persistent or recurrent symptoms may require behavioural 
or other formal psychotherapy (Ch. 31).
Functional causes of vomiting 
Cyclical vomiting syndrome (CVS) is an increasingly recognised cause of 
functional vomiting. It is characterised by distinct phases. There tends 
to be a prodrome phase, where symptoms of nausea, pallor and sweat-
ing are noted. This is then followed by an intense vomiting phase, with 
other associated symptoms such as abdominal pain, which can last up 
to a week. After this, patients enter a recovery phase, with improvement 
and resolution of symptoms. There will then be a period of time with-
out symptoms. Triggers can include stress, fatigue and menstruation. 
The cause of CVS is unknown, although an association with migraine 
headaches is recognised. A subset of adults with CVS have symptoms 
triggered by chronic cannabis use, known as cannabinoid hyperemesis 
syndrome. Patients with CVS are managed with general lifestyle advice, 
with avoidance of triggers such as cannabis. Acute episodes can be 
managed with medications, such as anxiolytics (e.g. lorazepam) and 
antiemetics (e.g. ondansetron). Prophylactic treatment includes the use 
of tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitryptiline) and antiepileptic medica-
tion (e.g. levetiracetam).
In all patients it is essential to exclude other common causes of vomit-
ing (see; Fig. 23.18). Patients who do not have characteristic symptoms 
seen in CVS, with nausea or vomiting occurring weekly, in the absence 
of organic disease may be diagnosed as having chronic nausea and 
vomiting syndrome (CNVS). These patients may respond to treatments 
including antiemetics (e.g. ondansetron) and tricyclic antidepressants 
(e.g. amitriptyline).
Irritable bowel syndrome 
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) has an estimated worldwide prevalence of 
around 5%. It is characterised by recurrent abdominal pain in association 
with abnormal defecation in the absence of a structural abnormality of 
the gut. IBS accounts for frequent absenteeism from work and impaired 
quality of life. Young women are affected more often than men.
Pathophysiology 
The cause of IBS is incompletely understood but biopsychosocial factors 
are thought to play an important role, along with luminal factors, such as 
diet and the gut microbiota, as discussed below.
Behavioural and psychosocial factors 
Early learning difculties or emotionally challenging interactions during 
childhood may contribute to IBS in later life. Most patients seen in general 
practice do not have psychological problems but about 50% of patients 
referred to hospital have a psychiatric illness, such as anxiety, depres-
sion, somatisation and neurosis. Panic attacks are also common. Acute 
psychological stress and overt psychiatric disease are known to alter 
visceral perception and gastrointestinal motility. There is an increased 
prevalence of abnormal illness behaviour, with frequent consultations for 
minor symptoms and reduced coping ability (Ch. 31). These factors con-
tribute to but do not cause IBS.
Physiological factors 
The pathophysiology of IBS is still not fully understood. IBS is thought to be 
a disorder of the brain–gut axis, with alterations in visceral hypersensitivity. 
There is some evidence that IBS may be a serotoninergic (5-HT) disorder, 
as evidenced by relatively excessive release of 5-HT in diarrhoea-predom-
inant IBS (IBS-D) and relative deciency with constipation-predominant 
IBS (IBS-C). Accordingly, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are effective in IBS-
D, while 5-HT4 agonists improve bowel function in IBS-C. There is some 
evidence that IBS may represent a state of low-grade gut inammation 
or immune activation, not detectable by tests, with raised numbers of 
mucosal mast cells that sensitise enteric neurons by releasing histamine 
and tryptase. Some patients respond positively to mast cell stabilisers, 

[[p903]]
848    GASTROENTEROLOGY
such as ketotifen, which supports a pathogenic role of mast cells in at least 
some patients. Immune activation may be associated with altered CNS 
processing of visceral pain signals. This is more common in women and 
in IBS-D, and may be triggered by a prior episode of gastroenteritis with 
Salmonella or Campylobacter species.
Luminal factors 
Both quantitative and qualitative alterations in intestinal bacterial microbiota 
have been reported. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) may be 
present in some patients and lead to symptoms. This ‘gut dysbiosis’ may 
explain the response to probiotics or the non-absorbable antibiotic rifaximin.
Dietary factors are also important. Some patients have chemical food 
intolerances (not allergy) to poorly absorbed, short-chain carbohydrates 
(lactose, fructose and sorbitol, among others), collectively known as 
FODMAPs (fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccharides, and polyols). 
Whilst their fermentation in the colon is normal physiology, this leads to 
bloating, pain, wind and altered bowel habit in patients with IBS, thought 
to be due to visceral hypersensitivity. Gluten exposure seems to cause 
symptoms in some IBS patients and there is an overlap with the diagno-
sis of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity (negative coeliac serology and normal 
duodenal biopsies).
Clinical features 
The key symptoms of IBS include recurrent abdominal pain and altered 
bowel habit (Box 23.74). Abdominal pain is usually colicky or cramping 
in nature, felt in the lower abdomen and related to defecation. The bowel 
habit is variable, with IBS stratied by predominant bowel habit; those 
with mainly constipation (IBS-C), mainly diarrhoea (IBS-D), mixed bowel 
habit (IBS-M) or unsubtyped (IBS-U). Those with constipation tend to 
pass infrequent pellety stools, usually in association with abdominal pain 
or proctalgia. Those with diarrhoea have frequent defecation but pro-
duce low-volume stools and rarely have nocturnal symptoms. Passage 
of mucus is common but rectal bleeding does not occur. Patients do not 
lose weight and are constitutionally well. Diagnosis is made through a 
careful history, exploring diet, medical, surgical and psychological history. 
The presence of other functional gastrointestinal disorders may also sup-
port the diagnosis, in addition to non-gastrointestinal symptoms such 
as migraine headaches, dyspareunia and interstitial cystitis. Onset after 
gastroenteritis may point towards a diagnosis of post-infectious IBS. 
Physical examination is generally unremarkable, with the exception of 
variable tenderness to palpation.
Investigations 
The diagnosis is clinical in nature and can be made condently in most 
patients using the Rome IV criteria, combined with the absence of alarm 
symptoms and without resorting to complicated tests (Box 23.75). 
Limited laboratory tests are normally performed prior to making a diag-
nosis of IBS, including full blood count, faecal calprotectin and C-reactive 
protein, which are all normal. Colonoscopy should be undertaken when 
patients present with alarm features, to exclude other diagnoses such 
as colorectal cancer and inammatory bowel disease. Those who pres-
ent atypically require investigations to exclude other gastrointestinal dis-
eases. Diarrhoea-predominant patients justify investigations to exclude 
coeliac disease, microscopic, lactose intolerance, bile acid diarrhoea 
(see earlier in this chapter), thyrotoxicosis (Ch. 20) and, in relevant coun-
tries, parasitic infection.
Management 
The most important steps are to make a positive diagnosis, as well as 
educating and reassuring the patient. Communicating diagnostic cer-
tainty is crucial, to prevent further unwarranted testing. Many people are 
concerned that they have developed cancer. A cycle of anxiety leading 
to colonic symptoms, which further heighten anxiety, can be broken by 
explaining that symptoms are not due to a serious underlying disease, 
but instead are the result of behavioural, psychosocial, physiological and 
luminal factors. In individuals who fail to respond to reassurance, treat-
ment is traditionally tailored to the predominant symptoms (Fig. 23.67).
A large proportion of IBS patients report symptoms triggered by food, 
with diet being shown to be an effective management option for many 
patients (Box 23.76). Dietary advice should be implemented under the 
expert guidance of a dietitian, to prevent potential nutritional deciencies 
of restrictive diets. General dietary advice is the rst-line option recom-
mended in the UK, with advice on regular meals, adjustment of bre 
intake, adequate uid intake, assessment of alcohol and caffeine intake, 
decreasing fat intake and assessing components of spicy meals which 
may be contributing to symptoms. If these measures fail, a low FODMAP 
diet may help some patients, as may a trial of a gluten-free diet. Up to 
30% may benet from a wheat-free diet, some may respond to lactose 
exclusion and excess intake of articial sweeteners, such as sorbitol, 
should be addressed. Probiotics, in capsule form, may be effective if 
taken for several months, although the optimum combination of bacterial 
strains and dose have yet to be claried.
Patients with intractable symptoms sometimes benet from several 
months of therapy with a tricyclic antidepressant, such as amitripty-
line or imipramine. Side-effects include dry mouth and drowsiness, 
but these are usually mild and the drug is generally well tolerated, 
although patients with features of somatisation tolerate the drug 
poorly and lower doses should be used. It may act by reducing vis-
ceral sensation and by altering gastrointestinal motility. Anxiety and 
affective disorders may also require specic treatment (Ch. 31). The 
5-HT4 agonist prucalopride, the guanylate cyclase-C receptor agonist 
linaclotide and chloride channel activators, such as lubiprostone, can 
be effective in IBS-C.
Systemic and nonabsorbable antibiotics, such as rifaximin, that act 
strictly on the gut lumen are sometimes used to manage symptoms, 
although the mechanism of action remains uncertain.
Psychological interventions, such as cognitive behavioural therapy, 
relaxation and gut-directed hypnotherapy, should be reserved for the 
most difcult cases. Cognitive behavioural therapy is the most widely 
studied psychotherapy treatment for IBS and may improve bowel symp-
toms, quality of life and psychological distress. A range of complemen-
tary and alternative therapies exist; most lack a good evidence base but 
are popular and help some patients (Box 23.77).
Most patients have a relapsing and remitting course. Exacerbations 
often follow stressful life events, occupational dissatisfaction and difcul-
ties with interpersonal relationships.
Ischaemic gut injury 
Ischaemic gut injury is usually the result of arterial occlusion. Severe 
hypotension and venous insufciency are less frequent causes. The 
presentation is variable, depending on the different vessels involved and 
the acuteness of the event. Diagnosis is often difcult.
23.74  Rome IV criteria for diagnosis of irritable bowel 
syndrome
Recurrent abdominal pain at least 1 day per week on average in the last 3 months 
(onset at least 6 months before diagnosis), associated with two or more of the 
following:
 Related to defecation
 Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool
 Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool
23.75  Alarm features in suspected irritable bowel syndrome
 Age >50 years
 Unintentional weight loss
 Nocturnal symptoms
 Recent change in bowel habit
 Palpable abdominal mass or 
lymphadenopathy
 Family history of colon cancer or 
inammatory bowel disease
 Anaemia
 Evidence of overt gastrointestinal 
bleeding (i.e. melaena or fresh blood 
in stools (haematochezia))

[[p904]]
Ischaemic gut injury     849
23
Acute small bowel ischaemia 
An embolus from the heart or aorta to the superior mesenteric artery is 
responsible for 40%–50% of cases, thrombosis of underlying atheroma-
tous disease for approximately 25% and non-occlusive ischaemia due 
to hypotension complicating myocardial infarction, heart failure, arrhyth-
mias or sudden blood loss for approximately 25%. Vasculitis and venous 
occlusion are rare causes. The clinical spectrum ranges from transient 
alteration of bowel function to transmural haemorrhagic necrosis and 
gangrene. Patients usually have evidence of cardiac disease and arrhyth-
mia. Almost all develop abdominal pain that is more impressive than the 
physical ndings. In the early stages, the only physical signs may be a 
silent, distended abdomen or diminished bowel sounds, with peritonitis 
developing only later.
Leucocytosis, lactic acidosis, hyperphosphataemia and hyperamylas-
aemia are typical. Plain abdominal X-rays show ‘thumb-printing’ due to 
mucosal oedema. CT with contrast has replaced percutaneous angio-
graphy as the gold standard for diagnosis and may demonstrate features 
such as occlusion of the mesenteric vessels and bowel wall thickening. 
Laparoscopy may also be used for diagnosis. Resuscitation, manage-
ment of cardiac disease and intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic 
therapy, followed by laparotomy, are key steps. If treatment is instituted 
 Duloxetine 30–60 mg at night
 Relaxation therapy
 Biofeedback
 Hypnotherapy
Symptoms persist
Spasmolytic drugs
 Mebeverine
 Peppermint oil
 Hyoscine
 Probiotics
 Rifaximin 600 mg daily for 
   2 weeks
 Amitriptyline or imipramine
  10–25 mg at night
 Amitriptyline or imipramine 10–25 mg
   at night
 Rifaximin 600 mg daily for 2 weeks
     Dietary changes
 Low-FODMAP diet
 Exclude wheat
 Exclude dairy
 Gluten-free diet
Irritable bowel syndrome confirmed
Reassurance
Symptoms resolve
Symptoms
persist
Constipation
predominant
Diarrhoea predominant
Pain and bloating
Avoid legumes and excessive dietary
fibre. Consider trials of low-FODMAP
or gluten-free diet
Antidiarrhoeal drugs
    Loperamide 2–8 mg daily
    Codeine phosphate 30–90 mg daily
    Colestyramine 1 sachet daily
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms
persist
Symptoms persist
High-roughage
diet
Symptoms
persist
Ispaghula or psyllium
Lactulose and/or macrogol
Prucalopride
or linaclotide
Fig. 23.67 Management of irritable bowel syndrome. (FODMAP = fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccharides, and polyols)
23.76  Dietary management of irritable bowel syndrome
 Eat regularly and avoid missing meals
 Take time to eat
 Ensure adequate hydration and avoid carbonated and caffeinated drinks
 Reduce alcohol intake
 Reduce intake of ‘resistant’ starch and insoluble bre
 Avoid foods with articial sweeteners
 Consider a low FODMAP diet
 Consider a gluten-free diet
 Consider a lactose exclusion diet
(FODMAPs = fermentable oligo-, di- and monosaccharides, and polyols)
23.77  Complementary and alternative therapies for irritable 
bowel syndrome
Manipulative and body-based
 Massage, chiropractic, yoga*
Mind–body interventions
 Meditation, hypnosis*, cognitive therapy
Biologically based
 Herbal products*, dietary additives, probiotics*
Alternative medical systems
 Ayurveda, homeopathy, traditional Chinese medicine
*Some evidence for benet exists.

[[p905]]
850    GASTROENTEROLOGY
early, embolectomy and vascular reconstruction may salvage some small 
bowel. In these rare cases, a ‘second look’ laparotomy should be under-
taken 24 hours later and further necrotic bowel resected. While laparotomy 
is the established approach, endovascular techniques may be consid-
ered, such as thrombolysis or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty. The 
results of therapy depend on early intervention; patients treated late have 
a 75% mortality rate. Survivors often have nutritional failure from short 
bowel syndrome (Ch. 22) and require intensive nutritional support, includ-
ing home parenteral nutrition and anticoagulation. Small bowel transplan-
tation can be considered in selected patients. Patients with mesenteric 
venous thrombosis also require surgery if there are signs of peritonitis, but 
are otherwise treated with anticoagulation. Investigations for underlying 
prothrombotic disorders should be performed (p. 988).
Acute colonic ischaemia 
The splenic exure and descending colon have little collateral circulation 
and lie in ‘watershed’ areas of arterial supply. The spectrum of injury 
ranges from reversible colopathy to transient colitis, colonic stricture, 
gangrene and fulminant pancolitis. Arterial thromboembolism is usually 
responsible, but colonic ischaemia can also follow severe hypotension, 
colonic volvulus, strangulated hernia, systemic vasculitis or hypercoag-
ulable states. Ischaemia of the descending and sigmoid colon is also 
a complication of abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery (where the infe-
rior mesenteric artery is ligated). The patient is usually an older adult 
who presents with sudden onset of cramping, left-sided, lower abdom-
inal pain and rectal bleeding. Symptoms usually resolve spontaneously 
over 24–48 hours and healing occurs in 2 weeks. Some may develop a 
brous stricture or segment of colitis. A minority develop gangrene and 
peritonitis. CT with contrast is the imaging of choice for diagnosis, with 
early colonoscopy within 48 hours of presentation recommended; oth-
erwise, mucosal ulceration may have resolved. Resection is required for 
peritonitis; colonoscopy should not be performed in this circumstance.
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia 
This results from atherosclerotic stenosis of the coeliac axis, superior 
mesenteric artery and inferior mesenteric artery. At least two of the three 
vessels must be affected for symptoms to develop. The typical pres-
entation is with dull but severe mid- or upper abdominal pain developing 
about 30 minutes after eating. Weight loss is common because patients 
are reluctant to eat and some experience diarrhoea. Physical exami-
nation shows evidence of generalised arterial disease. An abdominal 
bruit is sometimes audible but is non-specic. The diagnosis is made 
by mesenteric angiography. Treatment is by vascular reconstruction or 
percutaneous angioplasty and stenting, if the patient’s clinical condition 
permits. The condition is frequently complicated by intestinal infarction, 
if left untreated.
Diseases of the pancreas 
Acute pancreatitis 
Acute pancreatitis accounts for 3% of all cases of abdominal pain admit-
ted to hospital. It affects 2–28 per 100 000 of the population and is 
increasing in incidence. It is a potentially serious condition with an overall 
mortality of 10%. About 80% of all cases are mild and have a favoura-
ble outcome. Approximately 98% of deaths from pancreatitis occur in 
the 20% of patients with severe disease and about one-third of these 
arise within the rst week, usually from multi-organ failure. After this time, 
the majority of deaths result from sepsis, especially that complicating 
infected necrosis. At admission, it is possible to predict patients at risk of 
these complications (Box 23.78). Individuals who are predicted to have 
severe pancreatitis (Box 23.79) and those with necrosis or other compli-
cations should be managed in a specialist centre with an intensive care 
unit and multidisciplinary hepatobiliary specialists.
Pathophysiology 
Acute pancreatitis occurs as a consequence of premature intracellular 
trypsinogen activation, releasing proteases that digest the pancreas 
and surrounding tissue. Triggers for this are many, including alco-
hol, gallstones and pancreatic duct obstruction (Fig. 23.68). There is 
simultaneous activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), leading to 
mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy and a vigorous inammatory 
response. The normal pancreas has only a poorly developed capsule, 
and adjacent structures, including the common bile duct, duodenum, 
splenic vein and transverse colon, are commonly involved in the inam-
matory process. The severity of acute pancreatitis is dependent on 
the balance between the activity of released proteolytic enzymes and 
antiproteolytic factors. The latter comprise an intracellular pancreatic 
trypsin inhibitor protein and circulating β2-macroglobulin, α1-antitrypsin 
and C1-esterase inhibitors. The causes of acute pancreatitis are listed 
in Box 23.80. Acute pancreatitis is often self-limiting, but in some 
patients with severe disease, local complications, such as necrosis, 
pseudocyst or abscess, occur, as well as systemic complications that 
lead to multi-organ failure.
Clinical features 
The typical presentation is with severe, constant upper abdominal 
pain, of increasing intensity over 15–60 minutes, which radiates to the 
back. Nausea and vomiting are common. There is marked epigastric 
tenderness, but in the early stages (and in contrast to a perforated 
peptic ulcer), guarding and rebound tenderness are absent because 
the inammation is principally retroperitoneal. Bowel sounds become 
quiet or absent as paralytic ileus develops. In severe cases, the patient 
becomes hypoxic and develops hypovolaemic shock with oliguria. 
Discoloration of the anks (Grey Turner’s sign) or the periumbilical region 
23.79  Features that predict severe pancreatitis
Initial assessment
 Clinical impression of severity
 Body mass index > 30 kg/m2
 Pleural effusion on chest X-ray
 APACHE II score > 8 (see Box 9.55)
24 hours after admission
 Clinical impression of severity
 APACHE II score > 8
 Glasgow score > 3 (see Box 23.78)
 Persisting organ failure, especially if multiple
 CRP > 150 mg/L
48 hours after admission
 Clinical impression of severity
 Glasgow score > 3
 CRP > 150 mg/L
 Persisting organ failure for 48 hours
 Multiple or progressive organ failure
(CRP = C-reactive protein)
23.78  Glasgow criteria for prognosis in acute pancreatitis*
 Age > 55 years
 P O2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg)
 White blood cell count > 15 ×109/L
 Albumin < 32 g/L (3.2 g/dL)
 Serum calcium <2 mmol/L (8 mg/dL) (corrected)
 Glucose > 10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL)
 Urea > 16 mmol/L (45 mg/dL) (after rehydration)
 Alanine aminotransferase > 200 U/L
 Lactate dehydrogenase > 600 U/L
*Severity and prognosis worsen as the number of these factors increases. More than three 
implies severe disease.

[[p906]]
Diseases of the pancreas     851
23
structures, including blood vessels, to form pseudoaneurysms. Large 
pseudocysts can be detected clinically as a palpable abdominal mass.
Pancreatic ascites occurs when uid leaks from a disrupted pancreatic 
duct into the peritoneal cavity. Leakage into the thoracic cavity can result 
in a pleural effusion or a pleuro-pancreatic stula.
Investigations 
The diagnosis is based on raised serum amylase or lipase concentra-
tions and ultrasound or CT evidence of pancreatic swelling. Plain X-rays 
should be taken to exclude other diagnoses, such as perforation or 
Hyperstimulation
of pancreas
(alcohol, triglycerides)
Pancreatic
secretory
trypsin
inhibitors
+
+
+
+
Defective intracellular
transport and
secretion of
pancreatic zymogens
Pancreatic duct
obstruction
(common bile duct
stones, tumours)
Reflux of infected bile
or duodenal contents
into pancreatic duct
(sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction)
Activated
proteolytic
enzymes
Acute
pancreatitis
Pro-enzymes
Fig. 23.68 Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis.
23.80  Causes of acute pancreatitis
Common (90% of cases)
 Gallstones
 Alcohol
 Idiopathic causes
 Post-ERCP
Rare
 Post-surgical (abdominal, cardiopulmonary bypass)
 Trauma
 Drugs (azathioprine/mercaptopurine, thiazide diuretics, sodium valproate)
 Metabolic (hypercalcaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia)
 Pancreas divisum (p. 854)
 Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
 Infection (mumps, Coxsackie virus)
 Hereditary factors
 Renal failure
 Organ transplantation (kidney, liver)
 Severe hypothermia
 Petrochemical exposure
 Scorpion sting
(ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)
(Cullen’s sign) is a feature of severe pancreatitis with haemorrhage. The 
differential diagnosis includes a perforated viscus, acute cholecystitis 
and myocardial infarction. Various complications may occur and these 
are listed in Box 23.81
A collection of uid and debris may develop in the lesser sac, following 
inammatory rupture of the pancreatic duct; this is known as a pancre-
atic uid collection. It is initially contained within a poorly dened, fragile 
wall of granulation tissue, which matures over a 6-week period to form a 
brous capsule (Fig. 23.69). Such ‘pseudocysts’ are common and usu-
ally asymptomatic, resolving as the pancreatitis recovers. Pseudocysts 
greater than 6 cm in diameter seldom disappear spontaneously and can 
cause constant abdominal pain and compress or erode surrounding 
S
C
Fig. 23.69 Computed tomogram showing large pancreatic pseudocyst (C) 
compressing the stomach (S). The pancreas is atrophic and calcied (arrows).
23.81  Complications of acute pancreatitis
Complication
Cause
Systemic
Systemic inammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS)
Increased vascular permeability from 
cytokine, platelet-aggregating factor 
and kinin release
Hypoxia
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS) due to microthrombi in 
pulmonary vessels
Hyperglycaemia
Disruption of islets of Langerhans 
with altered insulin/glucagon release
Hypocalcaemia
Sequestration of calcium in fat 
necrosis, fall in ionised calcium
Reduced serum albumin 
concentration
Increased capillary permeability
Pancreatic
Necrosis
Non-viable pancreatic tissue 
and peripancreatic tissue death; 
frequently infected
Abscess
Circumscribed collection of pus close 
to the pancreas and containing little 
or no pancreatic necrotic tissue
Pseudocyst
Disruption of pancreatic ducts
Pancreatic ascites or pleural effusion
Disruption of pancreatic ducts
Gastrointestinal
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Gastric or duodenal erosions
Variceal haemorrhage
Splenic or portal vein thrombosis
Erosion into colon
Erosion by pancreatic pseudocyst
Duodenal obstruction
Compression by pancreatic mass
Obstructive jaundice
Compression of common bile duct

[[p907]]
852    GASTROENTEROLOGY
obstruction and to identify pulmonary complications. Amylase is ef-
ciently excreted by the kidneys and concentrations may have returned 
to normal if measured 24–48 hours after the onset of pancreatitis. A 
persistently elevated serum amylase concentration suggests pseudocyst 
formation. Peritoneal amylase concentrations are massively elevated 
in pancreatic ascites. Serum amylase concentrations are also elevated 
(but less so) in intestinal ischaemia, perforated peptic ulcer and ruptured 
ovarian cyst, while the salivary isoenzyme of amylase is elevated in par-
otitis. If available, serum lipase measurements are preferable to amylase, 
as they have greater diagnostic accuracy for acute pancreatitis.
Ultrasound scanning can conrm the diagnosis, although in the earlier 
stages the gland may not be grossly swollen. An ultrasound scan is also 
useful because it may show gallstones, biliary obstruction or pseudocyst 
formation.
Contrast-enhanced pancreatic CT performed at least 3 days after 
admission can be useful in assessing viability of the pancreas if persisting 
organ failure, sepsis or clinical deterioration is present, since these fea-
tures may indicate that pancreatic necrosis has occurred. Necrotising 
pancreatitis is associated with decreased pancreatic enhancement on 
CT, following intravenous injection of contrast material. The presence of 
gas within necrotic material (Fig. 23.70) suggests infection and impend-
ing abscess formation, in which case percutaneous aspiration of material 
for bacterial culture should be carried out and appropriate antibiotics 
prescribed. Involvement of the colon, blood vessels and other adjacent 
structures by the inammatory process is best seen on CT.
Certain investigations stratify the severity of acute pancreatitis and 
have important prognostic value at the time of presentation (see Boxes 
23.78 and 23.79). In addition, serial assessment of CRP is a useful indi-
cator of progress. A peak CRP of > 210 mg/L in the rst 4 days predicts 
severe acute pancreatitis with 80% accuracy. It is worth noting that the 
serum amylase concentration has no prognostic value.
Management 
Management comprises several related steps:
 establishing the diagnosis and disease severity
 early resuscitation, according to whether the disease is mild or 
severe
 detection and treatment of complications
 treatment of the underlying cause.
Opiate analgesics should be given to treat pain and hypovolaemia should 
be corrected using normal saline or other crystalloids. All severe cases 
should be managed in a high-dependency or intensive care unit. A urinary 
catheter should be inserted in patients with shock, with a central venous 
line inserted if required. Oxygen should be given to hypoxic patients and 
those who develop systemic inammatory response syndrome (SIRS) may 
require ventilatory support. Hyperglycaemia should be corrected using 
insulin and hypocalcaemia by intravenous calcium injection.
Nasogastric aspiration is required only if paralytic ileus is present. 
Enteral feeding, if tolerated, should be started at an early stage in 
patients with severe pancreatitis because they are in a severely catabolic 
state and need nutritional support. Enteral feeding decreases endotox-
aemia and so may reduce systemic complications. Nasogastric feeding 
is just as effective as feeding by the nasojejunal route. Prophylaxis of 
thromboembolism with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin is 
also advisable. The use of prophylactic, broad-spectrum intravenous 
antibiotics to prevent infection of pancreatic necrosis is not indicated, 
but infected necrosis is treated with antibiotics that penetrate necrotic 
tissue, e.g. carbapenems or quinolones, and metronidazole.
Patients who present with cholangitis in association with severe acute 
pancreatitis should undergo urgent ERCP to diagnose and treat chole-
docholithiasis. In less severe cases of gallstone pancreatitis, biliary imag-
ing (using MRCP or EUS) can be carried out after the acute phase has 
resolved. If the liver function tests return to normal and ultrasound has 
not demonstrated a dilated biliary tree, laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
with an on-table cholangiogram is appropriate because any common bile 
duct stones have probably passed. When the operative cholangiogram 
detects residual common bile duct stones, these should be removed 
by laparoscopic exploration of the duct or by post-operative ERCP. 
Cholecystectomy should be undertaken within 2 weeks of resolution of 
pancreatitis – and preferably during the same admission – to prevent fur-
ther potentially fatal attacks of pancreatitis. Patients with infected pancre-
atic necrosis or pancreatic abscess require urgent endoscopic drainage 
or minimally invasive retroperitoneal pancreatic (MIRP) necrosectomy to 
debride all cavities of necrotic material. Pancreatic pseudocysts can be 
treated by drainage into the stomach or duodenum. This is usually per-
formed after an interval of at least 6 weeks, once a pseudocapsule has 
matured, by surgical or endoscopic cystogastrostomy.
Chronic pancreatitis 
Chronic pancreatitis is a chronic inammatory disease characterised by 
brosis and destruction of exocrine pancreatic tissue. Diabetes mellitus 
occurs in advanced cases because the islets of Langerhans are involved 
(Ch. 21).
Pathophysiology 
Around 80% of cases in Western countries result from alcohol misuse, 
with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis being the second most common 
cause. In southern India, severe chronic brocalcic pancreatitis occurs 
in non-alcoholics, possibly as a result of malnutrition, deciency of trace 
elements and micronutrients, and cassava consumption. Other causes 
are listed in Box 23.82. The pathophysiology of chronic pancreatitis is 
shown in Figure 23.71
Clinical features 
Chronic pancreatitis predominantly affects middle-aged men with alco-
hol dependence. More than 80% present with abdominal pain. In 50%, 
this occurs as episodes of ‘acute pancreatitis’, although each attack 
results in a degree of permanent pancreatic damage. Relentless, slowly 
progressive chronic pain without acute exacerbations affects 35% of 
patients, while the remainder have no pain but present with diarrhoea. 
Pain is due to a combination of increased pressure within the pancreatic 
ducts and direct involvement of peripancreatic nerves by the inamma-
tory process. Pain may be relieved by leaning forwards or by drinking 
alcohol. Approximately one-fth of patients chronically consume opiate 
analgesics. Weight loss is common and results from a combination of 
anorexia, avoidance of food because of post-prandial pain, malabsorp-
tion and/or diabetes. Steatorrhoea occurs when more than 90% of the 
exocrine tissue has been destroyed; protein malabsorption develops only 
in the most advanced cases. Overall, 30% of patients have (secondary) 
diabetes, but this gure rises to 70% in those with chronic brocalcic 
Fig. 23.70 Pancreatic necrosis. Lack of vascular enhancement of the pancreas 
during contrast-enhanced computed tomography indicates necrosis (arrow). The 
presence of gas suggests that infection has occurred.

[[p908]]
Diseases of the pancreas     853
23
Management 
Alcohol misuse 
Alcohol avoidance is crucial in halting progression of the disease and 
reducing pain.
23.82  Causes of chronic pancreatitis*
Toxic–metabolic
 Alcohol
 Tobacco
 Hypercalcaemia
 Chronic kidney disease
Idiopathic
 Tropical
 Early-/late-onset types
Genetic
 Hereditary pancreatitis (cationic 
trypsinogen mutation)
 SPINK-1 mutation
 Cystic brosis
Autoimmune
 In isolation or as part of multi-organ problem
Recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis
 Recurrent acute pancreatitis
 Post-necrotic
Obstructive
 Ductal adenocarcinoma
 Intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasia
 Pancreas divisum
 Sphincter of Oddi stenosis
*These can be memorised by the mnemonic ‘TIGARO’. Gallstones do not cause chronic 
pancreatitis but may be observed as an incidental nding.
Clinical course
Mechanisms
Aetiology
Normal
Treg
Th
Acute
pancreatitis
Recurrent
acute
pancreatitis
Recurrent
acute
pancreatitis
Oxidative
stress
Alcohol
Smoking
Idiopathic
Genetic
Autoimmune
Obstructive
Toxic–
metabolic
Necrosis–
fibrosis
Duct
obstruction
Chronic
pancreatitis
Acinus
Ductule
Fig. 23.71 Pathophysiology of chronic pancreatitis. Alcohol and other risk factors may trigger acute pancreatitis through multiple mechanisms. The rst (or ‘sentinel’) 
episode of acute pancreatitis initiates an inammatory response involving T-helper (Th) cells. Ongoing exposure to alcohol drives further inammation but this is modied by 
regulatory T cells (Treg) with subsequent brosis, via activation of pancreatic stellate cells. A cycle of inammation and brosis ensues, with development of chronic pancreatitis. 
Alcohol is the most relevant risk factor, as it is involved at multiple steps.
pancreatitis. Physical examination reveals a thin, malnourished patient 
with epigastric tenderness. Skin pigmentation over the abdomen and 
back is common and results from chronic use of a hot water bottle 
(erythema ab igne). Many patients have features of other alcohol- and 
smoking-related diseases. Complications are listed in Box 23.83
Investigations 
Investigations (Box 23.84 and Fig. 23.72) are carried out to:
 make a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis
 dene pancreatic function
 demonstrate anatomical abnormalities prior to surgical intervention.
23.83  Complications of chronic pancreatitis
 Pseudocysts and pancreatic ascites, which occur in both acute and chronic 
pancreatitis
 Obstructive jaundice due to benign stricture of the common bile duct as it 
passes through the diseased pancreas
 Duodenal stenosis
 Portal or splenic vein thrombosis leading to segmental portal hypertension and 
gastric varices
 Peptic ulcer
 Secondary diabetes mellitus
 Pancreatic cancer
 Pancreatic exocrine insufciency
 Osteopenia or osteoporosis
23.84  Investigations in chronic pancreatitis
Tests to establish the diagnosis
 Ultrasound
 Computed tomography (may show atrophy, calcication or ductal dilatation)
 Abdominal X-ray (may show calcication)
 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
 Endoscopic ultrasound
Tests to dene pancreatic function
 Collection of pure pancreatic juice after secretin injection (gold standard but 
invasive and seldom used)
 Faecal pancreatic elastase (see Box 23.12)
Tests to demonstrate anatomy prior to surgery
 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

[[p909]]
854    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Pain relief 
A range of analgesic drugs, particularly NSAIDs, are valuable but the 
severe and unremitting nature of the pain often leads to opiate use with 
the risk of addiction. Analgesics, such as pregabalin and tricyclic antide-
pressants at a low dose, may be effective. Oral pancreatic enzyme sup-
plements suppress pancreatic secretion and their regular use reduces 
analgesic consumption in some patients. Patients who are abstinent 
from alcohol and who have severe chronic pain that is resistant to con-
servative measures should be considered for surgical or endoscopic 
pancreatic therapy (Box 23.85). Coeliac plexus neurolysis sometimes 
produces long-lasting pain relief, although relapse occurs in the majority 
of cases. In some patients, MRCP does not show a surgically or endo-
scopically correctable abnormality and, in these individuals, the only 
surgical approach is total pancreatectomy. Unfortunately, even after this 
operation, some continue to experience pain. Moreover, the procedure 
causes diabetes, which may be difcult to control, with a high risk of 
hypoglycaemia (since both insulin and glucagon are absent) and signi-
cant morbidity and mortality.
Malabsorption 
This is treated by dietary fat restriction (with supplementary medi-
um-chain triglyceride therapy in malnourished patients) and oral pancre-
atic enzyme supplements. A PPI is added to optimise duodenal pH for 
pancreatic enzyme activity.
Management of complications 
Surgical or endoscopic therapy may be necessary for the management 
of pseudocysts, pancreatic ascites, common bile duct or duodenal 
stricture and the consequences of portal hypertension. Many patients 
with chronic pancreatitis also require treatment for other alcohol- and 
smoking-related diseases and for the consequences of self-neglect and 
malnutrition.
Autoimmune pancreatitis 
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is a chronic broinammatory disease of 
the pancreas that can mimic cancer, but which responds to glucocorti-
coids. There are two different subtypes, type 1 and type 2 AIP. Type 1 
AIP belongs to IgG4-related disorders, which can include various organs 
such as bile ducts, salivary glands, kidneys, lungs and thyroid glands. 
Type 2 AIP affects the pancreas only, but is strongly associated with 
inammatory bowel disease, particularly ulcerative colitis. AIP can pres-
ent with obstructive jaundice, weight loss and abdominal pain. Blood 
tests may reveal increased serum IgG4 in type 1 AIP, with no reliable 
serological markers for type 2 AIP. Imaging in type 1 AIP may show a 
diffusely enlarged pancreas, narrowing of the pancreatic duct and stric-
turing of the lower bile duct. Focal mass-like pancreatic lesions may be 
seen in type 2 AIP. The symptom response to glucocorticoids is usually 
good in AIP, but recurrence can occur after initial response, particularly 
in type 1 AIP, with some patients requiring immunomodulators (e.g. aza-
thioprine) or rituximab.
Congenital abnormalities affecting the pancreas 
Pancreas divisum 
This is due to failure of the primitive dorsal and ventral ducts to fuse dur-
ing embryonic development of the pancreas. As a consequence, most 
of the pancreatic drainage occurs through the smaller accessory ampulla 
rather than through the major ampulla. The condition occurs in 7%–10% 
of the normal population and is usually asymptomatic, but some patients 
develop acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis or atypical abdominal 
pain.
Annular pancreas 
In this congenital anomaly, the pancreas encircles the second/third part 
of the duodenum, leading to gastric outlet obstruction. Annular pan-
creas is associated with malrotation of the intestine, atresias and cardiac 
anomalies.
Cystic brosis 
This disease is considered in detail on page 510. The major gastrointes-
tinal manifestations are pancreatic insufciency and meconium ileus. 
Peptic ulcer and hepatobiliary disease may also occur. In cystic bro-
sis, pancreatic secretions are protein- and mucus-rich. The resultant 
viscous juice forms plugs that obstruct the pancreatic ductules, lead-
ing to progressive destruction of acinar cells. Steatorrhoea is univer-
sal and the large-volume bulky stools predispose to rectal prolapse. 
Malnutrition is compounded by the metabolic demands of respira-
tory failure and by diabetes, which develops in 40% of patients by 
adolescence.
A
B
A
B
A
B
Fig. 23.72 Imaging in chronic pancreatitis. 
showing a grossly dilated and irregular duct with a calcied stone (arrow A). 
cholangiopancreatogram of the same patient showing marked ductal dilatation with 
abnormal dilated side branches (arrows A). A small cyst is also present (arrow B).
23.85  Intervention in chronic pancreatitis
Endoscopic therapy
 Dilatation or stenting of pancreatic duct strictures
 Removal of calculi (mechanical or shock-wave lithotripsy)
 Drainage of pseudocysts
Surgical methods
 Partial pancreatic resection, preserving the duodenum
 Pancreatico-jejunostomy

[[p910]]
Diseases of the pancreas     855
23
Nutritional counselling and supervision are important to ensure intake 
of high-energy foods, providing 120%–150% of the recommended 
intake for normal subjects. Fats are an important calorie source and, 
despite the presence of steatorrhoea, fat intake should not be restricted. 
Supplementary fat-soluble vitamins are also necessary. High-dose oral 
pancreatic enzymes are required, in doses sufcient to control steat-
orrhoea and stool frequency. A PPI aids fat digestion by producing an 
optimal duodenal pH.
Meconium ileus 
Mucus-rich plugs within intestinal contents can obstruct the small or 
large intestine of a newborn child. Meconium ileus is treated by the muc-
olytic agent N-acetylcysteine, given orally, by Gastrogran enema or by 
gut lavage using polyethylene glycol. In resistant cases of meconium 
ileus, surgical resection may be necessary.
Tumours of the pancreas 
Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas 
Some 90% of pancreatic neoplasms are adenocarcinomas that arise 
from the pancreatic ducts. These tumours involve local structures and 
metastasise to regional lymph nodes at an early stage. Most patients 
have advanced disease at the time of presentation. Neuro-endocrine 
tumours also arise in the pancreas, but tend to grow more slowly and 
have a better prognosis; these are discussed in detail on page 691. 
The incidence of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is higher in high-income 
countries, affecting 10–15 per 100 000 in Western populations, rising 
to 100 per 100 000 in those over the age of 70. Men are affected more 
often than women. The disease is associated with increasing age, 
smoking, diabetes and chronic pancreatitis. Between 5% and 10% of 
patients have a genetic predisposition: hereditary pancreatitis, HNPCC 
and familial atypical mole multiple melanoma syndrome (FAMMM). 
Overall survival is only 3%–5%, with a median survival of 6–10 months 
for those with locally advanced disease and 3–5 months if metastases 
are present.
Clinical features 
Many patients are asymptomatic until an advanced stage, when they 
present with central abdominal pain, weight loss and obstructive jaun-
dice (Fig. 23.73). The pain results from invasion of the coeliac plexus 
and is characteristically incessant and gnawing. It often radiates from 
the upper abdomen through to the back and may be eased a little by 
bending forwards. Almost all patients lose weight and many are cachec-
tic. Around 60%–70% of tumours arise from the head of the pancreas, 
and involvement of the common bile duct results in the development of 
obstructive jaundice, often with severe pruritus. Some patients present 
with diarrhoea, vomiting from duodenal obstruction, diabetes mellitus, 
recurrent venous thrombosis, acute pancreatitis or depression. Physical 
examination reveals clear evidence of weight loss. An abdominal mass 
due to the tumour, a palpable gallbladder or hepatic metastases is 
commonly found. A palpable gallbladder in a jaundiced patient is usu-
ally the consequence of distal biliary obstruction by a pancreatic cancer 
(Courvoisier’s sign).
Lymphadenopathy
Pancreatic
tumour mass
Sister Joseph’s nodule
(tumour spread to umbilicus
via umbilical vein)
Erythema ab igne 
Venous thrombosis
(‘thrombophlebitis migrans’)
Metastases
common
Obstructed
common bile
duct and dilated
gallbladder
Cancer
Dilated
pancreatic
duct
Lymph node
spread at
early stage
Jaundice
Cachexia
Depression
Vomiting from
duodenal obstruction
Hepatomegaly
(extrahepatic biliary
obstruction/secondary
deposits)
Palpable gallbladder
(Courvoisier’s sign)
Scratch marks
(obstructive jaundice)
Fig. 23.73 Features of pancreatic cancer.

[[p911]]
856    GASTROENTEROLOGY
Investigations 
The diagnosis is usually made by ultrasound and contrast-enhanced CT 
(Fig. 23.74). Diagnosis in non-jaundiced patients is often delayed because 
presenting symptoms are relatively non-specic. Fit patients with small, 
localised tumours should undergo staging to dene operability. EUS or lap-
aroscopy with laparoscopic ultrasound will dene tumour size, involvement 
of blood vessels and metastatic spread. In patients unsuitable for surgery 
because of advanced disease, frailty or comorbidity, EUS- or CT-guided 
cytology or biopsy can be used to conrm the diagnosis (see Fig. 23.74). 
MRCP and ERCP are sensitive methods of diagnosing pancreatic cancer 
and are valuable when the diagnosis is in doubt, although differentiation 
between cancer and localised chronic pancreatitis can be difcult. The 
main role of ERCP is to insert a stent into the common bile duct to relieve 
obstructive jaundice in inoperable patients. Serum cancer antigen 19-9 
(CA 19-9) can be used to monitor response to treatment and as a marker 
of recurrent disease. It has a poor predictive value for diagnosis.
Management 
Surgical resection is the only method of effecting cure and 5-year survival 
in patients undergoing a complete resection is around 12%. Adjuvant 
chemotherapy can also be used in these patients, using gemcitabine and 
capecitabine. Only 10%–15% of tumours are resectable with potential 
curative intent, since most are locally advanced at the time of diagnosis. 
For the great majority of patients, treatment is palliative. Chemotherapy 
with FOLFIRINOX (5-uorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan and oxaliplatin) 
improves median survival to 11 months. Pain relief can be achieved 
using analgesics, but in some patients coeliac plexus neurolysis may 
be required. Jaundice can be relieved by choledochojejunostomy in t 
patients, whereas percutaneous or endoscopic stenting is preferable 
in older patients and those with very advanced disease. Ampullary or 
periampullary adenocarcinomas are rare neoplasms that arise from the 
ampulla of Vater or adjacent duodenum. They are often polypoid and 
may ulcerate; they frequently inltrate the duodenum, but behave less 
aggressively than pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Around 25% of patients 
undergoing resection of ampullary or periampullary tumours survive for 5 
years, in contrast to patients with pancreatic ductal cancer.
Incidental pancreatic mass 
Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are increasingly being seen with 
widespread use of CT. These are a heterogeneous group; serous cys-
tadenomas rarely, if ever, become malignant and do not require surgery. 
Mucinous cysts occur more often in women, are usually in the pancreatic 
tail and display a spectrum of behaviour from benign to frankly malignant. 
Aspiration of the cyst contents for cytology and measurement of CEA 
and amylase concentrations in uid obtained at EUS can help determine 
whether a lesion is mucinous or not. In t patients, all mucinous lesions 
should be resected. A variant, called intraductal papillary mucinous neo-
plasia (IPMN), is often discovered coincidentally on CT, frequently in men 
in old age. This may affect the main pancreatic duct with marked dilata-
tion and plugs of mucus, or may involve a side branch. The histology var-
ies from villous adenomatous change to dysplasia or carcinoma. Since 
IPMN is a pre-malignant, but indolent, condition, the decision to resect 
or to monitor depends on age and tness of the patient and location, size 
and evolution of lesions.
Diseases of the peritoneal cavity 
Peritonitis 
Surgical peritonitis occurs as the result of a ruptured viscus (for details 
see this book’s companion text, Principles and Practice of Surgery). 
Peritonitis may also complicate ascites in chronic liver disease (spon-
taneous bacterial peritonitis, p. 877) or may occur in children in the 
absence of ascites, due to infection with Streptococcus pneumoniae or 
β-haemolytic streptococci (p. 301).
Chlamydial peritonitis is a complication of pelvic inammatory disease 
(p. 375). The patient presents with right upper quadrant pain, pyrexia and 
a hepatic rub (the Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome). Tuberculosis may cause 
peritonitis and ascites (p. 518).
Tumours 
The most common is secondary adenocarcinoma from the ovary or gas-
trointestinal tract. Mesothelioma is a rare tumour complicating asbestos 
exposure. It presents as a diffuse abdominal mass, due to omental inltra-
tion, and with ascites. The prognosis is extremely poor. Pseudomyxoma 
peritonei is a rare tumour of the appendix that spreads into the peritoneal 
cavity and is often found incidentally. Diagnosis can be conrmed by 
abdominal CT or MRI, with cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intra-
peritoneal chemotherapy being used for curative treatment.
Other disorders 
Endometriosis 
Ectopic endometrial tissue can become embedded on the serosal 
aspect of the intestine, most frequently in the sigmoid and rectum. The 
overlying mucosa is usually intact. Cyclical engorgement and inamma-
tion result in pain, bleeding, diarrhoea, constipation and adhesions or 
B
A
Fig. 23.74 Carcinoma of the pancreas. 
subsequently performed to enhance staging and to obtain a ne needle aspiration biopsy, which conrmed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

[[p912]]
Further information     857
23
obstruction. Low backache is frequent. The onset is usually between 
20 and 45 years and the condition is more common in nulliparous 
women. Bimanual examination may reveal tender nodules in the pouch 
of Douglas. Endoscopic studies reveal the diagnosis only if carried out 
during menstruation, when a bluish mass with intact overlying mucosa is 
apparent. In some patients, laparoscopy is required. Treatment options 
include laparoscopic diathermy and hormonal therapy with progesto-
gens (e.g. norethisterone), gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues 
or danazol.
Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis 
In this rare condition, multiple gas-lled submucosal cysts line the colonic 
and small bowel walls. The cause is unknown but the condition may 
be seen in patients with chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease, pyloric 
obstruction, systemic sclerosis or dermatomyositis. Most patients are 
asymptomatic, although there may be abdominal cramp, diarrhoea, 
tenesmus, rectal bleeding and mucus discharge. The cysts are recog-
nised on sigmoidoscopy, plain abdominal X-rays, CT or MRI. Therapies 
reported to be effective include prolonged high-ow oxygen, elemental 
diets and antibiotics.
HIV/AIDS and the gastrointestinal tract 
Patients with human immunodeciency virus/acquired immunode-
ciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) may develop several symptoms referable to 
the gastrointestinal tract, as discussed in detail on page 359. HIV testing 
should be considered in all patients with atypical or unexplained gastro-
intestinal symptoms and in those resident in areas of high prevalence.
Further information 
Books and journal articles 
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal 
and liver disease, 11th edn. Elsevier; 2020.
Podolsky DK, Camilleri M, Gregory Fitz J, etal. Yamada’s Textbook of 
gastroenterology, 6th edn. Wiley–Blackwell; 2015.
Websites 
bsg.org.uk British Society of Gastroenterology.
crohnsandcolitis.org.uk Crohn’s and Colitis UK.
coeliac.org.uk Coeliac UK.
ecco-ibd.eu European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation.
esge.com European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.
gastro.org American Gastroenterological Association and American Digestive Health 
Foundation.
isg.org.in Indian Society of Gastroenterology.

[[p913]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p914]]
Multiple Choice Questions 
 23.1.  A 27-year-old woman with coeliac disease presents with ongoing 
symptoms of chronic diarrhoea despite being on a gluten-free 
diet. Bloods tests for tTG are taken, which are elevated. Which 
would be the next appropriate test?
A. Capsule endoscopy
 B. Colonoscopy
 C. Endoscopy with duodenal biopsies
 D. CT abdomen
E. Lactose hydrogen breath test
Answer: C.
The most likely cause of symptoms in this patient is ongoing dis-
ease activity from coeliac disease. The gold standard of assessment of 
adherence in coeliac disease is an endoscopy with duodenal biopsies. 
Other causes of diarrhoea are also possible, and investigations such as a 
colonoscopy may be later considered, provided that there is no ongoing 
villous atrophy on biopsy.
 23.2.  A 72-year-old man presents with a 24-hour history of 
haematemesis. He receives resuscitation prior to a planned 
endoscopy. Which of the medications below should he continue 
to take if possible?
A. Rivaroxaban
B. Warfarin
C. Clopidogrel
D. Aspirin
E. Prasugrel
Answer: D.
Low-dose aspirin (75 mg) can be continued during an upper gastroin-
testinal bleed. Caution should be taken with discontinuation, in view of 
an increased association of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events 
noted within one week of discontinuation. Whilst bleeding risk may be 
increased during an upper GI bleed with aspirin, all-cause mortality is 
reduced with continuation. Direct oral anticoagulants, P2Y12-receptor 
antagonists and warfarin should be discontinued in most cases, although 
balance and risks may need to be evaluated, such as the continuation of 
dual antiplatelets (aspirin and clopidogrel) being considered for patients 
with drug-eluting coronary artery stents.
 23.3.  A 28-year-old pregnant woman with known pan-ulcerative 
colitis presents to clinic. Her most recent colonoscopy prior 
to pregnancy showed severe active colonic disease both 
macroscopically and histologically. She is 30 weeks pregnant 
and currently is taking iniximab for management of her ulcerative 
colitis, opening her bowels 4 times per day. What is the most 
appropriate ongoing management?
A. Commence methotrexate in addition to iniximab
B. Switch to vedolizumab
C. Discontinue iniximab and restart post-partum
D. Discontinue iniximab with restart in future if has symptoms
E. Continue with iniximab during remainder of pregnancy
Answer: E.
The best course of action in this circumstance would be to continue 
with iniximab during her third trimester. Women with moderate to active 
disease can experience disease activity during pregnancy, which can be 
associated with low birth weight and preterm birth. Despite signicant 
exposure of the fetus to anti-TNF drugs during the third trimester, no 
negative impact on neonatal outcomes or pregnancy has been shown. 
In individuals with inactive disease, it may be reasonable to discontinue 
TNF therapy during the third trimester. Patients must be counselled on 
the risks and benets during pregnancy. There is no indication for chang-
ing class of drug at this point, with methotrexate being shown to be 
teratogenic.
 23.4.  A 28-year-old man with a background of asthma presents 
with a history of intermittent dysphagia to solids and liquids, 
in addition to chest pain. An endoscopy is performed which 
shows longitudinal furrows and exudate in the oesophagus. 
Oesophageal biopsies demonstrate 25 eosinophils/HPF. What is 
the most appropriate initial pharmacological management?
A. Amitryptiline
B. 8-week empirical trial of PPI
C. Swallowed uticasone
D. Oral budesonide
E. Inhaled salbutamol
Answer: B.
The most likely diagnosis in this man is eosinophilic oesophagitis. 
An empirical 8-week trial of PPIs should be used in the rst instance, 
with around one-third of patients responding, known as PPI-responsive 
oesophageal eosinophilia. In individuals who fail to respond to this, 8–12 
weeks of topical therapy with glucocorticoids can be used, such as uti-
casone or budesonide. In addition, dietary modications are an effective 
management strategy, including elemental and elimination diets.
 23.5.  A 55-year-old female with a history of chronic constipation 
presents having failed to respond to bre supplements, lactulose 
and bisacodyl. In view of this, anorectal manometry is performed, 
suggesting dyssynergic defecation. What is the next appropriate 
management step?
A. Low FODMAP diet
B. Reassurance
C. Biofeedback
D. Lincalotide
E. Prucalopride
Answer: C.
Biofeedback therapy has been shown to be an effective management 
option in individuals with dyssynergic defecation, with up to 70% of indi-
viduals responding to this therapy. Agents such as lincalotide and pru-
calopride may be considered in individuals with functional or slow transit 
constipation. It is worth noting that patients with dyssynergic defecation 
may have secondary slow transit constipation, which may respond to 
pharmacological management. However, biofeedback would be the rst-
line management for dyssynergic defecation.

[[p915]]
Hepatology
24
MJ Williams
TT Gordon-Walker
Clinical examination of the abdomen for liver and biliary disease 860
Functional anatomy and physiology 862
Applied anatomy 862
Hepatic function 864
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary disease 865
Liver blood biochemistry 865
Haematological tests 867
Immunological tests 867
Imaging 867
Non-invasive markers of hepatic brosis 868
Histological examination 868
Presenting problems in liver disease 869
Abnormal liver function tests 870
Jaundice 870
Acute liver failure 872
Hepatomegaly 875
Ascites 875
Hepatic encephalopathy 878
Variceal bleeding 879
Cirrhosis 879
Acute on chronic liver failure 881
Portal hypertension 881
Infections and the liver 884
Viral hepatitis 884
HIV infection and the liver 891
Liver abscess 891
Alcohol-related liver disease 892
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 895
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease 897
Autoimmune hepatitis 897
Primary biliary cholangitis 898
Primary sclerosing cholangitis 899
IgG4-associated cholangitis 901
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions 901
Primary malignant tumours 901
Secondary malignant tumours 904
Benign tumours 904
Drugs and the liver 904
Drug-induced liver injury 906
Inherited liver diseases 906
Haemochromatosis 906
Wilson’s disease 907
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency 908
Gilbert syndrome 908
Vascular liver disease 908
Hepatic arterial disease 909
Portal venous disease 909
Hepatic venous disease 909
Pregnancy and the liver 910
Intercurrent and pre-existing liver disease 910
Pregnancy-associated liver disease 911
Liver transplantation 911
Indications and contraindications 911
Complications 912
Prognosis 912
Cholestatic and biliary disease 912
Chemical cholestasis 912
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis 912
Intrahepatic biliary disease 913
Extrahepatic biliary disease 913
Secondary biliary cirrhosis 913
Gallstones 913
Cholecystitis 915
Choledocholithiasis 916
Tumours of the gallbladder and bile duct 917
Miscellaneous biliary disorders 918

[[p916]]
860    HEPATOLOGY
Clinical examination of the abdomen for liver and biliary disease
Observation
Face
Jaundice
Spider naevi
Parotid swelling
Chest
Loss of body hair
Abdomen: inspection
Scars
Distension
Veins
Testicular atrophy
 Smell of alcohol or fetor hepaticus
 Encephalopathy
 Weight loss
 Scratch marks from itching
Hands
Clubbing
Dupuytren’s contracture
Leuconychia
Bruising
Flapping tremor (hepatic
encephalopathy)
Legs
Bruising
Oedema
Xanthelasma and jaundiced
sclera in a patient with
chronic cholestasis
Palmar erythema
Spider naevi
Aspiration of ascitic fluid
Gynaecomastia
Abdomen: palpation/
percussion/auscultation
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Ascites
Palpable gallbladder
Hepatic bruit (rare)
Tumour
Dilated abdominal wall veins
(caput medusae)
6
4
5
2
1
2
3
4
6
5
3
1
Insets (Spider naevi) From Hayes P, Simpson K. Gastroenterology and liver disease. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 1995; 
(Aspiration) Strachan M. Davidson’s Clinical cases. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2008; (Palmar erythema) Goldman L, 
Schafter AI. Goldman’s Cecil medicine, 24th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2012.

[[p917]]
Clinical examination of the abdomen for liver and biliary disease    861
24
History and signicance of abdominal signs
Interpretation of physical signs in cirrhosis
Signs of cirrhosis
 Spider naevi
 Palmar erythema
 Leuconychia
 Bruising (low platelets)
 Loss of body hair (increased oestrogens)
 Gynaecomastia (increased oestrogens)
Signs of portal hypertension
 Splenomegaly
 Dilated abdominal wall veins
Signs of decompensation
 Jaundice
 Ascites/peripheral oedema
 Flapping tremor (encephalopathy)
Signs related to specic aetiologies
Dupuytren’s contracture (alcohol)
 Parotid swelling (alcohol)
 Intoxication/withdrawal (alcohol)
 Xanthelasma (PBC, NAFLD)
 Scratch marks (cholestatic liver disease)
 Clubbing (hepatopulmonary syndrome)
(NAFLD = non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; PBC = primary biliary cholangitis) 
 Ascites
Causes
Associated clinical ndings
Exudative (high protein)
Carcinoma
Tuberculosis
Weight loss
Abdominal mass
‘Craggy’ hepatomegaly
Weight loss ± fever
Transudative (low protein)
Cirrhosis
Stigmata of cirrhosis (see above)
Renal failure (including nephrotic syndrome)
Severe generalised oedema
Congestive heart failure
Elevated jugular venous pressure
Peripheral oedema
 Silent presentation of liver disease
It is important to note that patients with liver 
disease can present silently following detection 
of abnormality on screening investigation. This 
occurs frequently in practice in three settings:
Biochemical abnormality
 Liver enzyme abnormality detected during 
health screening or drug monitoring
Radiological abnormality
 Observation of an unexpected structural 
abnormality such as an altered liver texture 
or contour, or a mass lesion on ultrasound, 
computed tomography or other imaging 
undertaken for reasons unrelated to the liver
Serological abnormality
 Detection of a liver-related autoantibody
Flapping tremor. Jerky forward movements every 
5–10 secs, when arms are outstretched and hands 
are dorsiexed, suggest hepatic encephalopathy. The 
movements are coarser than those seen in tremor.
Number connection test. These 25 numbered circles 
can normally be joined together within 30 secs. Serial 
observations may provide useful information, as long as 
the position of the numbers is varied to avoid the patient 
learning their pattern.
Constructional apraxia. Drawing stars and clocks may 
reveal marked abnormality.
  Assessment of liver size
Clinical assessment of hepatomegaly is 
important in diagnosing liver disease.
 Start in the right iliac fossa.
 Press hand gently up towards ribcage as  
patient breathes in.
 Progress up the abdomen 2 cm with each breath.
 Detect if smooth or irregular, tender or non-tender;  
ascertain the shape.
 Conrm the lower border of the liver by percussion.
 Identify the upper border by percussion.
Begin
End
19
20
18
15
16
13
3
2
17
8
14
5
1
9
7
6
4
10
25
23
11
24
12
22
21
Doctor
Patient
1

[[p918]]
862    HEPATOLOGY
Hepatic acinus
Right
hepatic duct
Common hepatic duct
Left
hepatic duct
Common bile duct
Portal vein
Central vein
Hepatic
lobule
Hepatic artery
Bile duct
Sphincter of Oddi
Pancreatic duct
Pancreas
Cholangiole
A
B
C
Liver
Gallbladder
Cystic duct
Portal
vein
Hepatic
artery
Bile
duct
Central
vein
Zone 3
(pericentral)
Mono-oxygenation
Glycolysis
Lipolysis
Glucuronidation
Zone 2
Zone 1
(periportal)
Good O2 supply
Gluconeogenesis
Bile salt formation
Bile flow
Blood flow
Duodenum
Fig. 24.2 Liver structure and microstructure. 
I
II
III
IVa
IVb
Right hemiliver
(RHL)
Left hemiliver
(LHL)
V
VI
VII
I
II
III
IVa
IVb
Clockwise numbering
starting posteriorly
V
VI
VII
VIII
VIII
Right hepatic
vein
Inferior
vena cava
Falciform
ligament
Portal vein
Middle hepatic vein
Left hepatic vein
Fig. 24.1 Liver blood supply.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Applied anatomy
Normal liver structure and blood supply
The liver weighs 1.2–1.5 kg and has multiple functions, including roles in 
metabolism, control of infection, and elimination of toxins and by-products 
of metabolism. It is classically divided into left and right lobes by the 
falciform ligament, but a more useful functional division is into the right 
and left hemilivers, based on blood supply (Fig. 24.1). These are further 
divided into eight segments, according to subdivisions of the hepatic and 
portal veins. Each segment has its own branch of the hepatic artery and 
biliary tree. The segmental anatomy of the liver has an important inu-
ence on imaging and treatment of liver tumours, given the increasing use 
of surgical resection. A liver segment is made up of multiple smaller units 
known as lobules, comprised of a central vein, radiating sinusoids sepa-
rated from each other by single liver cell (hepatocyte) plates, and periph-
eral portal tracts containing terminal branches of the hepatic artery, portal 
vein and bile duct. The functional unit of the liver is the hepatic acinus 
(Fig. 24.2).
Blood ows into the acinus via a single branch of the portal vein and 
hepatic artery situated centrally in the portal tract. Blood ows outwards 
along the hepatic sinusoids into one of several tributaries of the hepatic 
vein at the periphery of the acinus. Bile is excreted by hepatocytes into 
channels called cholangioles, which lie between them, and ows in the 
opposite direction from the periphery of the acinus back to the interlobu-
lar bile duct in the portal tract. The hepatocytes in each acinus lie in three 
zones, depending on their position relative to the portal tract. Those in 
zone 1 are closest to the terminal branches of the portal vein and hepatic 
artery, and are richly supplied with oxygenated blood, and with blood 
containing the highest concentration of nutrients and toxins. Conversely, 
hepatocytes in zone 3 are furthest from the portal tracts and closest to 
the hepatic veins, and are therefore relatively hypoxic and exposed to 
lower concentrations of nutrients and toxins compared to zone 1. The 
different perfusion and toxin exposure patterns, and thus vulnerability, of 
hepatocytes in the different zones contribute to the often patchy nature 
of liver injury.
Liver cells
Hepatocytes comprise 80% of liver cells. The remaining 20% are the 
endothelial cells lining the sinusoids, cholangiocytes lining the intra-
hepatic bile ducts, cells of the immune system including macrophages 
(Kupffer cells) and key populations of non-parenchymal cells, including 
hepatic stellate cells (Ito cells) and other myobroblast precursors.
Endothelial cells line the sinusoids (Fig. 24.3), a network of capillary 
vessels that differ from other capillary beds in the body, in that there is 
no basement membrane. The endothelial cells have gaps between them 

[[p919]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    863
24
Blood supply
The liver is unique as an organ, as it has dual perfusion. The majority of 
its blood supply (50%–90%) is via the portal vein, which drains blood 
from the gut via the superior mesenteric vein and from the spleen, and is 
the principal route for nutrient trafcking to the liver. A minority of inow 
is oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery. The dual perfusion system, 
and the variable contribution from portal vein and hepatic artery, can 
have important effects on the clinical expression of liver ischaemia (which 
typically exhibits a less dramatic pattern than ischaemia in other organs, 
a fact that can sometimes lead to it being missed clinically), and can raise 
practical challenges in liver surgery.
Biliary system and gallbladder
Hepatocytes provide the driving force for bile ow by creating osmotic 
gradients of bile acids, which form micelles in bile (bile acid-dependent 
bile ow), and of sodium (bile acid-independent bile ow). Hepatocytes 
secrete bile into the biliary canaliculi that then progressively merge into a 
system of interlobular, septal and major ducts. The right and left hepatic 
ducts join as they emerge from the liver to form the common hepatic 
duct, which becomes the common bile duct after joining the cystic duct 
(see Fig. 24.2). The common bile duct is approximately 5 cm long and 
4–6 mm wide. The distal portion of the duct passes through the head of 
the pancreas and usually joins the pancreatic duct before entering the 
duodenum through the ampullary sphincter (sphincter of Oddi). It should 
be noted, though, that the anatomy of the lower common bile duct can 
vary widely. Common bile duct pressure is maintained by rhythmic con-
traction and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi; this pressure exceeds 
gallbladder pressure in the fasting state, so that bile normally ows into 
the gallbladder, where it is concentrated 10-fold by resorption of water 
and electrolytes.
Stellate
cell
Activated
stellate cell
Peroxide
products IGF1
TGF-α
Injured
hepatocyte
EGF
Platelets
TGF-β1
PDGF
Initiation
Activated
Kupffer cell
Chemotaxis
Vasoconstriction
(ET1)
Cytokine
production
(IL-10)
Perpetuation
TGF-β1
PDGF
ROS
PDGF
ROS
Matrix degeneration
(MMP2, TIMP1+ 2)
Fibrogenesis
(TGF-β1)
TGF-β1
Fig. 24.4 Pathogenic mechanisms in hepatic brosis. Stellate cell activation occurs under the inuence of cytokines released by other cell types in the liver, including 
hepatocytes, Kupffer cells (tissue macrophages), platelets and lymphocytes. Once stellate cells become activated, they can perpetuate their own activation by synthesis of 
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β1), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) through autocrine loops. Activated stellate cells produce TGF-β1, stimulating the production 
of collagen matrix, as well as inhibitors of collagen breakdown. The inhibitors of collagen breakdown, matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9 (MMP2 and MMP9), are inactivated in 
turn by tissue inhibitors TIMP1 and TIMP2, which are increased in brosis. Inammation also contributes to brosis, with the cytokine prole produced by Th2 lymphocytes, such 
as interleukin-6 and 13 (IL-6 and IL-13). Activated stellate cells also produce endothelin 1 (ET1), which may contribute to portal hypertension. (EGF = epidermal growth factor; 
IGF1 = insulin-like growth factor 1; ROS = reactive oxygen species)
Hepatocyte
Space
of Disse
PMN cell
B cell
Sinusoid lumen
Monocyte
Kupffer cell
Red blood cells
Stellate cell
NK cell
T cell
Sinosoidal
endothelial
cell
Fig. 24.3 Non-parenchymal liver cells. (B cell = B lymphocyte; NK cell = natural 
killer cell; PMN cell = polymorphonuclear leucocyte; T cell = T lymphocyte).
(fenestrae) of about 0.1 μm in diameter, allowing free ow of uid and 
particulate matter to the hepatocytes. Individual hepatocytes are sepa-
rated from the leaky sinusoids by the space of Disse, which contains 
stellate cells that store vitamin A and play an important part in regulating 
liver blood ow. They may also be immunologically active and play a 
role in the liver’s contribution to defence against pathogens. The key role 
of stellate cells in terms of pathology is in the development of hepatic 
brosis, the precursor of cirrhosis. They undergo activation in response 
to cytokines produced following liver injury, differentiating into myobro-
blasts, which are the major producers of the collagen-rich matrix that 
forms brous tissue (Fig. 24.4).

[[p920]]
864    HEPATOLOGY
Liver
Kidney
Urobilinogen
(4 mg/day)
Urobilin
Bilirubin
mono- or
diglucuronide
(conjugated)
Bile
Stercobilinogen
(100 –200 mg/day)
Stercobilin
Stool
Colonic
bacteria
Large
intestine
Bilirubin
(unconjugated)
Urobilinogen
(enterohepatic
circulation)
Blood
Fig. 24.6 Pathway of bilirubin excretion.
Excretion
Bile salts
Bilirubin
Drugs
Phospholipid
Cholesterol
Storage
Iron
Copper
Vitamins A, D and B12
Nutrient metabolism
Carbohydrate
Protein
Lipids
Protein synthesis
Albumin
Coagulation factors
Complement factors
Haptoglobin
Caeruloplasmin
Transferrin
Protease inhibitors,
e.g. α1-antitrypsin
Immune
functions
Local cells
(Kupffer cells)
Innate factors
(defensins etc.)
Fig. 24.5 Important liver functions.
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac typically lying under the right 
hemiliver, with its fundus located anteriorly behind the tip of the 9th cos-
tal cartilage. Anatomical variation is common. The function of the gall-
bladder is to concentrate, and provide a reservoir for, bile. Gallbladder 
tone is maintained by vagal activity, and cholecystokinin released from 
the duodenal mucosa during feeding causes gallbladder contraction 
and reduces sphincter pressure, so that bile ows into the duodenum. 
The body and neck of the gallbladder pass posteromedially towards the 
porta hepatis, and the cystic duct then joins it to the common hepatic 
duct. The cystic duct mucosa has prominent crescentic folds (valves of 
Heister), giving it a beaded appearance on cholangiography.
Hepatic function
Carbohydrate, amino acid and lipid metabolism
The liver plays a central role in carbohydrate, lipid and amino acid metab-
olism, and is also involved in metabolising drugs and environmental toxins 
(Fig. 24.5). An important and increasingly recognised role for the liver is in 
the integration of metabolic pathways, regulating the response of the body 
to feeding and starvation. Abnormality in metabolic pathways and their 
regulation can play an important role both in liver disease (e.g. non-alco-
holic fatty liver disease, NAFLD) and in diseases that are not conventionally 
regarded as diseases of the liver (such as type 2 diabetes and inborn errors 
of metabolism). Hepatocytes have specic pathways to handle each of the 
nutrients absorbed from the gut and carried to the liver via the portal vein:
 Amino acids from dietary proteins are used for synthesis of plasma 
proteins, including albumin. The liver produces 8–14 g of albumin 
per day, and this plays a critical role in maintaining oncotic pressure 
in the vascular space and in the transport of small molecules like 
bilirubin, hormones and drugs throughout the body. Amino acids 
that are not required for the production of new proteins are broken 
down, with the amino group being converted ultimately to urea.
 Following a meal, more than half of the glucose absorbed is taken 
up by the liver and stored as glycogen or converted to glycerol and 
fatty acids, thus preventing hyperglycaemia. During fasting, glucose 
is synthesised (gluconeogenesis) or released from glycogen (glyco-
genolysis) in the liver, thereby preventing hypoglycaemia.
 The liver plays a central role in lipid metabolism, producing very 
low-density lipoproteins and further metabolising low- and high- 
density lipoproteins (see Fig. 19.12).
Clotting factors
The liver produces key proteins that are involved in the coagulation 
cascade. Many of these coagulation factors (II, VII, IX and X) are post-
translationally modied by vitamin K-dependent enzymes, and their 
synthesis is impaired in vitamin K deciency. Reduced clotting factor 
 synthesis is an important and easily accessible biomarker of liver function 
in the setting of liver injury. The short half-life of clotting factors makes the 
prothrombin time (PT; or the International Normalised Ratio, INR) a rap-
idly responsive measure of hepatocyte function. However, the deranged 
PT or INR seen in liver disease does not directly equate to increased 
bleeding risk, as these tests do not capture the concurrent reduced 
synthesis of anticoagulant factors, including protein C and protein S. In 
stable patients with liver disease the coagulation is rebalanced by these 
offsetting factors that restore a neutral or marginally pro-thrombotic state 
(balanced coagulopathy). Correction of PT using blood products before 
minor invasive procedures should be guided by clinical risk rather than 
the absolute value of the PT.
Bilirubin metabolism and bile
The liver plays a central role in the metabolism of bilirubin and is respon-
sible for the production of bile (Fig. 24.6). Between 425 and 510 mmol 
(250–300 mg) of unconjugated bilirubin is produced from the catabolism 
of haem daily. Bilirubin in the blood is normally almost all unconjugated 
and, because it is not water-soluble, is bound to albumin and does not 
pass into the urine. Unconjugated bilirubin is taken up by hepatocytes 
at the sinusoidal membrane, where it is conjugated in the endoplasmic 
reticulum by UDP-glucuronyl transferase, producing bilirubin mono- and 
diglucuronide. Impaired conjugation by this enzyme is a cause of inher-
ited hyperbilirubinaemias (see Box 24.18). These bilirubin conjugates are 
water-soluble and are exported into the bile canaliculi by specic carriers 
on the hepatocyte membranes. The conjugated bilirubin is excreted in 
the bile and passes into the duodenal lumen.
Once in the intestine, conjugated bilirubin is metabolised by colonic 
bacteria to form stercobilinogen, which may be further oxidised to ster-
cobilin. Both stercobilinogen and stercobilin are then excreted in the stool, 
contributing to its brown colour. Biliary obstruction results in reduced ster-
cobilinogen in the stool, and the stools become pale. A small amount of 
stercobilinogen (4 mg/day) is absorbed from the bowel, passes through 

[[p921]]
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary disease    865
24
the liver and is excreted in the urine, where it is known as  urobilinogen or, 
following further oxidisation, urobilin. The liver secretes 1–2 L of bile daily. 
Bile contains bile acids (formed from cholesterol), phospholipids, bilirubin 
and cholesterol. Several biliary transporter proteins have been identied 
(Fig. 24.7). Mutations in genes encoding these proteins have been identi-
ed in inherited intrahepatic biliary diseases presenting in childhood, and 
in adult-onset disease such as intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and 
gallstone formation.
Storage of vitamins and minerals
Vitamins A, D and B12 are stored by the liver in large amounts, while 
others, such as vitamin K and folate, are stored in smaller amounts and 
disappear rapidly if dietary intake is reduced. The liver is also able to 
metabolise vitamins to more active compounds, e.g. 7-dehydrocholes-
terol to 25(OH) vitamin D. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin and so the 
inability to absorb fat-soluble vitamins, as occurs in biliary obstruction, 
results in a coagulopathy. The liver also stores minerals such as iron, in 
ferritin and haemosiderin, and copper, which is excreted in bile.
Immune regulation
Approximately 9% of the normal liver is composed of immune cells 
(see Fig. 24.3). Cells of the innate immune system include Kupffer cells 
derived from blood monocytes, the liver macrophages and natural killer 
(NK) cells, as well as ‘classical’ B and T cells of the adaptive immune 
response. Additional populations of atypical lymphocytes, with phe-
notypic features of both T cells and NK cells, are thought to play an 
important role in host defence through linking of innate and adaptive 
immunity. The enrichment of such cells in the liver reects the unique 
importance of the liver in preventing microorganisms from the gut from 
entering the systemic circulation.
Kupffer cells constitute the largest single mass of tissue-resident mac-
rophages in the body and account for 80% of the phagocytic capacity of 
this system. They remove aged and damaged red blood cells, bacteria, 
viruses, antigen–antibody complexes and endotoxin. They also produce 
a wide variety of inammatory mediators that can act locally or may be 
released into the systemic circulation.
The immunological environment of the liver is unique in that antigens 
presented within it tend to induce immunological tolerance. This is of 
importance in liver transplantation, where classical major histocompati-
bility (MHC) barriers may be crossed, and also in chronic viral infections, 
when immune responses may be attenuated. The mechanisms that 
underlie this phenomenon have not been fully dened.
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary 
disease
Investigations play an important role in the management of liver disease 
in three settings:
 identifying the presence of liver disease in those with risk factors
 establishing the aetiology in those with incidentally found liver 
disease
 understanding disease severity (in particular, identication of brosis 
which leads to cirrhosis with its complications).
When planning investigations, it is important to be clear as to which of 
these goals is being addressed.
Suspicion of the presence of liver disease is normally based on blood 
biochemistry abnormality (‘liver function tests’, or ‘LFTs’).
Aetiology is typically established through a combination of history, 
specic blood tests and, where appropriate, imaging and liver biopsy.
Staging of disease involves the assessment of brosis and identica-
tion of cirrhosis and its complications. Although histology remains the 
gold standard for staging liver brosis, it has been largely replaced by 
non-invasive approaches, including novel imaging modalities, elasto-
graphy, serum markers of brosis and predictive scoring systems.
The aims of investigation in patients with suspected liver disease are 
shown in Box 24.1
Liver blood biochemistry
Liver blood biochemistry (LFTs) includes the measurement of serum 
bilirubin, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, γ-glutamyl trans-
ferase and albumin. Most analytes measured by LFTs are not truly 
‘function’ tests but enzymes that are released by injured hepatocytes 
and provide biochemical evidence of liver cell damage. The pattern of 
liver enzyme abnormalities can help to distinguish the likely cause of 
injury (hepatitic or cholestatic). Liver function per se is best assessed by 
the serum bilirubin, albumin and prothrombin time because of the role 
played by the liver in clearance of bilirubin and in synthesis of albumin 
and clotting factors. These measures reect the severity of liver disease 
Bile acid/lipid micelles
Basolateral
membrane
Canalicular
membrane
NTCP
Bile
acids
Bilirubin
and
organic
anions
OATP
MDR3
BSEP
Hepatocyte
ABCG5/8
Hepatocyte
Sinusoid
Bile canaliculus
MRP2
FIC1
Fig. 24.7 Biliary transporter proteins. On the hepatocyte basolateral membrane, 
sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) mediates uptake of 
conjugated bile acids from portal blood. At the canalicular membrane, bile salts 
are secreted via the bile salt export pump (BSEP) into bile. Multidrug resistance 
protein 3 (MDR3) transports (ips) phospholipid onto the outer side of the canalicular 
membrane. The ATP-binding cassette subgroup G 5 and 8 transporters (ABCG5/8) 
transport sterols including cholesterol into bile. These lipids form mixed micelles with 
bile salts and protect the membranes lining the biliary tree against the detergent 
action of bile salts. Familial intrahepatic cholestasis 1 (FIC1), now known as ATP8B1, 
transports phosphatidylserine to the outer side of the canalicular membrane and 
is essential for normal bile ow. Mutations in FIC1 can result in either progressive 
familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) in children or benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis (BRIC). Organic anion transporter protein (OATP) transports bilirubin and 
organic anions from portal blood into hepatocytes. Multidrug resistance protein 
2 (MRP2) transports bilirubin, a range of organic anions and conjugates into bile.
24.1  Aims of investigations in patients with suspected liver 
disease
 Detect hepatic abnormality
 Measure the severity of liver damage
 Detect the pattern of liver function test abnormality: hepatitis, cholestatic or 
mixed
 Identify the specic cause
 Investigate possible complications

[[p922]]
866    HEPATOLOGY
and are related to clinical outcomes, reected by their use in several 
prognostic scores: the Child–Pugh and MELD (Model for End-stage 
Liver Disease) scores in cirrhosis (see Boxes 24.31 and 24.32), the 
Glasgow score in alcoholic hepatitis (see Box 24.49) and the King’s 
College Hospital criteria for liver transplantation in acute liver failure (see 
Box 24.18).
Bilirubin
The degree of elevation of bilirubin can reect the degree of liver dam-
age. A raised bilirubin often occurs earlier in the natural history of bil-
iary disease (e.g. primary sclerosing cholangitis) than in disease of the 
liver parenchyma (e.g. cirrhosis), where the hepatocytes are primarily 
involved. Swelling of the liver within its capsule in inammation can, 
however, sometimes impair bile ow and cause an elevation of biliru-
bin level that is disproportionate to the degree of liver injury. Caution 
is therefore needed in interpreting the level of liver injury purely on 
the basis of bilirubin elevation. Bilirubin may also be elevated in the 
absence of liver injury as a result of haemolysis (resulting in increased 
bilirubin production) or inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism (see 
Box 24.12).
Albumin
Serum albumin levels are often low in patients with cirrhosis. This is due 
to a change in the volume of distribution of albumin, and to reduced syn-
thesis. Since the plasma half-life of albumin is about 2 weeks, albumin 
levels may be normal in acute liver failure but are almost always reduced 
in chronic liver failure. Albumin is not a specic marker of liver disease 
and is reduced in a range of conditions, including sepsis, malnutrition, 
nephrotic syndrome and protein-losing enteropathy.
Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate 
aminotransferase
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 
are intracellular enzymes that are released during damage to hepato-
cytes. Although AST may also be released from heart or skeletal mus-
cle, expression of ALT outside the liver is relatively low and this enzyme 
is therefore considered more specic for hepatocellular damage. Large 
increases of aminotransferase activity favour hepatocellular damage, and 
this pattern of enzyme abnormality is known as ‘hepatitic’.
The AST level is usually lower than the ALT, resulting in an AST/ALT 
ratio of less than 0.8. This ratio reverses in two situations: in alcohol-
related liver disease (particularly in alcoholic hepatitis where the ratio can 
be > 2), or as an indicator of advanced brosis in non-alcohol-related liver 
disease such as hepatitis C or NAFLD.
Alkaline phosphatase and γ-glutamyl transferase
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is the collective name given to several 
different enzymes that hydrolyse phosphate esters at alkaline pH. These 
enzymes are widely distributed in the body but the main sites of pro-
duction are the liver, bone and placenta. ALPs are post-translationally 
modied, resulting in the production of several different isoenzymes, 
which differ in abundance in different tissues. ALP enzymes in the liver 
are located in cell membranes of the hepatic sinusoids and the biliary 
canaliculi. Accordingly, levels rise with biliary injury and with sinusoidal 
obstruction, as occurs in inltrative liver disease.
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is a microsomal enzyme found 
in many cells and tissues of the body. The highest concentrations are 
located in the liver, where it is produced by hepatocytes and biliary 
epithelium.
The pattern of a modest increase in aminotransferase activity and 
large increases in ALP and GGT activity suggests impaired bile ow and 
is commonly described as ‘cholestatic’ (Box 24.2). Isolated elevation of 
the serum GGT is relatively common and may occur during ingestion of 
microsomal enzyme-inducing drugs, including alcohol (Box 24.3), but 
also in NAFLD. Elevated ALP with normal GGT is suggestive of non-
hepatic origin, e.g. bone disease or pregnancy.
Other biochemical tests
Other widely available biochemical tests may become altered in patients 
with liver disease:
 Hyponatraemia occurs in severe liver disease despite a high total 
body sodium content due to increased production of vasopressin 
(antidiuretic hormone, ADH; see Fig. 19.7), and may be exacerbated 
by diuretic use. A low sodium level predicts a poor prognosis in 
cirrhosis.
 Serum urea may be reduced in hepatic failure or due to loss of  
muscle mass, whereas levels of urea may be increased following 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
 Ferritin is elevated in patients with haemochromatosis, systemic 
inammatory disease and a range of conditions causing signicant 
parenchymal inammation, including alcohol excess and NAFLD.
24.2 ‘Hepatitic’ and ‘cholestatic’ liver function tests
Pattern
AST/ALT
GGT
ALP
Cholestasis
↑
↑↑
↑↑↑
Hepatitis
↑↑↑
↑
↑
Alcohol/enzyme-inducing drugs
N/↑
↑↑
N
N = normal; ↑ mild elevation (< twice normal); ↑↑ moderate elevation (2–5 times 
normal); ↑↑↑ marked elevation (>  5 times normal).
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; ALP = alkaline phosphatase; AST = aspartate 
aminotransferase; GGT = gamma-glutamyltransferase)
24.3  Drugs that increase levels of γ-glutamyltransferase
 Ethanol
 Phenytoin
 Carbamazepine
 Valproate
 Barbiturates
 Oral contraceptive pill
 Griseofulvin
 Isotretinoin
S
T
Fig. 24.8 Ultrasound showing a stone in the gallbladder (A) with acoustic 
shadow (S).

[[p923]]
Investigation of liver and hepatobiliary disease    867
24
Haematological tests
Blood count
The peripheral blood count is often abnormal and can give a clue to the 
underlying diagnosis:
 A normochromic normocytic anaemia may reect anaemia of 
chronic disease or recent gastrointestinal haemorrhage, whereas 
chronic blood loss is characterised by a hypochromic microcytic 
anaemia secondary to iron deciency. A high erythrocyte mean 
cell volume (macrocytosis) is associated with alcohol misuse or 
haemolysis, but target cells in any jaundiced patient also result in a 
macrocytosis.
 Leucopenia may complicate portal hypertension and hypersplenism, 
whereas leucocytosis may occur with cholangitis, alcoholic hepatitis 
and hepatic abscesses. Atypical lymphocytes are seen in infectious 
mononucleosis, which may be complicated by an acute hepatitis.
 Thrombocytopenia is common in cirrhosis and is due to reduced plate-
let production and increased breakdown because of hypersplenism. 
Thrombopoietin, required for platelet production, is produced in the 
liver and levels fall with worsening liver function. Thus platelet levels 
are usually more depressed than white cells and haemoglobin in the 
presence of hypersplenism in patients with cirrhosis. Thrombocytosis is 
unusual in patients with liver disease but may occur in those with active 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage and, rarely, in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Coagulation tests
These are often abnormal in patients with liver disease. An increased PT 
is an indicator of impaired liver function. The normal half-lives of the vita-
min K-dependent coagulation factors in the blood are short (5–72 hours), 
and so changes in the PT occur relatively quickly following liver damage; 
these changes provide valuable prognostic information in patients with 
both acute and chronic liver failure. Vitamin K does not reverse this de-
ciency if it is due to liver disease, but will correct the PT if the cause is 
vitamin K deciency, as may occur with cholestasis due to malabsorption 
of fat-soluble vitamins, or poor diet.
Immunological tests
A variety of tests are available to evaluate the aetiology of hepatic 
disease (Boxes 24.4 and 24.5). The presence of liver-related autoant i-
bodies can be suggestive of autoimmune liver disease (although false-
positive results can occur in other inammatory diseases such as 
NAFLD). Elevation in overall serum immunoglobulin levels (either IgG or 
IgM) can also indicate autoimmunity. In contrast, elevated serum IgA may 
be seen in alcohol-related liver disease and NAFLD.
Imaging
Several imaging techniques can be used to determine the site and nature 
of structural lesions in the liver and biliary tree. In general, however, imag-
ing techniques are unable to identify hepatic inammation and have poor 
sensitivity for liver brosis unless advanced cirrhosis with portal hyper-
tension is present.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is non-invasive and most commonly used as a ‘rst-line’ test 
to identify gallstones, biliary obstruction (Fig. 24.8) or thrombosis in the 
hepatic vasculature. Ultrasound may show changes of cirrhosis (nodular 
liver contour, coarse echotexture, right lobe atrophy and left lobe hyper-
trophy) or portal hypertension (splenomegaly, ascites) but has a relatively 
low sensitivity for diagnosing compensated cirrhosis. Focal lesions, such 
as tumours, may not be detected if they are less than 2 cm in diameter 
24.4  Chronic liver disease screen
 Hepatitis B surface antigen
 Hepatitis C antibody
 Liver autoantibodies (antinuclear antibody, smooth muscle antibody, 
antimitochondrial antibody, anti-liver–kidney microsomal antibody)
 Immunoglobulins
 Ferritin
 α1-antitrypsin
 Caeruloplasmin
24.5 How to identify the cause of liver function test (LFT) abnormality
Diagnosis
Clinical clue
Initial test
Additional tests
Alcohol-related liver disease
History
LFTs
AST > ALT; high MCV
Random blood alcohol
Non-alcoholic fatty liver  
disease (NAFLD)
Metabolic syndrome (central obesity, 
diabetes, hypertension)
LFTs
Ultrasound showing fatty liver
Chronic hepatitis B
Born in high-prevalence area; injection 
drug use; blood transfusion
HBsAg
HBeAg, HBeAb
HBV-DNA
Chronic hepatitis C
Injection drug use; blood transfusion
HCV antibody
HCV-RNA
Primary biliary cholangitis
Itch; raised ALP
AMA
Raised IgM
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Inammatory bowel disease
MRCP
Autoimmune hepatitis
Other autoimmune diseases
ASMA, ANA, LKM, raised IgG
Liver biopsy
Haemochromatosis
Diabetes/joint pain
Transferrin saturation, ferritin
HFE gene test
Wilson’s disease
Neurological signs; haemolysis
Caeruloplasmin
24-hour urinary copper
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
Lung disease
α1-antitrypsin level
α1-antitrypsin genotype
Drug-induced liver disease
Drug/herbal remedy history
LFTs
Liver biopsy
(ALP = alkaline phosphatase; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AMA = antimitochondrial antibody; ANA = antinuclear antibody; ASMA = anti-smooth muscle antibody;  
AST = aspartate aminotransferase; HBeAb = antibody to hepatitis B e antigen; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B 
virus;HCV = hepatitis C virus; HFE = haemochromatosis (high iron/Fe); IgM = immunoglobulin M; IgG = immunoglobulin G; LKM = liver–kidney microsomal antibody;  
MCV = mean cell volume; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography)

[[p924]]
868    HEPATOLOGY
and have similar echogenicity to normal liver tissue. Bubble-based con-
trast media can enhance discriminant capability. Doppler ultrasound 
allows blood ow in the hepatic artery, portal vein and hepatic veins to 
be investigated. Endoscopic ultrasound provides high-resolution images 
of the pancreas, biliary tree and liver (see below and Fig. 24.46).
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging
Computed tomography (CT) detects smaller focal lesions in the liver, 
especially when combined with contrast injection (Fig. 24.9). Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) can also be used to localise and conrm the 
aetiology of focal liver lesions, particularly primary and secondary tumours.
Hepatic angiography is seldom used nowadays as a diagnostic tool, 
since CT and MRI are both able to provide images of hepatic vascu-
lature, but it still has a therapeutic role in the embolisation of vascular 
tumours, such as hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatic venography is now 
rarely performed.
Cholangiography
Cholangiography can be undertaken by magnetic resonance chol-
angiopancreatography (MRCP; Fig. 24.10), endoscopy (endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography, ERCP) or the percutaneous 
approach (percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, PTC). The 
latter does not allow the ampulla of Vater or pancreatic duct to be visual-
ised. Endoscopic ultrasound can also provide high-quality biliary imaging 
safely (see below). MRCP is as good as ERCP at providing images of the 
biliary tree but is safer, and there is now little, if any, role for diagnostic 
ERCP. Both endoscopic and percutaneous approaches allow therapeu-
tic interventions, such as the insertion of biliary stents across bile duct 
strictures. The percutaneous approach is used only if it is not possible to 
access the bile duct endoscopically.
Endoscopic ultrasound
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is complementary to MRCP in the diag-
nostic evaluation of the extrahepatic biliary tree, ampulla of Vater and 
pancreas. With the ultrasonic probe in the duodenum, high-quality 
images are obtained, tissue sampling can be performed and, increas-
ingly, therapeutic drainage of biliary obstruction can be performed. EUS 
has the advantage over ERCP of not exposing patients to the risk of 
pancreatitis, among other complications of bile duct cannulation.
Non-invasive markers of hepatic brosis
Fibrosis is a key predictor of prognosis in chronic liver disease, and can 
help to guide monitoring and treatment decisions. This is now largely 
assessed by non-invasive markers of liver brosis. A number of indirect 
brosis markers have been described, including bilirubin, AST/ALT ratio 
and platelet count. Simple scoring systems such as the FIB-4 score and 
NAFLD brosis score combine routinely available blood tests and clinical 
risk factors, and are often used as screening tests for brosis risk. These 
tests have a high negative predictive value, with a normal value mak-
ing advanced brosis very unlikely, but a relatively low positive predictive 
value. Whilst these have been validated across a range of aetiologies, 
the cut-off values used (e.g. for FIB-4) may differ according to aetiology, 
and serum-based tests are less reliable in alcohol-related liver disease.
Fibrosis can also be assessed using more specic serum tests. 
Fibrotest® combines ve serum markers including α2-macroglobulin, 
haptoglobin and apolipoprotein A1. The Enhanced Liver Fibrosis (ELF®) 
serological assay provides direct assessment of brogenesis and broly-
sis using a combination of hyaluronic acid, procollagen peptide III (PIIINP) 
and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1).
An alternative to serological markers is transient elastography 
(Fibroscan®), in which ultrasound-based shock waves are sent through 
the liver to measure stiffness as a surrogate for hepatic brosis. This 
is quick, non-invasive and provides immediate results. Depending on 
the threshold used, this can exclude signicant brosis or diagnose cir-
rhosis. However, results can be inuenced by the presence of severe 
inammation and become less reliable with increasing obesity. Magnetic 
resonance elastography appears more reliable and is not inuenced by 
obesity, but is costly and not widely available.
Histological examination
A liver biopsy can conrm the severity of liver damage and provide aeti-
ological information. It is performed percutaneously with a Trucut or 
Menghini needle, usually through an intercostal space under local anaes-
thesia, or radiologically using a transjugular approach.
Percutaneous liver biopsy is a relatively safe procedure if the condi-
tions detailed in Box 24.6 are met, but carries a mortality of about 0.01%. 
The main complications are abdominal and/or shoulder pain, bleeding 
and biliary peritonitis. Liver biopsies can be carried out in patients with 
defective haemostasis if:
 the defect is corrected with fresh frozen plasma and platelet transfusion,
 the biopsy is obtained by the transjugular route, or
Fig. 24.9 Computed tomography in a patient with cirrhosis. The liver is small 
and has an irregular outline (black arrow), the spleen is enlarged (long white arrow), 
uid (ascites) is seen around the liver, and collateral vessels are present around the 
proximal stomach (short white arrow).
CBD
PD
Fig. 24.10 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showing a biliary 
stricture due to cholangiocarcinoma in the distal common bile duct (arrow). The 
proximal common bile duct (CBD) is dilated but the pancreatic duct (PD) is normal.

[[p925]]
Presenting problems in liver disease    869
24
 the procedure is conducted percutaneously under ultrasound con-
trol and the needle track is then plugged with procoagulant material.
In patients with potentially resectable malignancy, biopsy should be 
avoided due to the potential risk of tumour dissemination (biopsy track 
seeding). Operative or laparoscopic liver biopsy may sometimes be 
valuable.
Liver biopsy is used where there is uncertainty as to the cause of liver 
disease, or to quantify the degree of inammation (‘grade’) or brosis 
(‘stage’). Semi-quantitative scoring systems may be used to describe the 
degree of inammation or brosis. Although often regarded as the ‘gold 
standard’ investigation for liver disease, liver biopsies are limited by sam-
pling error, with studies showing signicant variation in both grade and 
stage between simultaneous paired biopsies. The use of special histo-
logical stains can help in determining aetiology. The clinical features and 
prognosis of these changes are dependent on the underlying aetiology 
and are discussed in the relevant sections below.
Presenting problems in liver disease
Liver injury may be either acute or chronic. The main causes are listed 
in Fig. 24.11 and discussed in detail later in the chapter. In the UK, liver 
disease is the only one of the top causes of mortality that is steadily 
increasing (Fig. 24.12). Mortality rates have risen substantially over the 
last 30 years, with a near-vefold increase in liver-related mortality in 
people younger than 65 years. The rate of increase is substantially higher 
in the UK than in other countries in Western Europe.
 Acute liver injury may present with non-specic symptoms of fatigue 
and abnormal LFTs, or with jaundice and acute liver failure.
 Chronic liver injury is dened as hepatic injury, inammation and/or 
brosis occurring in the liver for more than 6 months. In the early 
stages, patients can be asymptomatic with uctuating abnormal 
LFTs. With more severe liver damage, however, the presentation 
can be with jaundice, portal hypertension or other signs of cirrhosis 
and hepatic decompensation (Box 24.7). Patients with clinically 
silent chronic liver disease frequently present when abnormalities in 
liver function are observed on routine blood testing, or when clinical 
events, such as an intercurrent infection or surgical intervention, 
cause the liver to decompensate. Patients with compensated cirrho-
sis can undergo most forms of surgery without signicantly increased 
risk. Surgical complications are more common in patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis and the presence of portal hypertension 
with intra-abdominal varices can make abdominal surgery more haz-
ardous. The possibility of undiagnosed liver disease should be borne 
Acute liver injury
Viral hepatitis
(A, B, E)
Alcoholic liver disease*
Autoimmune hepatitis*
Drugs
Chronic liver injury
Chronic viral hepatitis
(B + C)
PBC
PSC
NAFLD
Haemochromatosis
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
Cryptogenic (unknown)
Wilson’s disease
Fig. 24.11 Causes of acute and chronic liver injury. *Although there is often 
evidence of chronic liver disease at presentation, may present acutely with jaundice. 
In alcoholic liver disease this is due to superimposed alcoholic hepatitis. (NAFLD = 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; PBC = primary biliary cholangitis; PSC = primary 
sclerosing cholangitis)
24.6  Conditions required for safe percutaneous liver biopsy
 Cooperative patient
 It is recommended that for non-lesional liver biopsy in patients with chronic liver 
disease a transvenous route should be used if INR > 1.4
 For percutaneous lesional biopsies the INR should be < 2
 Platelet count > 50 ×109/L
 Exclusion of bile duct obstruction, localised skin infection, advanced chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, marked ascites and severe anaemia
 Liver biopsy should be avoided in unstable patients with uncontrolled bleeding, 
bacterial infection and signicant renal impairment.
(INR = International Normalised Ratio)
Primary liver cancer
Alcohol
Cause not recorded
NAFLD
Viral hepatitis
Autoimmune disease
Ischaemic heart disease
Breast cancer
Lung cancer
Liver disease
300000
Potential years of working life lost
250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
Year
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
0
Fig. 24.12 Potential years of working life lost (before 65 years of age) estimated with Ofce for National Statistics mortality data for 1979–2015. From Williams 
R, Alexander G, Armstrong I, et al. Disease burden and costs from excess alcohol consumption, obesity, and viral hepatitis: fourth report of the Lancet Standing Commission on 
Liver Disease in the UK. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier (The Lancet 2018; 391:1097–1107).

[[p926]]
870    HEPATOLOGY
consider whether the cause might be pre-hepatic, hepatic or post-hepatic, 
and there are often important clues in the  history (Box 24.11).
Pre-hepatic jaundice
This is caused either by haemolysis or by congenital hyperbilirubinaemia, 
and is characterised by an isolated raised bilirubin level.
In haemolysis, destruction of red blood cells or their marrow precur-
sors causes increased bilirubin production. Jaundice due to haemolysis 
is usually mild because a healthy liver can excrete a bilirubin load six-
times greater than normal before unconjugated bilirubin accumulates in 
the plasma. This does not apply to newborns, who have less capacity to 
metabolise bilirubin.
The most common form of non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinae-
mia is Gilbert syndrome, an inherited disorder of bilirubin metabolism 
(Box 24.12). Other inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism are very rare.
Hepatic jaundice
This is characterised by jaundice due to hepatic dysfunction (usually indi-
cated by abnormal liver enzymes) but normal biliary imaging. This can be 
due to acute hepatocellular injury (see Box 24.9), intrahepatic cholestasis 
(see Box 24.10) or decompensation of cirrhosis. ‘Hepatic’ jaundice can 
be a manifestation of extrahepatic disease such as sepsis or right heart 
failure. In all of these, jaundice results from an inability of the liver to 
transport bilirubin into the bile, occurring at any point between uptake of 
unconjugated bilirubin into the cells and transport of conjugated bilirubin 
into the canaliculi. In addition, swelling of cells and oedema resulting 
24.9  Common causes of elevated serum transaminases
Minor elevation (< 100 U/L*)
 Chronic hepatitis C
 Chronic hepatitis B
 Fatty liver disease
 Alcoholic hepatitis
 Haemochromatosis
Moderate elevation (100–300 U/L*)
As above plus:
 Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
 Autoimmune hepatitis
 Wilson’s disease
Major elevation (> 300 U/L*)
 Drugs (e.g. paracetamol)
 Acute viral hepatitis
 Autoimmune hepatitis
 Ischaemic hepatitis
 Toxins (e.g. Amanita phalloides
poisoning)
 Flare of chronic hepatitis B
*These ranges are indicative but do not rigidly discriminate between different aetiologies.
24.10  Causes of cholestatic jaundice
Hepatic
 Primary biliary cholangitis
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 Alcohol
 Drugs
 Hepatic inltrations (lymphoma, 
granuloma, amyloid, metastases)
 Cystic brosis
 Sepsis
 Pregnancy
 Inherited cholestatic liver disease 
(e.g. benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis)
 Right heart failure
Post-hepatic
 Carcinoma:
Ampullary
Pancreatic
Bile duct (cholangiocarcinoma)
Liver metastases
 Choledocholithiasis
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 Parasitic infection
 Traumatic biliary strictures
 Chronic pancreatitis
 IgG4 cholangitis
24.7  Presentation of liver disease
Severity
Acute liver injury
Chronic liver injury
Mild/moderate
Abnormal liver function tests
Abnormal liver function tests
Severe
Jaundice
Signs of cirrhosis ± portal 
hypertension
Very severe
Acute liver failure
Chronic liver failure*
Jaundice
Ascites
Hepatic encephalopathy
Portal hypertension with 
variceal bleeding
*May not occur until several years after cirrhosis has presented.
in mind in all patients in at-risk groups undergoing signicant surgery. 
Many liver disorders are more common in older age and can pursue 
a more aggressive course (Box 24.8).
Abnormal liver function tests
LFTs are frequently requested in patients who have no symptoms or signs 
of liver disease, as part of routine health checks, insurance medicals or 
drug monitoring. The prevalence of abnormal LFTs has been reported to 
be as high as 10%–20% in some studies. In the majority of cases, these 
will not reect signicant underlying liver disease. However, many patients 
with chronic liver disease are asymptomatic or have vague, non-spe-
cic symptoms. The most common abnormalities are alcohol-related or 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Since effective medical treatments are 
now available for many types of chronic liver disease, further evaluation 
is usually warranted to make sure the patient does not have a treatable 
condition. Biochemical abnormalities in chronic liver disease often uctu-
ate over time; even mild abnormalities can therefore indicate signicant 
underlying disease and so warrant follow-up and investigation.
When abnormal LFTs are detected, a thorough history should be com-
piled to determine the patient’s alcohol consumption, drug use (prescribed, 
over-the-counter or recreational), risk factors for viral hepatitis (e.g. blood 
transfusion, injection drug use, tattoos), the presence of autoimmune dis-
eases, family history, neurological symptoms and the presence of features 
of the metabolic syndrome, including diabetes and/or obesity (see Box 24.5
and Fig. 22.6). Stigmata of chronic liver disease should be looked for but 
further investigations are indicated even in the absence of these signs.
Both the pattern of enzyme abnormality (hepatitic or cholestatic) and 
the degree of elevation are helpful in determining the cause of underlying 
liver disease (Boxes 24.9 and 24.10). The investigations that make up a 
standard liver screen and additional or conrmatory tests are shown in 
Boxes 24.4 and 24.5. An algorithm for investigating abnormal LFTs is 
provided in Fig. 24.13
Jaundice
Jaundice is usually detectable clinically when the plasma bilirubin exceeds 
40 µmol/L (~2.5 mg/dL). The causes of jaundice overlap with the causes 
of abnormal LFTs discussed above. In a patient with jaundice it is useful to 
24.8  Liver disease in old age
 Alcoholic liver disease: 10% of cases present over the age of 70 years, when 
disease is more likely to be severe and has a worse prognosis.
 Hepatitis A: causes more severe illness and runs a more protracted course.
 Primary biliary cholangitis: one-third of cases are over 65 years.
 Liver abscess: more than 50% of all cases in the UK are over 60 years.
 Hepatocellular carcinoma: approximately 50% of cases in the UK present over 
the age of 65 years.
 Surgery: older people are less likely to survive liver surgery (including 
transplantation) because comorbidity is more prevalent.

[[p927]]
Presenting problems in liver disease    871
24
Bile ducts
dilated
Bile ducts
non-dilated
Action
Clinical situation
Management
Consider MRCP/EUS
Consider liver biopsy
Treat underlying disorder
Recheck with conjugated (direct) bilirubin
Exclude haemolysis
Isolated raised bilirubin
Raised GGT only
Hepatitic liver enzymes
Raised ALT or AST
Check GGT
Cholestatic liver enzymes
Raised ALP
Normal GGT/elevated ALP
Elevated GGT/elevated ALP
Full history/examination
Liver US (exclude focal lesion)
Aetiology screen with autoantibodies,
immunoglobulins, ferritin and transferrin
saturation (Box 24.4)
Full history/examination
Liver US
Aetiology screen including hepatitis B and C,
autoantibodies, immunoglobulins,
caeruloplasmin, α1-antitrypsin, ferritin and
transferrin saturation (Box 24.4)
Liver disease unlikely: exclude alternative
cause of raised ALP, e.g. bone disease
Reassure, as likely Gilbert syndrome
Full history and examination
Alcohol: stage disease; reduce alcohol to
safe limits/consider abstinence
Enzyme induction from medication;
review current medication
NAFLD: stage disease; lifestyle modification
(diet and exercise)
Alcohol: stage disease; reduce alcohol to
safe limits/consider abstinence
Specialist referral to treat underlying
disease depending on test results and
consider liver biopsy 
NAFLD/increased BMI: stage disease;
lifestyle modification (diet and exercise)
Fig. 24.13 Suggested management of abnormal liver function tests in asymptomatic patients. (ALP = alkaline phosphatase; ASP = aspartate aminotransferase; 
BMI = body mass index; EUS = endoscopic ultrasound; GGT = γ-glutamyl transferase; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; NAFLD = non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease; US = ultrasound)
from parenchymal damage may cause obstruction of the biliary canali-
culi. Consequently, the concentrations of both unconjugated and conju-
gated bilirubin in the blood increase. Jaundice due to acute parenchymal 
liver disease is associated with increases in transaminases (AST/ALT), 
but increases in cholestatic enzymes (GGT/ALP) may occur and suggest 
specic aetiologies (see below). Acute jaundice in the presence of an ALT 
of > 1000 U/L is highly suggestive of an infectious cause (e.g. hepatitis 
A, B or E), drugs (e.g. paracetamol) or hepatic ischaemia. Imaging is 
essential, not only to exclude a post-hepatic cause but to identify fea-
tures suggestive of cirrhosis or portal hypertension, and to dene the 
patency of the hepatic vasculature. Liver biopsy has an important role 
in dening the aetiology of unexplained hepatocellular jaundice and the 
extent of liver injury.
Post-hepatic jaundice
Post-hepatic jaundice may be caused by obstruction of the larger bile 
ducts, usually between the hilum and the ampulla of Vater, resulting in 
biliary dilatation on imaging.
The causes of post-hepatic jaundice are listed in Box 24.10. Post-
hepatic jaundice is most commonly due to diseases affecting the 
24.11  Key history points in patients with jaundice
Symptoms*
 Itch
 Abdominal pain (suggests 
gallstones)
 Weight loss (chronic liver disease 
and malignancy)
 Dark urine and pale stools
 Fever ± rigors
 Dry eyes/dry mouth
Recent drug history
Other
 Alcohol history
 Exposure to intravenous drugs or blood transfusions
 Travel history and country of birth
 Metabolic syndrome (increased body mass index ± type 2 diabetes/
hypertension)
 Autoimmune disease history
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Family history of liver disease, autoimmune disease or the metabolic  
syndrome
*Symptoms may be absent and abnormal liver function tests detected incidentally.

[[p928]]
872    HEPATOLOGY
extrahepatic bile ducts, which are often amenable to surgical or endo-
scopic correction.
Clinical features (Box 24.13) comprise those due to cholestasis itself, 
those due to secondary infection (cholangitis) and those of the under-
lying condition (Box 24.14). Post-hepatic jaundice is characteristically 
associated with pale stools, dark urine and itch, although these features 
also occur with intrahepatic cholestasis. If the gallbladder is palpable, the 
jaundice is unlikely to be caused by biliary obstruction due to gallstones, 
probably because a chronically inamed, stone-containing gallbladder 
cannot readily dilate. This is Courvoisier’s Law, and suggests that jaun-
dice is due to a malignant biliary obstruction (e.g. pancreatic cancer). 
Cholangitis is characterised by ‘Charcot’s triad’ of jaundice, right upper 
quadrant pain and fever.
Cholestatic jaundice is characterised by a relatively greater eleva-
tion of ALP and GGT than ALT, although a high ALT is often seen 
with ductal gallstones presumably due to a cholangitic element. 
Ultrasound is usually the rst-line imaging to determine whether there 
is dilatation of the biliary tree (Fig. 24.14). MRCP provides a more 
detailed assessment of the biliary tree, especially where ductal stones 
are suspected, whereas CT is preferred for assessing malignant 
lesions. EUS provides an additional modality for investigation of lower 
common bile duct obstruction.
Management of post-hepatic jaundice depends on the underlying 
cause and is discussed in the relevant sections below.
24.12  Congenital non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemia
Syndrome
Inheritance
Abnormality
Clinical features
Treatment
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia
Gilbert
Typically autosomal recessive, 
although autosomal dominant 
forms are also described
↓Glucuronyl transferase
Mild jaundice, especially with 
fasting
None necessary
↓Bilirubin uptake
Crigler–Najjar:
Type I
Autosomal recessive
Absent glucuronyl transferase
Rapid death in neonate 
(kernicterus)
Type II
Autosomal recessive
↓↓Glucuronyl transferase
Presents in neonate
Phenobarbital, phototherapy 
or liver transplant
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia
Dubin–Johnson
Autosomal recessive
↓Canalicular excretion of 
organic anions, including 
bilirubin
Mild jaundice
None necessary
Pigmentation of liver biopsy 
tissue
Rotor
Autosomal recessive
↓Bilirubin uptake
Mild jaundice
None necessary
↓Intrahepatic binding
24.13 Clinical features and complications of cholestatic jaundice
Cholestasis
Early features
 Jaundice
 Dark urine
 Pale stools
 Pruritus
Late features
 Malabsorption (vitamins A, D, E and K): 
weight loss, steatorrhoea, osteomalacia, 
bleeding tendency
 Xanthelasma and xanthomas
Cholangitis
 Fever
 Rigors
 Pain (if gallstones present)
Acute liver failure
Acute liver failure is a rare but life-threatening condition characterised 
by a rapid progressive deterioration in liver function. A variety of insults 
can lead to marked elevation of transaminases, or acute liver injury. This 
is considered severe if it results in jaundice and coagulopathy. A small 
number of such patients will go on to develop encephalopathy, which 
is the cardinal feature of acute liver failure. The absence of evidence of 
24.14  Clinical features suggesting an underlying cause of 
cholestatic jaundice*
Clinical feature
Causes
Jaundice
Static or increasing
Carcinoma
Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Fluctuating
Choledocholithiasis
Stricture
Pancreatitis
Choledochal cyst
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Abdominal pain
Choledocholithiasis
Pancreatitis
Choledochal cyst
Cholangitis
Choledocholithiasis
Stricture
Choledochal cyst
Abdominal scar
Stone
Stricture
Irregular hepatomegaly
Hepatic carcinoma
Palpable gallbladder
Carcinoma below cystic duct (usually 
pancreas)
Abdominal mass
Carcinoma
Pancreatitis (cyst)
Choledochal cyst
Occult blood in stools
Ampullary tumour
*Each of these diseases can give rise to almost any of the clinical features shown but the box 
indicates the most likely cause of the clinical features listed.

[[p929]]
Presenting problems in liver disease    873
24
pre-existing liver disease distinguishes it from encephalopathy due to 
decompensated cirrhosis or acute-on-chronic liver failure. It is critical, 
therefore, to understand whether liver failure is a truly acute event or an 
acute deterioration on a background of pre-existing injury (which may 
itself not have been diagnosed). Although liver biopsy may ultimately be 
necessary, it is the presence or absence of the clinical features suggest-
ing chronicity that guides the clinician.
Acute liver failure may be subclassied into hyperacute, acute and 
subacute, according to the interval between onset of jaundice and 
encephalopathy (Box 24.15). This can help to identify likely cause and 
predict prognosis. Patients with subacute liver failure are more likely to be 
drug-induced or of indeterminate cause, and have a worse outcome with 
medical care alone than those with a hyperacute course.
Pathophysiology
Any cause of hepatocyte damage can produce acute liver failure, pro-
vided it is sufciently severe (Fig. 24.15). Acute viral hepatitis is the most 
common cause worldwide, whereas paracetamol toxicity is the most fre-
quent cause in the UK. Acute liver failure occurs occasionally with other 
drugs (prescription, recreational or herbal), or from Amanita phalloides
(mushroom) poisoning, in autoimmune hepatitis, in acute fatty liver of 
pregnancy, in Wilson’s disease, following shock and, rarely, in extensive 
malignant disease of the liver. In 10% of cases, the cause of acute liver 
failure remains unknown and these patients are often labelled as having 
‘non-A–E viral hepatitis’ or ‘cryptogenic’ acute liver failure.
Clinical assessment
Cerebral disturbance (hepatic encephalopathy and/or cerebral oedema) 
is the cardinal manifestation of acute liver failure. The initial clinical features 
are often subtle and include reduced alertness and poor concentration, 
progressing through behavioural abnormalities, such as restlessness and 
aggressive outbursts, to drowsiness and coma (Box24.16). Cerebral 
oedema may occur due to increased intracranial pressure, causing 
un equal or abnormally reacting pupils, xed pupils, hypertensive epi-
sodes, bradycardia, hyperventilation, profuse sweating, local or general 
myoclonus, focal ts or decerebrate posturing. Papilloedema occurs 
rarely and is a late sign.
More general symptoms include weakness, nausea and vomiting. The 
patient may be jaundiced but jaundice may not be present at the outset 
(e.g. in paracetamol overdose), and there are a number of exceptions, 
including Reye syndrome, in which jaundice is rare. Occasionally, death 
may occur in hyperacute liver failure before jaundice develops. Fetor 
hepaticus can be present. The liver is usually of normal size but later 
 History (Box 24.11) and clinical examination
 Liver ultrasound
 Urinalysis for bilirubin/urobilinogen
Unexplained jaundice in an adult patient
Isolated bilirubin rise (other LFTs normal)
Normal liver ultrasound
Urobilinogen present in urine 
Pre-hepatic jaundice
Hepatic jaundice
Post-hepatic jaundice
Unconjugated
bilirubin rise*
Conjugated
bilirubin rise
Dubin–Johnson
and Rotor
syndromes
(very rare) 
*In healthy individuals and those with Gilbert syndrome serum bilirubin is
predominantly unconjugated. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia is present
when serum unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin is >20 µmol/L (~1.2 mg/L) AND
the conjugated (direct) fraction is <20% of total bilirubin
Positive
Haemolysis
work-up
including
Coombs test
Negative
Gilbert
syndrome
Raised conjugated bilirubin/
abnormal enzymes
No evidence of biliary disease
Raised conjugated bilirubin/
abnormal enzymes
Dilated bile ducts
Further imaging
(MRCP/CT/EUS)
Prothrombin time (severity marker)
Aetiology screen:
 acute viral hepatitis serology
 autoantibodies/immunoglobulins
 caeruloplasmin
 iron studies
Consider drug causes, sepsis,
congestion
Haemolysis screen
 blood film/reticulocyte count
 haptoglobin
 LDH
Fig. 24.14 Investigation of jaundice. (CT = computed tomography; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS = endoscopic ultrasound; LDH = lactate 
dehydrogenase; LFTs = liver function tests; MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography)
24.15  Classication of acute liver failure
Type
Time: jaundice to 
encephalopathy
Cerebral 
oedema
Common 
causes
Hyperacute
<  7 days
Common
Viral, 
paracetamol
Acute
8–28 days
Common
Cryptogenic, 
drugs
Subacute
29 days to 12 
weeks
Uncommon
Cryptogenic, 
drugs, 
autoimmune 
hepatitis

[[p930]]
874    HEPATOLOGY
becomes smaller. Hepatomegaly is unusual and, in the presence of a 
sudden onset of ascites, suggests venous outow obstruction as the 
cause (Budd–Chiari syndrome, p. 909). Splenomegaly is uncommon and 
never prominent. Ascites and oedema are late developments and may 
be a consequence of uid therapy.
Investigations
The patient should be investigated to determine the cause of the liver failure 
and the prognosis (Boxes 24.17 and 24.18). Hepatitis B core IgM antibody 
is the best screening test for acute hepatitis B infection, as liver damage is 
due to the immunological response to the virus, which has often been elim-
inated, and the test for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) may be negative 
by the time liver failure develops. The PT rapidly becomes prolonged as 
coagulation factor synthesis fails; this is the laboratory test of greatest prog-
nostic value and should be carried out at least twice daily. Vitamin K should 
be given to ensure that the PT is not prolonged as a result of underlying 
vitamin K deciency, but fresh frozen plasma should be avoided except in 
major bleeding as it will interfere with the use of PT for monitoring. Factor 
V levels can be used instead of the PT to assess the degree of liver impair-
ment. Plasma bilirubin also predicts outcome in non-paracetamol causes of 
acute liver failure. Plasma aminotransferase activity is particularly high after 
paracetamol overdose, reaching 100–500 times normal, but falls as liver 
damage progresses and is not helpful in determining prognosis. Plasma 
albumin remains normal unless the course is prolonged. Percutaneous liver 
biopsy is contraindicated because of the severe coagulopathy, but biopsy 
can be undertaken using the transjugular route if appropriate.
Miscellaneous
(< 5%)
Acute
liver failure
Viral infections
(5%)
Drugs
(70–80%)
Poisons
(< 5%)
Amanita phalloides
Paracetamol
Halothane
Antituberculous drugs
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA, 'ecstasy')
Herbal remedies
Hepatitis A, B, E (rare)
Wilson's disease
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Shock and cardiac failure
Budd–Chiari syndrome
Leptospirosis
Liver metastases
Lymphoma
      Cryptogenic
             (5–10%)
Non-A–E viral
hepatitis
Fig. 24.15 Causes of acute liver failure in the UK. The relative frequency of the different causes varies according to geographical area.
24.16  How to assess clinical grade of hepatic encephalopathy
Clinical grade
Clinical signs
Grade 1
Poor concentration, slurred speech, slow mentation, 
disordered sleep rhythm
Grade 2
Drowsy but easily rousable, occasional aggressive 
behaviour, lethargic
Grade 3
Marked delirium, drowsy, sleepy but responds to pain 
and voice, gross disorientation
Grade 4
Unresponsive to voice, may or may not respond to 
painful stimuli, unconscious
24.17  Investigations to determine the cause of acute liver failure
 Toxicology screen of blood and urine
 HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc
 IgM anti-HAV
 Anti-HEV, HCV, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, Epstein–Barr virus
 Caeruloplasmin, serum copper, urinary copper, slit-lamp eye examination
 Autoantibodies: ANA, ASMA, LKM, SLA
 Immunoglobulins
 Ultrasound of liver and Doppler of hepatic veins
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; ASMA = anti-smooth 
muscle antibody; HAV = hepatitis A virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV = hepatitis C 
virus; HEV = hepatitis E virus; IgM = immunoglobulin M; LKM = liver–kidney microsomal antibody; 
SLA = soluble liver antigen)
24.18  Adverse prognostic criteria in acute liver failure1
Paracetamol overdose
 pH < 7.25 at or beyond 24 hours following the overdose and after uid 
resuscitation
Or
 Prothrombin time > 100 secs plus encephalopathy grade 3 or 4 plus serum 
creatinine > 300 µmol/L (≅ 3.38 mg/dL) or anuria
Or
 Arterial lactate > 5 mmol/L at presentation and > 4 mmol/L 24 hours later after 
uid resuscitation
Non-paracetamol cases
 Prothrombin time > 100 secs (or INR > 6.5) with any grade of encephalopathy
Or
 Any three of the following2
Jaundice to encephalopathy time > 7 days
Age < 10 or > 40 years
Bilirubin > 300 µmol/L (≅  17.6 mg/dL)
Prothrombin time > 50 secs (or INR >3.5)
Unfavourable aetiology, e.g. seronegative hepatitis or idiosyncratic drug reaction
1Predict a mortality rate of ≥  90% and are an indication for possible liver transplantation. 2In 
the absence of encephalopathy INR > 2 after vitamin K repletion is mandatory.
(INR = International Normalised Ratio)

[[p931]]
Presenting problems in liver disease    875
24
Management
Patients with acute liver failure should be treated in a high-dependency or 
intensive care unit as soon as progressive prolongation of the PT occurs 
or hepatic encephalopathy is identied (Box 24.19), so that prompt treat-
ment of complications can be initiated (Box 24.20). Conservative treatment 
aims to support other organ systems in the hope that hepatic regeneration 
will occur. N-acetylcysteine therapy should be given early to all patients 
in whom paracetamol toxicity is suspected, although the benets are less 
clear in non-paracetamol-induced acute liver failure. Liver transplantation 
is an increasingly important treatment option for acute liver failure, and cri-
teria have been developed to identify patients unlikely to survive without a 
transplant (see Box 24.18). Patients should, wherever possible, be trans-
ferred to a transplant centre before these criteria are met to allow time for 
assessment and to maximise the time for a donor liver to become available. 
Survival following liver transplantation for acute liver failure is improving and 
1-year survival rates of 80%–90% can be expected. A number of articial 
liver support systems have been developed and evaluated for use as a 
bridge to either transplantation or recovery. None, however, has entered 
routine clinical use.
Hepatomegaly
Hepatomegaly may occur as the result of a general enlargement of the 
liver or because of primary or secondary liver tumour (Box 24.21). The 
most common liver tumours in Western countries are liver metastases, 
whereas primary liver cancer complicating chronic viral hepatitis is more 
common in the Far East. Unlike carcinoma metastases, those from 
 neuro-endocrine tumours typically cause massive hepatomegaly but 
without signicant weight loss. Cirrhosis can be associated with either 
hepatomegaly or reduced liver size in advanced disease.
Ascites
Ascites is present when there is accumulation of free uid in the perito-
neal cavity. Small amounts of ascites are asymptomatic, but with larger 
accumulations of uid (> 1 L) there is abdominal distension, fullness in the 
anks, shifting dullness on percussion and, when the ascites is marked, 
a uid thrill/uid wave. Other features include eversion of the umbilicus, 
herniae, abdominal striae, divarication of the recti and scrotal oedema. 
Dilated supercial abdominal veins may be seen if the ascites is due to 
portal hypertension.
Pathophysiology
The most common causes of ascites are cirrhosis, intra-abdominal malig-
nancy and heart failure. Many primary disorders of the peritoneum and 
visceral organs can also cause ascites, and these need to be considered 
even in a patient with chronic liver disease (Box 24.22). Splanchnic arterial 
vasodilatation is thought to be the main factor leading to ascites in cirrho-
sis. This is mediated by vasodilators (mainly nitric oxide) that are released 
when portal hypertension causes shunting of blood into the systemic 
circulation. Systemic arterial pressure falls due to pronounced splanchnic 
24.19  Monitoring in acute liver failure
Cardiorespiratory
 Pulse
 Blood pressure
 Central venous pressure
 Respiratory rate
Neurological
 Signs of intracranial hypertension including pupillary responses. Invasive 
intracranial pressure monitor is now less commonly used
 Conscious level
Fluid balance
 Hourly output (urine, vomiting, diarrhoea)
 Input: oral, intravenous
Blood analyses
 Arterial blood gases
 Peripheral blood count (including platelets)
 Sodium, potassium, HCO3 , calcium, magnesium
 Creatinine, urea
 Glucose (2-hourly in acute phase)
 Prothrombin time
Infection surveillance
 Cultures: blood, urine, throat, sputum, cannula sites
 Chest X-ray
 Temperature
24.20  Complications of acute liver failure
 Encephalopathy and cerebral oedema
 Hypoglycaemia
 Metabolic acidosis
 Infection (bacterial, fungal)
 Renal failure
 Multi-organ failure (hypotension and respiratory failure)
24.21  Causes of change in liver size
Large liver (hepatomegaly)
 Liver metastases
 Cirrhosis (early): non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, alcohol, haemochromatosis
 Right heart failure
 Multiple or large hepatic cysts
 Hepatic vein outow obstruction
 Inltration: amyloid
Small liver
 Cirrhosis (late)
24.22 Causes of ascites
Low SAAG
High SAAG
Common causes
Malignant disease:
Hepatic
Peritoneal
Cirrhosis
Cardiac failure
Other causes
Acute pancreatitis
Lymphatic obstruction
Infection:
Tuberculosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing enteropathy
Severe malnutrition
Hepatic venous occlusion:
Budd–Chiari syndrome1
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
(Veno-occlusive disease)
Rare causes
Hypothyroidism
Meigs syndrome2
Constrictive pericarditis
1Early Budd–Chiari syndrome presents with ascites with high protein content (> 25 g/L) and 
elevated SAAG. In chronic Budd–Chiari syndrome the protein concentration may fall but SAAG 
remains elevated. 2Meigs syndrome is the association of a right pleural effusion with or without 
ascites and a benign ovarian tumour. The ascites resolves on removal of the tumour. Although 
usually reported as being associated with a low SAAG, it can also be seen with a high SAAG.
(SAAG = serum–ascites albumin gradient; see text)

[[p932]]
876    HEPATOLOGY
vasodilatation as cirrhosis advances. This leads to activation of the 
renin–angiotensin system with secondary aldosteronism, increased sym-
pathetic nervous activity, increased atrial natriuretic hormone secretion 
and altered activity of the kallikrein–kinin system (Fig. 24.16). These sys-
tems tend to normalise arterial pressure initially but produce salt and 
water retention. In this setting, the combination of splanchnic arterial 
vasodilatation and portal hypertension alters intestinal capillary permea-
bility, promoting accumulation of uid within the peritoneum.
Investigations
Ultrasonography is the best means of detecting ascites, particularly in the 
obese and those with small volumes of uid. Paracentesis (if necessary 
under ultrasonic guidance) can be used to obtain ascitic uid for analysis. The 
appearance of ascitic uid may point to the underlying cause (Box 24.23). 
Pleural effusions are found in about 10% of patients, usually on the right 
side (hepatic hydrothorax); most are small and identied only on chest X-ray, 
but occasionally a massive hydrothorax occurs. Pleural effusions, particularly 
those on the left side, should not be assumed to be due to the ascites.
Measurement of the protein concentration and the serum–ascites 
albumin gradient (SAAG) can be a useful tool to distinguish ascites of 
different aetiologies. Cirrhotic patients typically develop ascites with a 
low protein concentration (‘transudate’; protein concentration < 25 g/L 
(2.5 g/dL)) and relatively few cells. In up to 30% of patients, however, the 
total protein concentration is >  30 g/L (3.0 g/dL). In these cases, it is use-
ful to calculate the SAAG by subtracting the concentration of the ascites 
uid albumin from the serum albumin. A gradient of > 11 g/L (1.1 g/dL) is 
96% predictive that ascites is due to portal hypertension. Venous outow 
obstruction due to cardiac failure or hepatic venous outow obstruction 
can also cause a SAAG of > 11 g/L (1.1 g/dL) but, unlike in cirrhosis, the 
total protein content is usually > 25 g/L (2.5 g/dL). Conversely, conditions 
including nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing enteropathy and severe 
malnutrition result in ascites with low protein concentration and a SAAG 
of < 11 g/L (1.1 g/dL) due to diminished serum oncotic pressure.
High protein ascites (‘exudate’; protein concentration > 25 g/L (2.5 g/
dL) or a SAAG of < 11 g/L (1.1 g/dL) raises the possibility of infection 
(especially tuberculosis), malignancy, pancreatic ascites or, rarely, 
hypothyroidism. Ascitic amylase activity of > 1000 U/L identies pan-
creatic ascites, whereas low ascites glucose concentrations suggest 
malignant disease or tuberculosis. Cytological examination may reveal 
malignant cells but has a low sensitivity unless large volumes are sent. 
Polymorphonuclear leucocyte counts of > 250×106/L strongly suggest 
infection (spontaneous bacterial peritonitis; see below). Laparoscopy can 
be valuable in detecting peritoneal disease.
The presence of triglyceride at a level > 1.1 g/L (110 mg/dL) is diagnos-
tic of chylous ascites and suggests anatomical or functional abnormality 
of lymphatic drainage from the abdomen. Chylous ascites has a charac-
teristic milky-white appearance.
Management
Successful treatment relieves discomfort but does not prolong life; if 
over-vigorous, it can produce serious disorders of uid/electrolyte bal-
ance, and precipitate hepatic encephalopathy (see below). Treatment 
of transudative ascites is based on restricting sodium intake, promoting 
urine output with diuretics and, if necessary, removing ascites directly by 
paracentesis. Exudative ascites due to malignancy is treated with para-
centesis but uid replacement is generally not required. During manage-
ment of ascites, the patient should be weighed regularly. Diuretics should 
be titrated to remove no more than 1 L of uid (or 1 kg body weight) daily 
to avoid excessive uid depletion.
Sodium restriction
Restriction of dietary sodium intake is essential to achieve negative 
sodium balance and a few patients can be managed satisfactorily by 
this alone. Restriction of sodium intake to 100 mmol/24 hrs (‘no added 
salt diet’) is usually adequate. Drugs containing relatively large amounts 
of sodium, and those promoting sodium retention, such as non-steroi-
dal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs), must be avoided (Box 24.24). 
Restriction of water intake to 1.0–1.5 L/24 hrs is rarely needed unless the 
plasma sodium falls below 125 mmol/L.
Diuretics
Most patients require diuretics in addition to sodium restriction. 
Spironolactone (100–400 mg/day) is the rst-line drug because it is a 
powerful aldosterone antagonist; it can, however, cause painful gynae-
comastia and hyperkalaemia, in which case amiloride (5–10 mg/day) 
can be substituted. This is often combined with a loop diuretic, such as 
furosemide (40–160 mg/day). Patients must be monitored for electrolyte 
imbalance and renal dysfunction. Diuresis may be improved if patients 
are rested in bed, perhaps because renal blood ow increases in the 
horizontal position. Patients who do not respond to maximal doses of 
Ascites
Kidney
Transudation of fluid
Reduced
oncotic
pressure
Portal
hypertension
Reduced
aldosterone
metabolism
Increased
aldosterone
Reduced
renal
blood flow
Activation
of
vasopressin
Under-filling
of circulation
Activation
of renin–
angiotensin
system
Splanchnic
arterial
vasodilatation
Reduced
albumin
Reduced
synthetic
function
Salt
and water
retention
Lymph formation
exceeds lymph
return
Cirrhosis
Fig. 24.16 Pathogenesis of ascites
24.23  Ascitic uid: appearance and analysis
Cause/appearance
 Cirrhosis: clear, straw-coloured or light green
 Malignant disease: bloody
 Infection: cloudy
 Biliary communication: heavy bile staining
 Lymphatic obstruction: milky-white (chylous)
Useful investigations
 Total albumin (plus serum albumin) and protein*
 Amylase
 Neutrophil count
 Cytology
 Microscopy and culture
*To calculate the serum–ascites albumin gradient (SAAG).

[[p933]]
Presenting problems in liver disease    877
24
spironolactone and furosemide (diuretic-resistant), or who are unable 
to tolerate these doses due to hyponatraemia or renal impairment 
(diure tic-intolerant), are considered to have refractory ascites and should 
be treated by other measures.
Paracentesis
First-line treatment of refractory ascites is large-volume paracentesis. 
Paracentesis to dryness is safe, provided the circulation is supported 
with an intravenous colloid such as human albumin (6–8 g per litre of 
ascites removed, usually as 100 mL of 20% or 25% human albumin 
solution (HAS) for every 2–3 L of ascites drained). Paracentesis can be 
used as an initial therapy or when other treatments fail. Drains should be 
removed after 6–12 hours to reduce risk of infection.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt
A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt (TIPSS; p. 883) can 
relieve resistant ascites but does not prolong life; it may be an option 
where the only alternative is frequent, large-volume paracentesis. TIPSS 
can be used in patients awaiting liver transplantation or in those with 
reasonable liver function, but can aggravate encephalopathy in those 
with poor function.
Complications
Renal failure
Renal dysfunction is commonly seen in patients with liver cirrhosis, 
related to pre-renal, intrinsic and post-renal causes. It is most frequently 
related to dehydration, diuretic therapy and/or sepsis. However, patients 
with cirrhosis and ascites may develop a distinct type of renal dysfunc-
tion termed hepatorenal syndrome (HRS).
Hepatorenal syndrome
HRS is renal dysfunction that occurs due to reduced renal perfusion, 
resulting from both haemodynamic alterations in the arterial circulation 
(splanchnic vasodilatation/renal vasoconstriction) and overactivity of 
endogenous vasoactive systems. HRS has traditionally been classied 
into two subtypes but the terminology has recently changed to reect 
changes in the understanding and denition of both acute kidney injury 
(AKI) and chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Type-1 HRS (now termed HRS-AKI) involves a rapid reduction in renal 
function (AKI) that is usually precipitated by an acute event, including 
bacterial infection, GI haemorrhage, alcoholic hepatitis or acute liver fail-
ure, which disturbs the abnormal renal haemodynamics and has a poor 
prognosis.
Traditionally HRS was diagnosed with a serum creatinine cutoff of 
> 1.5 g/dL (> 133 μmol/L) but this has been modied to use a change in 
renal function from baseline and removing the cutoff threshold. This was 
necessary to avoid delay in diagnosis and initiation of treatment for HRS. 
The diagnostic criteria from HRS AKI are shown in Box 24.25
Type II HRS (now termed HRS non-acute kidney injury or HRS-NAKI) 
is a stable or slowly progressive form of renal dysfunction developing 
over weeks to months, in the absence of an obvious precipitant. It is 
characterised clinically by diuretic-resistant ascites.
Management of HRS-AKI involves identifying and treating precipitating 
factors. Diuretics and beta-blockers should be discontinued. Nephrotoxic 
drugs including vasodilators and non-steroidal anti-inammatories 
should be stopped. Infections should be sought and treated. Volume 
replacement should be used to treat uid loss/decits. Intravenous albu-
min infusions in combination with terlipressin (1–2 mg every 4–6 hours) 
have been shown to improve short-term survival. In countries where 
terlipressin is not available, a combination of midodrine, octreotide and 
albumin may be used. TIPSS may be effective for treatment of HRS in 
highly selected patients. Haemodialysis may be considered in patients 
who fail to respond to treatment as either a bridge to transplant (in suit-
able patients) or as a bridge to recovery in patients with a reversible liver 
injury (typically acute liver failure).
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is the most common bacterial 
infection in patients with cirrhosis, and results from translocation of bac-
teria from the intestine into ascites. It may present with abdominal pain or 
fever in a patient with obvious features of cirrhosis and ascites. However, 
abdominal signs are mild or absent in about one-third of patients, and 
it may present with hepatic encephalopathy or a non-specic deteriora-
tion. SBP is associated with a high rate of acute kidney injury and mortal-
ity, and prompt recognition is critical. Diagnostic paracentesis may show 
cloudy uid, and an ascites neutrophil count of > 250 × 106/L almost 
invariably indicates infection. Most organisms isolated are of enteric ori-
gin and Escherichia coli is the most frequently found. Ascitic culture in 
blood culture bottles gives the highest yield of organisms. SBP needs 
to be differentiated from other intra-abdominal emergencies, and the 
nding of multiple organisms on culture should arouse suspicion of a 
perforated viscus.
Treatment should be started immediately with broad-spectrum antibi-
otics, such as cefotaxime or piperacillin/tazobactam). Patients with jaun-
dice or renal impairment also benet from intravenous albumin (1.5 g/kg 
on day 1 and 1.0 g/kg on day 3). Recurrence of SBP is common, but 
is reduced by prophylactic antibiotics such as noroxacin (400 mg/day), 
ciprooxacin (750 mg/week) or cotrimoxazole (960 mg/day). Primary 
antibiotic prophylaxis also reduces the incidence of SBP in patients with 
low ascitic protein < 15 g/L.
Prognosis
Only 10%–20% of patients survive for 5 years from the rst appearance 
of ascites due to cirrhosis. The outlook is not universally poor, how-
ever, and is best in those with well-maintained liver function and a good 
response to therapy. The prognosis is also better when a treatable cause 
for the underlying cirrhosis is present or when a precipitating cause for 
ascites, such as excess salt intake, is found. The mortality at 1 year is 
50% following the rst episode of bacterial peritonitis.
24.24 Some drugs containing relatively large amounts of 
sodium or causing sodium retention
High sodium content
 Alginates
 Antacids
 Antibiotics
 Phenytoin
 Effervescent preparations (e.g. aspirin, 
calcium, paracetamol)
 Sodium valproate
Sodium retention
 Carbenoxolone
 Glucocorticoids
 Metoclopramide
 Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
 Oestrogens
24.25 Diagnostic criteria for HRS-AKI
 Diagnosis of cirrhosis, acute liver failure, acute on chronic liver failure
 Increase in serum creatinine ≥ 26.5 μmol/L (≥ 0.3 mg/dl) within 48 hours or 
≥ 50% from baseline according to IAC-AKI criteria
and/or
 Urinary output ≤ 0.5 ml/kg per hr for ≥ 6 hrs
 No response after 2 consecutive days of diuretic withdrawal and volume 
expansion with albumin. The recommended dose of albumin is 1 g/kg body 
weight to a maximum of 100 g
 Absence of shock
 No current or recent treatment with nephrotoxic drugs
 Absence of parenchymal kidney disease, as dened as
1 Absence of proteinuria (> 500 mg/day)
2 Absence of microhaematuria (> 50 RBC per high power eld)
3 Normal ndings on renal ultrasound
(AKI = acute kidney injury; HRS = hepatorenal syndrome; IAC = International 
Aascites Club; RBC = red blood cells)

[[p934]]
878    HEPATOLOGY
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy is a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by liver 
disease that occurs in 30%–40% of patients with cirrhosis. It causes a 
spectrum of symptoms ranging from mild uctuating cognitive impair-
ment to coma. The degree of encephalopathy can be graded from 1 to 
4, and this is useful in assessing progression or response to therapy (see 
Box 24.10). The earliest features are very mild and easily overlooked, 
but as the condition becomes more severe, inability to concentrate, 
delirium, disorientation, drowsiness, slurring of speech and eventually 
coma develop. Seizures are rare. Examination usually shows a apping 
tremor (asterixis), inability to perform simple mental arithmetic tasks or 
to draw objects such as a star (constructional apraxia, p. 861) and, as 
the condition progresses, hyper-reexia and bilateral extensor plantar 
responses. Hepatic encephalopathy rarely causes focal neurological 
signs; if these are present, other causes must be sought. Fetor hepati-
cus, a sweet musty odour to the breath, is usually present but is more a 
sign of liver failure and portosystemic shunting than of hepatic encepha-
lopathy. Rarely, chronic hepatic encephalopathy (hepatocerebral degen-
eration) gives rise to variable combinations of cerebellar dysfunction, 
Parkinsonian syndromes, spastic paraplegia and dementia.
Many conditions can cause similar presentations to encephalopa-
thy. Simple delirium needs to be differentiated from infection, alcohol 
withdrawal and Wernicke’s encephalopathy, and coma from subdural 
haematoma, which can occur after a fall, especially in alcohol misuse 
(Box 24.26). When an episode develops acutely, a precipitating factor 
may be found (Box 24.27).
Pathophysiology
Hepatic encephalopathy is thought to be due to a disturbance of brain 
function provoked by circulating gut-derived neurotoxins that are nor-
mally metabolised by the liver and excluded from the systemic circu-
lation. Affected patients usually have evidence of both liver failure and 
portosystemic shunting of blood, but the balance between these varies 
between individuals. Some degree of liver failure is a key factor, as por-
tosystemic shunting of blood alone hardly ever causes encephalopathy. 
The ‘neurotoxins’ causing encephalopathy are unknown but are thought 
to be mainly nitrogenous substances produced in the gut, at least in 
part by bacterial action. Ammonia has traditionally been considered an 
important factor, but the correlation between serum ammonia levels and 
encephalopathy is poor. Recent interest has focused on γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) as a mediator, along with octopamine, amino acids, mer-
captans and fatty acids that can act as neurotransmitters. The brain in 
cirrhosis may also be sensitised to other factors, such as drugs that can 
precipitate hepatic encephalopathy (see Box 24.27). Disruption of the 
function of the blood–brain barrier is a feature of acute hepatic failure and 
may lead to cerebral oedema.
Investigations
The diagnosis can usually be made clinically; when doubt exists, an elec-
troencephalogram shows diffuse slowing of the normal alpha waves with 
eventual development of delta waves. The arterial ammonia is usually 
increased in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Increased concen-
trations can, however, occur in the absence of clinical encephalopathy, 
rendering this investigation of little diagnostic value.
Management
The principles are to treat or remove precipitating causes (Box 24.27) 
and to suppress the production of neurotoxins by bacteria in the bowel. 
Lactulose (15–30 mL 3 times daily) is increased gradually until the bowels 
are moving twice daily. It produces an osmotic laxative effect, reduces 
the pH of the colonic content, thereby limiting colonic ammonia absorp-
tion, and promotes the incorporation of nitrogen into bacteria. Phosphate 
enemas may be required in patients where the oral route is compro-
mised or in patients with refractory constipation. Rifaximin (550 mg twice 
daily) is a well-tolerated, non-absorbed antibiotic that acts by reducing 
the bacterial content of the bowel and is effective in reducing episodes 
of recurrent hepatic encephalopathy. There is some evidence to sup-
port the amino acid combination l-ornithine l-arginine (LOLA) in lowering 
ammonia levels and improving encephalopathy. In cases of reduced con-
scious level, endotracheal intubation may be required for airway protec-
tion. Dietary protein restriction is no longer recommended because it can 
24.26 Differential diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy
 Intracranial bleed (subdural/extradural haematoma)
 Drug or alcohol intoxication
 Delirium tremens/alcohol withdrawal
 Wernicke’s encephalopathy
 Primary psychiatric disorders
 Hypoglycaemia
 Neurological Wilson’s disease
 Post-ictal state
24.27 Factors precipitating hepatic encephalopathy
 Drugs (especially sedatives, antidepressants)
 Dehydration (including diuretics, paracentesis)
 Portosystemic shunting
 Infection
 Hypokalaemia
 Hyponatraemia
 Constipation
 ↑Protein load (including gastrointestinal bleeding)
A
B
C
Fig. 24.17 

[[p935]]
Cirrhosis    879
24
lead to a worsening nutritional state in already malnourished patients. 
Chronic or refractory encephalopathy is one of the main indications for 
liver transplantation.
Variceal bleeding
Acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage from gastro-oesophageal 
varices (Fig. 24.17) is common in chronic liver disease. Investigation and 
management are discussed on page 797 and the specic management 
of variceal bleeding on page 882.
Cirrhosis
Cirrhosis is characterised by diffuse hepatic brosis and nodule forma-
tion. It can occur at any age, has signicant morbidity and is an impor-
tant cause of premature death. It is the most common cause of portal 
hypertension. Worldwide, the most common causes are chronic viral 
hepatitis, prolonged excessive alcohol consumption and NAFLD, but any 
condition leading to persistent or recurrent hepatocyte injury may lead to 
cirrhosis. The causes of cirrhosis are listed in Box 24.28
Cirrhosis may also occur in prolonged biliary injury, as is found in pri-
mary biliary cholangitis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and 
post-surgical biliary strictures. Persistent impairment of venous return 
from the liver, such as is found in sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS; 
veno-occlusive disease), Budd–Chiari syndrome and cardiac hepato-
pathy, can also result in cirrhosis.
Pathophysiology
Following liver injury, stellate cells in the space of Disse (see Fig. 24.3) are 
activated by cytokines produced by Kupffer cells and hepatocytes. This 
transforms the stellate cell into a myobroblast-like cell, capable of pro-
ducing collagen, pro-inammatory cytokines and other mediators that 
promote hepatocyte damage and tissue brosis (see Fig. 24.4).
Cirrhosis is technically a histological diagnosis (Fig. 24.18), although 
most cases will be diagnosed on a combination of imaging, clinical signs 
and brosis markers. Fibrosis evolves over years, and the progression 
can be described semi-quantitatively (Fig. 24.19). Fibrosis and wide-
spread hepatocyte loss lead to distortion of the normal liver architecture 
that disrupts the hepatic vasculature, causing portosystemic shunts. 
These changes usually affect the whole liver, but in biliary cirrhosis (e.g. 
PBC) they can be patchy.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is highly variable. Some patients are asymptomatic 
and the diagnosis is made incidentally at ultrasound or at surgery. Others 
present with isolated hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, signs of portal hyper-
tension or hepatic insufciency. When symptoms are present, they are often 
non-specic and include weakness, fatigue, muscle cramps, weight loss, 
anorexia, nausea and upper abdominal discomfort (Box 24.29). Cirrhosis 
will occasionally present because of shortness of breath due to a large right 
pleural effusion, or with hepatopulmonary syndrome (p. 909).
Hepatomegaly is common when the cirrhosis is due to alcoholic 
liver disease or haemochromatosis. Progressive hepatocyte destruc-
tion and brosis gradually reduce liver size as the disease progresses 
in other causes of cirrhosis. The liver is often hard, irregular and 
non-tender. Jaundice is mild when it rst appears and is due primarily 
to a failure to excrete bilirubin. Palmar erythema (redness over the 
thenar and hypothenar eminences) can be seen early in the disease 
but is of limited diagnostic value, as it occurs in many other conditions 
associated with a hyper-dynamic circulation, including pregnancy, as 
well as being found in some healthy people. Spider telangiectasias (or 
spider naevi) occur and comprise a central arteriole (that occasion-
ally raises the skin surface), from which small vessels radiate. They 
blanch with pressure and rell from the centre outwards, are usually 
found on the hands, face and upper chest. One or two small spider 
telangiectasias may be present in up to 15% of young healthy adults 
and may occur transiently in greater numbers in the third trimester of 
pregnancy, but otherwise multiple spider telangiectasias are a strong 
24.28  Causes of cirrhosis
 Alcohol
 Chronic viral hepatitis (B or C)
 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
 Immune:
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Autoimmune liver disease
 Biliary:
Primary biliary cholangitis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Cystic brosis
 Genetic:
Haemochromatosis
Wilson’s disease
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
 Cryptogenic (unknown – 15%)
 Chronic venous outow obstruction
 Cardiac hepatopathy with chronic 
hepatic congestion
 Any chronic liver disease
PT
PT
PT
CN
A
B
C
Fig. 24.18 Histological features in normal liver, hepatic brosis and cirrhosis.
(PT) to the central veins. The portal tract contains a normal intralobular bile duct 
pink, arrows) spreading out around the hepatic vein and single liver cells (pericellular) 
architecture is disrupted. The normal arrangement of portal tracts and hepatic veins 
is now lost and nodules of proliferating hepatocytes are broken up bystrands of 
pink-/orange-staining brous tissue (arrows) forming cirrhotic nodules (CN).

[[p936]]
880    HEPATOLOGY
indicator of liver disease. Florid spider telangiectasia and gynaeco-
mastia are most common in alcohol- related cirrhosis, possibly related 
to phyto-oestrogens in alcoholic drinks. Pigmentation is most strik-
ing in haemochromatosis and in any cirrhosis associated with pro-
longed cholestasis. Clubbing of the ngers and toes is not a sign of 
cirrhosis but is seen in combination with hypoxia in hepatopulmonary 
syndrome.
Endocrine changes are noticed more readily in men, who show loss of 
male hair distribution and testicular atrophy. Gynaecomastia is common 
and can be due to drugs such as spironolactone. Easy bruising becomes 
more frequent as cirrhosis advances.
Splenomegaly and collateral vessel formation are features of portal 
hypertension, which occurs in more advanced disease (see below).
Jaundice, ascites, encephalopathy and variceal bleeding signify 
advanced disease, and are associated with a worse prognosis. The term 
‘hepatic decompensation’ or ‘decompensated liver disease’ is often 
used when any of these are present.
Other clinical and laboratory features may be present (Box 24.30); 
these include peripheral oedema, renal failure, and hypoalbuminae-
mia and coagulation abnormalities due to defective protein synthesis. 
Anaemia is common and often multifactorial, due to a combination of 
chronic inammation, bone marrow suppression, haemolysis or chronic 
blood loss.
Management
This includes treatment of the underlying cause, maintenance of nutri-
tion and treatment of complications, including ascites, hepatic encephal-
opathy, portal hypertension and varices.
Nutrition in cirrhosis
Malnutrition is a frequent complication, affecting up to 50% of patients 
with decompensated cirrhosis. Loss of muscle mass (sarcopenia) is 
associated with a higher rate of complications including infections, 
encephalopathy and ascites. Although BMI is the most widely used 
measure of nutritional status, sarcopenia can coexist with obesity 
especially in patients with NAFLD. Handgrip strength is a simple and 
inexpensive way to assess muscle function, and predicts morbidity 
and mortality in cirrhosis. Daily calorie intake should be no lower than 
35 kcal/kg body weight with a daily protein intake of 1.2–1.5 g/kg. 
A late evening snack will help to minimise overnight fasting which 
could otherwise trigger a catabolic state in cirrhosis. If patients are 
unable to achieve adequate oral intake, enteral feeding should be 
considered.
Screening for complications
Once the diagnosis of cirrhosis is made, endoscopy should be consid-
ered to screen for oesophageal varices. As cirrhosis is associated with 
an increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, patients should be placed 
under regular surveillance for it. Cirrhosis is associated with an increased 
risk of osteoporosis and associated fractures, and bone mineral density 
measurement is recommended.
Chronic liver failure due to cirrhosis can also be treated by liver trans-
plantation. This currently accounts for about three-quarters of all liver 
transplants.
Prognosis
Most chronic liver diseases run a gradually progressive course, although 
many patients present with advanced disease and/or serious complica-
tions that carry a high mortality. Prognosis is more favourable when the 
underlying cause can be corrected. Cirrhosis can be categorised into two 
prognostic groups: compensated and decompensated. Decompensated 
cirrhosis is dened by the presence of complications, including ascites, 
variceal bleeding, jaundice and encephalopathy, which are the main 
determinants of patient survival. Compensated patients have a relatively 
good prognosis with median survival >12 years. However, in decompen-
sated cirrhosis median survival is around 2 years, albeit with signicant 
patient-to-patient variability.
Raised bilirubin, low albumin and prolonged PT reect impaired liver 
function. Along with renal dysfunction and hyponatraemia, these are all 
bad prognostic features (Box 24.31 and Fig. 24.20). Prognostic scores 
including Child–Pugh and MELD (Model for End-stage Liver Disease) 
scores can be used to assess prognosis in chronic liver disease. MELD 
is a complex algorithm including serum creatinine, serum bilirubin and 
INR (Box 24.32). The MELD-Na score incorporates serum sodium into 
this calculation and provides better prognostic accuracy in predicting 
mortality in patients awaiting liver transplantation. The UKELD (United 
Kingdom Model of End-stage Liver Disease) score is based on the 
F3: Severe fibrosis with
numerous bridges or septa
F0: No fibrosis
F1: Fibrous portal
expansion
F2: Fibrous portal
expansion with few
bridges or septa
F4: Cirrhosis
Fig. 24.19 Progressive liver brosis assessed semi-quantitatively using 
Metavir scoring system.
24.29  Clinical features of hepatic cirrhosis
 Hepatomegaly (although liver may also be small)
 Jaundice
 Ascites
 Circulatory changes: spider telangiectasia, palmar erythema
 Endocrine changes: loss of libido, hair loss
Men: gynaecomastia, testicular atrophy, impotence
Women: breast atrophy, irregular menses, amenorrhoea
 Haemorrhagic tendency: bruises, purpura, epistaxis
 Portal hypertension: splenomegaly, collateral vessels, variceal bleeding
 Hepatic encephalopathy
 Other features: pigmentation (haemochromatosis), Dupuytren’s contracture 
(alcohol excess)
24.30 Features of chronic liver failure
 Worsening synthetic liver function:
Prolonged prothrombin time
Low albumin
 Jaundice
 Variceal bleeding
 Hepatic encephalopathy
 Ascites:
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Hepatorenal failure

[[p937]]
Portal hypertension    881
24
same variables as MELD-Na and is used in the United Kingdom to 
determine the need for liver transplantation. A score ≥ 49 indicates a 
9% 1-year risk of death and is the minimum score required for listing for 
liver transplantation for liver failure. Although these scores give a guide 
to prognosis, the course of cirrhosis is unpredictable, being heavily 
inuenced by the incidence of sporadic decompensating events (e.g. 
sepsis, variceal bleeding, etc.).
Acute on chronic liver failure
Acute on chronic liver failure (ACLF) is a term used to describe acute 
decompensation of chronic liver disease with features of liver failure 
(jaundice and coagulopathy) and other extra-hepatic organ failures. It is 
associated with a high short-term mortality. Common triggering events 
include alcoholic hepatitis, systemic infection or viral hepatitis. However 
up to 40% of patients have no identiable precipitant. Persistent inam-
mation and immune dysfunction results in a systemic inammatory 
response syndrome leading to extra-hepatic organ failure. The number 
of extra-hepatic organs involved determines prognosis. The 28-day mor-
tality with single organ failure (typically renal failure or hepatic encepha-
lopathy) is 23%, increasing to 32% in patients with two organ failures 
and > 75% in patients with three or more organ failures. Management 
involves identication and treatment of the precipitating event and organ 
support as required.
Portal hypertension
Portal hypertension frequently complicates cirrhosis but has other 
causes. The normal hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG – 
difference between the wedged hepatic venous pressure (WHVP) 
and free hepatic venous pressure (FHVP); see below) is 5–6 mmHg. 
Clinically signicant portal hypertension is present when the gradient 
exceeds 10 mmHg and risk of variceal bleeding increases beyond a 
gradient of 12 mmHg. Causes are classied in accordance with the 
main sites of obstruction to blood ow in the portal venous system 
(Fig. 24.21). Extrahepatic portal vein obstruction is the usual source 
of portal hypertension in childhood and adolescence, while cirrhosis 
causes at least 90% of cases of portal hypertension in adults in devel-
oped countries. Schistosomiasis is the most common cause of por-
tal hypertension worldwide but is infrequent outside endemic areas, 
such as Egypt.
Clinical features
The clinical features result principally from portal venous congestion 
and collateral vessel formation (Box 24.33). Splenomegaly is a car-
dinal nding and a diagnosis of portal hypertension is unusual when 
splenomegaly cannot be detected clinically or by ultrasonography. The 
spleen is rarely enlarged more than 5 cm below the left costal mar-
gin in adults but more marked splenomegaly can occur in childhood 
and adolescence. Collateral vessels may be visible on the anterior 
abdominal wall and occasionally several radiate from the umbilicus to 
form a ‘caput medusae’ (p. 860). Rarely, a large umbilical collateral 
vessel has a blood ow sufcient to give a venous hum on ausculta-
tion (Cruveilhier–Baumgarten syndrome). The most important collateral 
vessel formation occurs in the oesophagus and stomach, as this can 
be a source of severe bleeding. Rectal varices also cause bleeding 
and are often mistaken for haemorrhoids (which are no more common 
in portal hypertension than in the general population). Fetor hepaticus 
results from portosystemic shunting of blood, which allows mercaptans 
to pass directly to the lungs.
Ascites occurs as a result of renal sodium retention and portal hyper-
tension that may be due, for example, to post-hepatic causes (hepatic 
outow obstruction, p. 875) or cirrhosis.
The most important consequence of portal hypertension is variceal 
bleeding, which commonly arises from oesophageal varices located 
within 3–5 cm of the gastro-oesophageal junction, or from gastric 
varices. The size of the varices, endoscopic variceal features such as 
red spots and stripes, high portal pressure and liver failure are all fac-
tors that predispose to bleeding. Drugs capable of causing mucosal 
erosion, such as salicylates and NSAIDs, can also precipitate bleeding. 
Variceal bleeding is often severe, and recurrent if preventative treatment 
is not given.
24.31 Child–Pugh classication of prognosis in cirrhosis
Score
1
2
3
Encephalopathy
None
Mild
Marked
Bilirubin (µmol/L (mg/dL))*
Primary biliary 
cholangitis/sclerosing 
cholangitis
<  68 (4 )
68–170 
(4 10 )
> 170 (10 )
Other causes of 
cirrhosis
< 34 (2 )
34–50 (2 3 )
> 50 (3 )
Albumin (g/L (g/dL))
> 35 (3.5 )
28–35 
(2.8 3.5 )
< 28 (2.8 )
Prothrombin time
(secs prolonged)
<  4
4–6
>  6
Ascites
None
Mild
Marked
Add the individual scores:  
<  7 = Child’s A, 7–9 = Child’s B, > 9 = Child’s C
*To convert bilirubin in µmol/L to mg/dL, divide by 17.
100
(%)
75
50
25
A
B
C
0
1 year
5 years
10 years
Fig. 24.20 Survival in cirrhosis by Child–Pugh score.
24.32  One-year survival rate depending on MELD score
MELD score
1-year survival (%)
No complications
Complications*
<  9
97
90
10–19
90
85
20–29
70
65
30–39
70
50
MELD from SI units
10 × (0.378 [ln serum bilirubin (µmol/L)] + 1.12 [ln INR] + 0.957 [ln serum 
creatinine (µmol/L)] + 0.643)
MELD from non-SI units
3.8 [ln serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] + 11.2 [ln INR] + 9.3 [ln serum creatinine 
(mg/dL)] + 6.4
ln = natural log. To calculate online, go to https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
resources/allocation-calculators/meld-calculator/
*’Complications’ means the presence of ascites, encephalopathy or variceal bleeding.
(INR = International Normalised Ratio; MELD = Model for End-stage Liver Disease)

[[p938]]
882    HEPATOLOGY
Pathophysiology
Increased portal vascular resistance leads to a gradual reduction in the 
ow of portal blood to the liver and simultaneously to the development of 
collateral vessels, allowing portal blood to bypass the liver and enter the 
systemic circulation directly. Portosystemic shunting occurs, particularly 
in the gastrointestinal tract and especially the distal oesophagus, stom-
ach and rectum, in the anterior abdominal wall, and in the renal, lumbar, 
ovarian and testicular vasculature. Stomal varices can also occur at the 
site of an ileostomy. As collateral vessel formation progresses, more than 
half of the portal blood ow may be shunted directly to the systemic 
circulation. Increased portal ow contributes to portal hypertension but 
is not the dominant factor.
Investigations
The diagnosis is often made clinically. Portal venous pressure measure-
ments are rarely needed for clinical assessment or routine management 
but can be used to conrm portal hypertension and to differentiate sinu-
soidal and pre-sinusoidal forms. Pressure measurements are made by 
using a balloon catheter inserted using the transjugular route (via the 
inferior vena cava into a hepatic vein and then hepatic venule) to meas-
ure the WHVP. This is an indirect measurement of portal vein pressure. 
Thrombocytopenia is common due to hypersplenism, and platelet 
counts are usually in the region of 100 ×109/L; values below 50×109/L 
are uncommon. Leucopenia occurs occasionally but anaemia is seldom 
attributed directly to hypersplenism.
Endoscopy is the most useful investigation to determine whether gas-
tro-oesophageal varices are present (see Fig. 24.17). When cirrhosis 
is diagnosed, endoscopy should be performed to screen for oesoph-
ageal varices (and repeated every 2–3 years if initially absent). However, 
this may not be needed in patients with a normal platelet count and 
low liver stiffness (< 20 kPa) who are at low risk of signicant varices. 
Ultrasonography often shows features of portal hypertension, such as 
splenomegaly and collateral vessels, and can sometimes indicate the 
cause, such as cirrhosis or portal vein thrombosis. CT and magnetic 
resonance angiography can identify the extent of portal vein clot and 
check hepatic vein patency.
Management
Acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage from gastro-oesophageal 
varices is a common manifestation of chronic liver disease. In the pres-
ence of portal hypertension, the risk of a variceal bleed occurring within 
2 years varies from 7% for small varices up to 30% for large varices. The 
mortality following a variceal bleed has improved to around 15% overall 
but is still about 45% in those with poor liver function (i.e. Child–Pugh C).
The management of portal hypertension is largely focused on the pre-
vention and/or control of variceal haemorrhage. It is important to remem-
ber, though, that bleeding can also result from peptic ulceration, which is 
more common in patients with liver disease than in the general popula-
tion. The investigation and management of gastrointestinal bleeding are 
dealt with in more detail on page 797.
Primary prevention of variceal bleeding
If non-bleeding varices are identied at endoscopy, non-selec-
tive β-adrenoceptor antagonist (β-blocker) therapy with propranolol 
(80–160 mg/day) or nadolol (40–240 mg/day) is effective in reducing por-
tal venous pressure. Administration of these drugs at doses that reduce 
the heart rate by 25% has been shown to be effective in the primary 
prevention of variceal bleeding. In patients with cirrhosis, treatment 
with propranolol reduces variceal bleeding by 47% (number needed to 
treat for benet (NNTB) 10), death from bleeding by 45% (NNTB 25) and 
overall mortality by 22% (NNTB 16). The efcacy of β-blockers in pri-
mary prevention is similar to that of prophylactic banding, which may 
also be considered, particularly in patients who are unable to tolerate or 
adhere to β-blocker therapy. Carvedilol, a non-cardioselective vasodilat-
ing β-blocker, is also effective and may be better tolerated at doses of 
6.25–12.5 mg/day.
Management of acute variceal bleeding
The priority in acute bleeding is to restore the circulation, not least because 
shock reduces liver blood ow and causes further deterioration of liver 
function. However, restrictive transfusion (aiming for a haemoglobin level 
> 70 g/L) is associated with better outcomes than liberal transfusion. The 
source of bleeding should always be conrmed by endoscopy because 
about 20% of patients are bleeding from non-variceal lesions. Management 
of acute variceal bleeding is described in Box 24.34 and illustrated in Fig. 
24.22. All patients with cirrhosis and gastrointestinal bleeding should 
receive prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as intravenous 
cephalosporin or piperacillin/tazobactam, because sepsis is common and 
treatment with antibiotics improves survival. The measures used to control 
acute variceal bleeding include vasoactive medications (e.g. terlipressin), 
endoscopic therapy (banding), balloon tamponade and TIPSS.
Pharmacological reduction of portal venous pressure Terlipressin is a 
synthetic vasopressin analogue that, in contrast to vasopressin, can be 
given by intermittent injection rather than continuous infusion. It reduces 
Post-hepatic post-sinusoidal
Budd–Chiari syndrome
5
Intrahepatic post-sinusoidal
Veno-occlusive disease
4
Sinusoidal
Cirrhosis*
Polycystic liver disease
Nodular regenerative
hyperplasia
Metastatic malignant
disease
3
Intrahepatic
pre-sinusoidal
Schistosomiasis*
Congenital hepatic
fibrosis
Drugs
Vinyl chloride
Sarcoidosis
2
Pre-hepatic pre-sinusoidal
Portal vein thrombosis due to sepsis (umbilical,
portal pyaemia) or procoagulopathy or secondary
to cirrhosis
Abdominal trauma including surgery
1
5
4
3
2
1
Splenic
vein
Spleen
Superior
mesenteric vein
Blood
from gut
Heart
Inferior vena cava
Hepatic vein
Portal vein
Blood
flow
Liver
Blood
flow
Fig. 24.21 Classication of portal hypertension according to site of vascular 
obstruction *Most common cause. Note that splenic vein occlusion can also follow 
pancreatitis, leading to gastric varices.
24.33  Complications of portal hypertension
 Variceal bleeding: oesophageal, 
gastric, other (rare)
 Congestive gastropathy
 Hypersplenism
 Ascites
 Iron deciency anaemia
 Renal failure
 Hepatic encephalopathy

[[p939]]
Portal hypertension    883
24
portal blood ow and/or intrahepatic resistance and hence brings down 
portal pressure. It lowers mortality in the setting of acute variceal bleed-
ing. The dose of terlipressin is 2 mg intravenously 4 times daily until 
bleeding stops, and then 1 mg 4 times daily for up to 72 hours. Caution 
is needed in patients with severe ischaemic heart disease or peripheral 
vascular disease because of the drug’s vasoconstrictor properties. In 
countries where terlipressin is not available, octreotide is a frequently 
used alternative.
Variceal ligation (‘banding’) This is the most widely used initial treatment 
and is undertaken, if possible, at the time of diagnostic endoscopy (see 
Fig. 24.17C ). It stops variceal bleeding in over 90% of patients and can 
be repeated if bleeding recurs. Band ligation involves the varices being 
sucked into a cap placed on the end of the endoscope, allowing them 
to be occluded with a tight rubber band. The occluded varix subse-
quently sloughs with variceal obliteration. Banding is repeated every 2–4 
weeks until all varices are obliterated. Regular follow-up endoscopy is 
required to identify and treat any recurrence of varices. Band ligation has 
fewer side-effects than sclerotherapy, a technique in which varices were 
injected with a sclerosing agent, and has largely replaced it. Prophylactic 
acid suppression with proton pump inhibitors may reduce the risk of 
secondary bleeding from banding-induced ulceration.
In the case of gastric varices, banding is less effective and so 
endoscopic therapy relies on injection of agents such as thrombin or 
cyanoacrylate glue directly into the varix to induce thrombosis. Although 
highly effective, cyanoacrylate injection treatment may be complicated by 
‘glue embolism’ to the lungs.
Active bleeding may make endoscopic therapy difcult. Protection 
of the patient’s airway with endotracheal intubation aids the endosco-
pist, facilitating therapy and signicantly reducing the risk of pulmonary 
aspiration.
Balloon tamponade This technique employs a Minnesota tube, which 
consists of two balloons that can be positioned in the fundus of the 
stomach and in the lower oesophagus, respectively (Fig. 24.23). 
Additional lumens allow contents to be aspirated from the stomach 
and from the oesophagus. This technique may be used in the event of 
life-threatening haemorrhage if early endoscopic therapy is not available 
or is unsuccessful.
Endotracheal intubation prior to tube insertion reduces the risk of pul-
monary aspiration. The tube should be passed through the mouth into 
the stomach. The gastric balloon should be inated with 200–250 mL 
of air, and gentle traction applied to compress the gastro-oesophageal 
junction. Inadvertent ination in the oesophagus can result in oesopha-
geal rupture so, ideally, the gastric balloon should be inated under direct 
endoscopic vision. Tamponade of the gastro-oesophageal junction with 
the gastric balloon will almost always control bleeding from oesophageal 
varices and ination of the oesophageal balloon is rarely required. If the 
oesophageal balloon needs to be used because of continued bleeding, 
pressure should be monitored with a sphygmomanometer (to main-
tain < 40 mmHg) and it should be deated for about 10minutes every 
3hours to avoid oesophageal mucosal damage. Balloon tamponade 
is only a bridge to more denitive therapy. Novel endoscopic therapies 
such as self-expanding removable oesophageal stents and haemostatic 
powder spray also appear to be effective short-term alternatives in small 
case series.
TIPSS This technique uses a stent placed between the portal vein 
and the hepatic vein within the liver to provide a portosystemic shunt 
and reduce portal pressure (Fig. 24.24). It is carried out under radio-
logical control via the internal jugular vein; prior patency of the portal 
vein must be determined angiographically, coagulation deciencies may 
require correction with fresh frozen plasma, and antibiotic cover is pro-
vided. Successful shunt placement stops and prevents further variceal 
bleeding, and is an effective treatment for both oesophageal and gastric 
varices. Further bleeding necessitates investigation and treatment (e.g. 
angioplasty) because it is usually associated with shunt narrowing or 
occlusion. Hepatic encephalopathy occurs in up to a third of patients 
following TIPSS and may require reducing the shunt diameter. Although 
TIPSS is associated with less rebleeding than endoscopic therapy, sur-
vival is not improved.
24.34 Emergency management of bleeding
Management
Reason
Intravenous uids
To replace extracellular volume
Vasopressor (terlipressin)*
To reduce portal pressure, acute 
bleeding and risk of early rebleeding
Prophylactic antibiotics 
(cephalosporin IV)
To reduce incidence of spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis
Emergency endoscopy
To conrm variceal rather than ulcer 
bleed
Variceal band ligation
To stop bleeding
Proton pump inhibitor
To prevent peptic ulcers
Phosphate enema and/or lactulose
To prevent hepatic encephalopathy
*Caution in patients with signicant coronary artery, peripheral or other vascular disease.
Start IV terlipressin and
antibiotic prophylaxis
Suspected variceal
haemorrhage
Varices present?
Urgent upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy
Yes
Endoscopic therapy
(variceal banding,
sclerotherapy)
Haemostasis?
No
Stop terlipressin
(treat as for non-
variceal haemorrhage)
Yes
Continue
terlipressin to 72 hrs
Introduce β-blocker as
secondary prophylaxis
Enter patient into
endoscopic banding
programme to
obliterate varices
No
Further endoscopic
therapy
or
Balloon tamponade
or
Emergency TIPSS
Fig. 24.22 Management of acute bleeding from oesophageal varices. 
(TIPSS = transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt)

[[p940]]
884    HEPATOLOGY
Portosystemic shunt surgery Surgery prevents recurrent bleeding but car-
ries a high mortality and often leads to encephalopathy. In practice, por-
tosystemic shunts are now reserved for when other treatments have not 
been successful and are offered only to patients with good liver function.
Oesophageal transection Rarely, surgical transection of the varices may 
be performed as a last resort when bleeding cannot be controlled by 
other means but operative mortality is high.
Secondary prevention of variceal bleeding
Beta-blockers are used as a secondary measure to prevent recurrent 
variceal bleeding. Following successful endoscopic therapy, patients 
should be entered into an oesophageal banding programme with 
repeated sessions of therapy at 2–4-week intervals until the varices 
are obliterated. There is some evidence that early TIPSS after success-
ful endoscopic therapy may improve survival in selected patients with 
advanced liver disease.
Congestive ‘portal hypertensive’ gastropathy
Long-standing portal hypertension causes chronic gastric congestion, 
which is recognisable at endoscopy as multiple areas of punctate ery-
thema (‘portal hypertensive gastropathy’ or ‘snakeskin gastropathy’) in 
the proximal stomach. Similar lesions may also occur more distally in 
the gastrointestinal tract (enteropathy and colopathy). These areas may 
become eroded, causing oozing from multiple sites. Acute bleeding can 
occur but repeated minor bleeding causing iron deciency anaemia is 
more common. Anaemia may be prevented by oral iron supplements 
but repeated blood transfusions can become necessary. Reduction of 
the portal pressure using propranolol (80–160 mg/day) is the best initial 
treatment. In selected cases TIPSS procedure can be considered.
Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE) is an alternative cause of 
mucosal oozing in patients with cirrhosis. This is characterised by red 
spots in the distal stomach, often arranged in stripes around the pylorus 
(‘watermelon stomach’). Therapy for GAVE is focused on endoscopic 
ablation using argon plasma coagulation (APC) or radiofrequency abla-
tion (RFA).
Infections and the liver
The liver may be subject to a number of different infections. These include 
hepatotropic viral infections and bacterial and protozoal infections. Each 
has specic clinical features and requires targeted therapies.
Viral hepatitis
This must be considered in anyone presenting with hepatitic liver blood 
tests (high transaminases). The causes are listed in Box 24.35
All these viruses cause illnesses that have similar clinical and patholog-
ical features and are frequently anicteric or even asymptomatic. They dif-
fer in their tendency to cause acute and chronic infections. The features 
of the major hepatitis viruses are shown in Box 24.36
Clinical features of acute infection
A non-specic prodromal illness characterised by headache, myalgia, 
arthralgia, nausea and anorexia usually precedes the development of 
jaundice by a few days to 2 weeks. Vomiting and diarrhoea may follow 
and abdominal discomfort is common. Dark urine and pale stools may 
precede jaundice. There are usually few physical signs. The liver is often 
tender but only minimally enlarged. Occasionally, mild splenomegaly and 
Oesophageal
balloon
Oesophageal
aspirate
Traction
Gastric balloon
(clamped)
Gastric aspirate
Gastric balloon
(inflated with 200–250 mL of air)
Oesophageal
balloon
(deflated)
Fig. 24.23 Minnesota tube.
HV
PV
TIPSS
GV
Fig. 24.24 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt (TIPSS). X-ray 
showing placement of a TIPSS, allowing blood to ow from the portal vein (PV) into 
the hepatic vein (HV). Contrast can be also be seen in gastric varices (GV). Arrows 
show the outline of the gastric balloon of a Sengstaken tube.
24.35  Causes of viral hepatitis
Common
 Hepatitis A
 Hepatitis B ± hepatitis D
 Hepatitis C
 Hepatitis E
Less common
 Cytomegalovirus
 Epstein–Barr virus
Rare
 Herpes simplex
 Yellow fever

[[p941]]
Infections and the liver    885
24
cervical lymphadenopathy are seen. These features are more frequent 
in children or those with Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection. Symptoms 
rarely last longer than 3–6 weeks. Complications may occur but are rare 
(Box 24.37).
Investigations
A hepatitic pattern of LFTs develops, with serum transaminases typically 
between 200 and 2000 U/L in an acute infection (usually lower and uc-
tuating in chronic infections). The ALP rarely exceeds twice the upper 
limit of normal. The plasma bilirubin and prothrombin time (PT) reect the 
degree of liver damage. Prolongation of the PT rarely exceeds 25 seconds, 
except in rare cases of acute liver failure. The white cell count is usually 
normal with a relative lymphocytosis. Serological tests conrm the aeti-
ology of the infection.
Management
Most individuals do not need hospital care. Drugs such as sedatives 
and narcotics, which are metabolised in the liver, should be avoided. 
Alcohol should not be taken during the acute illness. Elective surgery 
should be avoided in cases of acute viral hepatitis, as there is a risk of 
post-operative liver failure.
Liver transplantation is very rarely indicated for acute viral hepatitis 
complicated by liver failure.
Hepatitis A
The hepatitis A virus (HAV) belongs to the picornavirus group of enter-
oviruses. HAV is highly infectious and is spread by the faecal–oral 
route. Risk of infection is associated with a lack of safe water and poor 
24.36  Features of the main hepatitis viruses
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Virus
Group
Enterovirus
Hepadnavirus
Flavivirus
Incomplete virus
Calicivirus
Nucleic acid
RNA
DNA
RNA
RNA
RNA
Size (diameter)
27 nm
42 nm
30–38 nm
35 nm
27 nm
Incubation (weeks)
2–4
4–20
2–26
6–9
3–8
Spread*
Faeces
Yes
No
No
No
Yes (1–2)
Ingestion of infected 
meat
No
No
No
No
Yes (3–4)
Blood
Uncommon
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Saliva
Yes
Yes
Yes
Unknown
Unknown
Sexual
Uncommon
Yes
Uncommon
Yes
Unknown
Vertical
No
Yes
Uncommon
Yes
No
Chronic infection
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No (except immune-
compromised)
Prevention
Active
Vaccine
Vaccine
No
Prevented by hepatitis B 
vaccination
No
Passive
Immune serum globulin
Hyperimmune serum 
globulin
No
No
*All body uids are potentially infectious, although some (e.g. urine) are less infectious than others.
24.37  Complications of acute viral hepatitis
 Acute liver failure
 Cholestatic hepatitis (hepatitis A)
 Aplastic anaemia
 Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (hepatitis B and C)
 Relapsing hepatitis
sanitation. In occasional outbreaks, water and shellsh have been the 
vehicles of transmission. Infection may be asymptomatic or produce 
symptoms after an average incubation period of 28 days. The likelihood 
of symptoms relates to age, with most children under 6 years of age 
having no symptoms but most adults developing jaundice. Up to 30% 
of adults will have serological evidence of past infection but give no 
history of jaundice. Infected individuals excrete the virus in faeces for 
about 2–3 weeks before the onset of symptoms and then for a further 
2 weeks or so.
In contrast to hepatitis B and C, chronic infection does not occur. 
Almost all cases will recover fully with lifelong immunity, but a very small 
proportion develop acute liver failure (0.1%) and may die. Infection in 
patients with pre-existing chronic liver disease may cause serious or 
life-threatening disease. In adults, a cholestatic phase with elevated ALP 
levels may complicate infection.
Investigations
Diagnosis of HAV infection is based on antibody testing. Only one HAV 
antigen has been found and infected people make an antibody to this 
antigen (anti-HAV). Anti-HAV immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibody is detecta-
ble in the blood 5–10 days before the onset of symptoms and falls to low 
levels within about 3 months of recovery, so is diagnostic of acute HAV 
infection. Anti-HAV IgG antibody persists for years after infection, and is 
a marker of previous HAV infection with resulting immunity.
Management
Infection in the community is best prevented by improving social con-
ditions, especially overcrowding and poor sanitation. Individuals can be 
given substantial protection from infection by active immunisation with an 
inactivated virus vaccine. Immunisation should be considered for those 
at particular risk, such as people travelling to endemic areas, close con-
tacts of HAV-infected patients, older individuals, those with other major 
disease (including chronic liver disease) and perhaps pregnant women.
Immediate protection can also be provided by immune serum glob-
ulin if this is given soon after exposure to the virus. The protective 
effect of immune serum globulin is attributed to its anti-HAV content. 
Intramuscular injection of immune serum globulin is recommended for 
close contacts of infected individuals who are less able to respond to 

[[p942]]
886    HEPATOLOGY
vaccination, such as those aged 60 years or over, immunocompromised 
individuals or those with chronic liver disease. It may also be effective in 
an outbreak of hepatitis, in a school or nursery, as injection of those at 
risk prevents secondary spread to families.
There is no role for antiviral drugs in the therapy of HAV infection.
Hepatitis B
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) consists of a core containing DNA and a DNA 
polymerase enzyme needed for virus replication, surrounded by surface 
protein (Fig. 24.25). The virus and an excess of its surface protein (known 
as hepatitis B surface antigen, HBsAg) circulate in the blood. The virus 
replicates and assembles within hepatocytes but is not directly cyto-
toxic; hepatocyte damage occurs during immune-mediated clearance 
of infected hepatocytes.
Hepatitis B is one of the most common causes of chronic liver disease 
and hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide. Approximately 250 million peo-
ple have chronic HBV infection. There is large regional variation, with the 
highest rates seen in the Western Pacic and African regions.
Hepatitis B can cause acute or chronic infection. The risk of devel-
oping chronic HBV infection depends on the source and timing of 
exposure. Infections may occur via a number of routes (Box 24.38). In 
endemic areas, vertical transmission from mother to child in the perinatal 
period is the most common cause of infection and carries the highest 
risk of ongoing chronic infection (90%–95%). In contrast, exposure to 
HBV at an older age is much more likely to result in an acute hepatitis, 
with chronic infection developing in less than 5% of adult-acquired HBV.
In perinatal infection, adaptive immune responses to HBV may be 
absent initially, with apparent immunological tolerance. Although HBV-
specic T-cells are detectable in this setting, they are weak and func-
tionally impaired. The mechanisms underlying this are incompletely 
understood.
Chronic hepatitis can lead to cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma, 
usually after decades of infection (Fig. 24.26). Chronic HBV infection is a 
dynamic process that can be divided into ve phases (Box 24.39); these 
are not necessarily strictly sequential, however, and not all patients will 
go through all phases. Phases are considered as either ‘infection’ where 
circulating HBsAg is detectable but is not resulting in any current liver 
injury, or ‘hepatitis’ where this is accompanied by liver inammation and 
brosis.
Investigations
Assessment of hepatitis B infection relies on looking at a combination of 
viral markers (surface antigen, e-antigen and viral load) and liver markers 
(ALT and brosis markers) to determine the stage of disease.
Serology
HBV contains several antigens to which infected persons can make 
immune responses (Fig. 24.27); these antigens and their antibodies are 
important in identifying the stage of HBV infection (see Box 24.39 and 
Box 24.40), in addition to direct assessment of viral load by polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) for HBV DNA.
Hepatitis B surface antigen Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is the 
main indicator of active infection, and a negative test for HBsAg makes 
HBV infection very unlikely. The exception is in acute liver failure from 
hepatitis B, where the liver damage is mediated by viral clearance and so 
HBsAg may be negative at presentation, with evidence of recent infec-
tion provided by the presence of hepatitis B core (anti-HBc) IgM (see 
below). In resolving acute HBV infection, antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) 
usually appears after about 3–6 months and persists for many years 
or perhaps permanently. Anti-HBs implies either a previous infection, in 
which case anti-HBc (see below) is usually also present, or previous vac-
cination, in which case anti-HBc is not present.
Hepatitis B core antigen Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) is not found in 
the blood, but antibody to it (anti-HBc) appears early in the illness and 
rapidly reaches a high titre, which subsides gradually but then persists. 
Anti-HBc is initially of IgM type, with IgG antibody appearing later (see 
Fig. 24.27 and Box 24.40).
Hepatitis B e antigen Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is part of the core 
antigen that is detectable in the blood and can be used as an indicator 
of viral replication. Seroconversion to e antigen (i.e. loss of HBeAg and 
development of anti-HBe antibody) indicates a partial immune control of 
the virus and is associated with a signicant drop in viral load. This typi-
cally occurs after 10–30 years in perinatally acquired infection, but within 
3–6 months in adult-acquired acute infections.
Viral load and genotype
HBV-DNA can be measured by PCR in the blood. Viral loads are usually 
highest (in excess of 107 copies/mL) in HBeAg-positive infection, making 
this the most infectious phase. Once patients undergo HBeAg serocon-
version, viral loads drop to less than 105 copies/mL in HBeAg-negative 
infection. Around 15%–20% of patients will subsequently develop further 
rises in viral load, due to mutations in the pre-core or core promoter 
region (Fig. 24.28). Such patients are classied as having HBeAg-
negative chronic hepatitis.
Measurement of viral load is important in detecting ares of HBeAg-
negative hepatitis and in monitoring response to antiviral therapy. Ten 
HBV genotypes (A–J) can also be identied using PCR. These affect the 
likelihood of response to pegylated interferon.
Management of acute hepatitis B
Full spontaneous recovery occurs in more than 95% of adults follow-
ing acute HBV infection. Fulminant liver failure due to acute hepatitis B 
HBV-DNA
HBV-DNA
polymerase
HBsAg
HBcAg
HBeAg (blood)
Fig. 24.25 Schematic diagram of the hepatitis B virus. Hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) is a protein that makes up part of the viral envelope. Hepatitis B core 
antigen (HBcAg) is a protein that makes up the capsid or core part of the virus (found 
in the liver but not in blood). Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is part of the HBcAg that 
can be found in the blood and indicates infectivity. (HBV = hepatitis B virus)
24.38  Risk factors for the acquisition of hepatitis B infection
Vertical transmission
 Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive mother (especially if e-antigen-
positive)
Horizontal transmission
 Sexual transmission
 Intravenous drug use
 Infected unscreened blood products
 Tattoos/acupuncture needles
 Needlestick injury
 Sharing toothbrush/razor
 Close living quarters/playground play as a toddler (may contribute to high rate of 
horizontal transmission in Africa)

[[p943]]
Infections and the liver    887
24
occurs in fewer than 1% of cases but can be life-threatening and require 
liver transplantation. The remaining < 5% develop chronic infection.
Treatment of acute HBV infection is supportive, with monitoring for 
acute liver failure. Antiviral therapy is usually only considered in those 
with evidence of severe liver injury with coagulopathy (INR > 1.5) or a 
protracted course with persistent symptoms for > 4 weeks.
Recovery from acute HBV infection occurs within 6 months and is char-
acterised by the appearance of antibody to viral antigens. Persistence of 
Persistence of HBeAg or HBsAg indicates chronic infection.
Management of chronic hepatitis B
Once hepatitis B infection has been present for more than 6 months, 
spontaneous clearance is uncommon. Most patients with chronic hep-
atitis B are asymptomatic and develop complications, such as cirrhosis 
and hepatocellular carcinoma, only after many years (see Fig. 24.26). 
Fibrosis accumulates during periods of liver injury (the ‘hepatitis’ phases) 
and results in cirrhosis in 15%–20% of patients with chronic HBV over 
5–20 years. The rate of progression to cirrhosis is higher in HBeAg-
negative hepatitis (8%–10% incidence per annum) than HBeAg-positive 
hepatitis (2%–5% per annum).
The ideal goal of treatment would be to achieve long-term viral clear-
ance with loss of HBsAg, but this is rarely achieved with current ther-
apies. Instead, treatment is aimed at suppressing viral replication to 
prevent disease progression to cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. 
The goals of treatment are therefore HBeAg seroconversion, reduction in 
HBV-DNA and normalisation of the LFTs. Only a proportion (10%–40%) 
of patients with chronic hepatitis B will require treatment. This is usu-
ally targeted at those in the ‘hepatitis’ phases with high viral load and 
HBeAg-positive
HBeAg-negative
Viral
load
HBV-tolerant
HBV clearance
Latent phase
HBV mutant
Liver
transaminases
ALT/AST
Time (years)
Chronic
infection
Liver
histology
Normal
Chronic
hepatitis
Minimal
inflammation
Chronic
hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Hepatocellular
carcinoma
Fig. 24.26 Natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. There is an initial immunotolerant phase with high levels of virus and normal liver biochemistry. 
An immunological response to the virus then occurs, with elevation in serum transaminases, which causes liver damage: chronic hepatitis. If this response is sustained over 
many years and viral clearance does not occur promptly, chronic hepatitis may result in cirrhosis. In individuals with a successful immunological response, viral load falls, HBe 
antibody (HBeAg) develops and there is no further liver damage. Some individuals may subsequently develop HBV-DNA mutants that escape from immune regulation, and viral 
load again rises with further chronic hepatitis. Mutations in the core protein result in the virus’s inability to secrete HBe antigen despite high levels of viral replication; such 
individuals have HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis. (ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase)
24.39  The ve phases of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection
Phase
HBsAg
HBeAg
Viral load
ALT
Histology
Notes
HBeAg positive 
chronic infection
+
+
+++
(> 107 IU/ml)
Normal
Normal/minimal 
necroinammation
Prolonged in perinatally infected individuals; may be short 
or absent if infected as an adult. High viral load and so very 
infectious. Previously known as ‘immune-tolerant’
HBeAg-positive 
chronic hepatitis
+
+
++
(104–107
IU/ml)
Raised
Moderate/severe 
necroinammation
May last weeks or years. Risk of cirrhosis or HCC if prolonged.
Previously known as ‘immune-reactive’
HBeAg-negative 
chronic infection
+
+/
(< 2000 IU/ml)
Normal
Normal/minimal 
necroinammation
Low risk of cirrhosis or HCC in majority. Previously known as 
‘inactive carrier’.
HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis
+
–
Fluctuating 
+/++
(> 2000 IU/ml)
Raised/
uctuating
Moderate/severe 
necroinammation
May represent late immune reactivation or presence of ‘pre-core 
mutant’ HBV. High risk of cirrhosis or HCC
HBsAg-negative 
phase
–
–
–/±
Normal
Normal
Ultrasensitive techniques may detect low-level HBV DNA even 
after HBsAg loss
(HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma)

[[p944]]
888    HEPATOLOGY
accompanying liver injury, either in terms of necroinammation (raised 
ALT) or established brosis (on biopsy or raised liver stiffness on transient 
elastography). All patients with cirrhosis should be treated to prevent 
decompensation. Treatment may also be initiated during pregnancy in 
the absence of liver injury to prevent mother-to-child transmission.
Two different types of drug are used to treat hepatitis B: direct-acting 
nucleoside/nucleotide analogues and pegylated interferon-alfa.
Direct-acting nucleoside/nucleotide antiviral agents
Orally administered nucleoside/nucleotide antiviral agents are the main-
stay of therapy. These act by inhibiting the reverse transcription of pre-
genomic RNA to HBV-DNA by HBV-DNA polymerase but do not directly 
affect the covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) template for viral rep-
lication, and so relapse is common if treatment is withdrawn. One major 
concern is the selection of antiviral-resistant mutations with long-term 
treatment. This is particularly important with some of the older agents, 
such as lamivudine, as mutations induced by previous antiviral exposure 
may also induce resistance to newer agents. Entecavir and tenofovir (see 
below) are potent antivirals with a high barrier to genetic resistance and 
so are the most appropriate rst-line agents.
Lamivudine Although initially effective, long-term therapy is often com-
plicated by the development of HBV-DNA polymerase mutants (e.g. the 
‘YMDD variant’), which lead to viral resistance. These occur in around 
half of patients after 3 years and are characterised by a rise in viral load 
during treatment. Outside resource-limited settings, this agent is now 
seldom used for the treatment of HBV but may be used to prevent reac-
tivation in patients with past HBV infection (HBsAg-negative but HBcAb-
positive) if they are undergoing treatment with rituximab or chemotherapy.
Entecavir and tenofovir Monotherapy with entecavir or tenofovir is sub-
stantially more effective than lamivudine in reducing viral load in HBeAg-
positive and HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis. Antiviral resistance 
mutations occur very rarely, in < 1% after 5 years of entecavir and with 
no evidence of resistance after 8 years of tenofovir. Both drugs have 
action against human immunodeciency virus (HIV) and so their use as 
monotherapy is contraindicated in HIV-positive patients, as it may lead 
to HIV antiviral drug resistance. Current European guidelines advise that 
the other nucleoside/nucleotide antivirals should not be used as rst-line 
monotherapy due to the induction of viral mutations, unless entecavir or 
tenofovir are not available or appropriate.
Pegylated interferon-alfa
Pegylated interferon-alfa (PEG-IFN) acts by augmenting the host immune 
response. This is most effective in patients with a pre-treatment low viral 
load and serum transaminases greater than twice the upper limit of 
normal. Treatment is for a nite period (typically around 1 year), and is 
associated with higher rates of HBsAg and HBeAg seroconversion than 
nucleoside/nucleotide agents but with greater side-effects. Interferon 
is contraindicated in the presence of cirrhosis, as it may cause a rise 
in serum transaminases and precipitate liver failure. In HBeAg-positive 
chronic hepatitis, PEG-IFN results in sustained HBeAG seroconversion in 
around 30%, and HBsAg seroconversion in 3%–5%. Response rates are 
higher in those with genotype A or B virus, and those with low viral load 
and high ALT. Sustained response rates are lower in HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis.
Liver transplantation
Patients with advanced liver disease or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
may require liver transplantation. The use of nucleoside/nucleotide ana-
logues post-transplant (with hepatitis B immunoglobulin in high-risk 
individuals) has made recurrent disease due to graft re-infection very 
uncommon, and outcomes are comparable with other indications.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
11
12
Relative amount of product detectable
Clinical
illness
HBeAg
HBsAg
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
IgM anti-HBc
Time after exposure (months)
Fig. 24.27 Serological responses to hepatitis B virus infection. (anti-HBc = 
antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBe = antibody to HBeAg; anti-HBs = 
antibody to HBsAg; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface 
antigen; IgM = immunoglobulin M)
24.40  How to interpret the serological tests of acute hepatitis 
B virus infection
Interpretation
HBsAg
Anti-HBc 
IgM
Anti-HBc 
IgG
Anti-HBs
Incubation period
+
+
–
–
Acute hepatitis
Early
+
+
–
–
Established
+
+
+
Convalescence
(3–6 months)
–
±
+
±
(6–9 months)
–
–
+
+
Post-infection
–
–
+
±
Immunisation without 
infection
–
–
–
+
+ = positive; – = negative; ± = present at low titre or absent.
(anti-HBc IgM/IgG = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen of immunoglobulin M/G type; anti-
HBs = antibody to HBsAg; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen)
Mutations
P
X
S
C
HBV-DNA
pre-S1
pre-S2
pre-C
Mutations
Mutations
Fig. 24.28 The site of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-DNA mutations. HBV-DNA 
encodes four proteins: a DNA polymerase needed for viral replication (P), a surface 
protein (S), a core protein (C) and an X protein. The pre-C and C regions encode 
a core protein and an e antigen. Although mutations in the hepatitis B virus are 
frequent, certain mutations have important clinical consequences. Pre-C encodes 
a signal sequence needed for the C protein to be secreted from the liver cell into 
serum as e antigen. A mutation in the pre-core region leads to a failure of secretion 
of e antigen into serum, and so individuals have high levels of viral production 
but no detectable e antigen in the serum. Mutations can also occur in the surface 
protein and may lead to the failure of vaccination to prevent infection, since surface 
antibodies are produced against the native S protein. Mutations also occur in the 
DNA polymerase during antiviral treatment with lamivudine.

[[p945]]
Infections and the liver    889
24
Hepatocellular carcinoma risk
Chronic HBV infection is associated with an increased risk of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma, even in the absence of cirrhosis. This risk increases with 
age, male sex, smoking, diabetes, family history of HCC and high viral 
loads. A number of scoring systems (such as REACH-B and PAGE-B) 
have been developed to identify high-risk non-cirrhotic patients who may 
benet from HCC screening.
Prevention
Individuals are most infectious when high levels of HBV-DNA are present 
in the blood, typically in the HBeAg-positive infection phase. HBV-DNA 
can be found in saliva, urine, semen and vaginal secretions (although 
urine is not usually considered to be capable of transmitting infection). 
The virus is about ten times more infectious than hepatitis C.
A recombinant hepatitis B vaccine containing HBsAg is available 
(Engerix) and is capable of producing active immunisation in 95% of nor-
mal individuals. The vaccine should be offered to those at increased risk 
of infection who are not already immune, as evidenced by anti-HBs in 
the blood (Box 24.41). The vaccine is ineffective in those already infected 
by HBV. Following known exposure, infection can also be prevented or 
minimised by the intramuscular injection of specic hepatitis B immuno-
globulin (HBIg) prepared from blood containing anti-HBs. This should be 
given within 48 hours, or at most a week, of exposure to infected blood 
(e.g. needlestick injury, contamination of cuts or mucous membranes). 
Vaccine can be given together with HBIg (active–passive immunisation).
Neonates born to hepatitis B-infected mothers should be immunised 
at birth and given immunoglobulin. Hepatitis B serology should then be 
checked at 12 months of age.
Co-infection with HIV
Around 10% of the HIV-infected population has concurrent HBV and this 
gure may be as high as 25% in areas where both viruses are prevalent. 
Up to half of injection drug users with HIV are co-infected with HBV. 
Co-infection increases the morbidity and mortality compared to either 
infection alone: there are greater levels of HBV viraemia, faster progres-
sion to chronic infection and greater risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma than with HBV infection alone. The immunosuppression that 
is seen in HIV infection can lead to loss of anti-HBs antibodies, reac-
tivation of infection and a poorer antibody response to HBV vaccina-
tion. Pregnancy poses particular problems in co-infected patients, with 
increased risk of perinatal transmission of HBV to the child.
Treatment can also be problematic. Several nucleoside analogues 
have dual antiviral activity and some regimens have been associated 
with emergence of drug resistance. Co-infection is also associated with 
diminished response to interferons and increased resistance to lamivu-
dine in some patients. Co-infection should be managed by specialists 
with expertise in this area and combinations of antiviral agents need 
to be thought through carefully. Antiviral therapy should be considered 
for co-infected pregnant women, using drugs with dual activity, e.g. 
teno fovir with emtricitabine or lamivudine.
Globally, there is a need to identify co-infected patients earlier, espe-
cially in endemic areas, as well as a need for early effective interventions, 
particularly in pregnant women, to reduce perinatal transmission.
Hepatitis D (Delta virus)
The hepatitis D virus (HDV) is an RNA-defective virus that has no inde-
pendent existence; it requires HBV for replication and has the same 
sources and modes of spread. It can infect individuals simultaneously 
with HBV or can superinfect those who already have chronic HBV. 
Simultaneous infections give rise to acute hepatitis, which is often severe 
but is limited by recovery from the HBV infection. Infections in individuals 
with chronic HBV can cause acute hepatitis with spontaneous recov-
ery, and occasionally there is simultaneous cessation of the chronic HBV 
infection. Chronic infection with HBV and HDV can also occur, and this 
frequently causes rapidly progressive chronic hepatitis and eventually 
cirrhosis.
HDV has a worldwide distribution. It is endemic in parts of the 
Mediterranean basin, Africa and South America, where transmission 
is mainly by close personal contact and occasionally by vertical trans-
mission from mothers with HBV. In non-endemic areas, transmission is 
mainly a consequence of parenteral drug misuse.
Investigations
HDV contains a single antigen to which infected individuals make an 
antibody (anti-HDV). Delta antigen appears in the blood only transiently, 
and in practice diagnosis depends on detecting anti-HDV. Simultaneous 
infection with HBV and HDV, followed by full recovery, is associated with 
the appearance of low titres of anti-HDV IgM within a few days of the 
onset of the illness. This antibody generally disappears within 2 months 
but persists in a few patients. Super-infection of patients with chronic 
HBV infection leads to the production of high titres of anti-HDV, initially 
IgM and later IgG. Such patients may then develop chronic infection with 
both viruses, in which case anti-HDV titres plateau at high levels.
Management
Effective management of hepatitis B prevents hepatitis D.
Hepatitis C
This is caused by an RNA avivirus. Acute symptomatic infection with 
hepatitis C is rare. Most individuals are unaware of when they became 
infected and are identied only when they develop chronic liver disease. 
Around 70% of individuals exposed to the virus become chronically 
infected and late spontaneous viral clearance is rare. It is estimated that 
around 70 million individuals have chronic hepatitis C worldwide, with 
the highest prevalence in the Eastern Mediterranean region. There is no 
active or passive protection against hepatitis C virus (HCV).
Hepatitis C infection is usually identied in asymptomatic individuals 
screened because they have risk factors for infection, such as previous 
injecting drug use (Box 24.42), or have incidentally been found to have 
abnormal liver blood tests. Although most people remain asymptomatic 
until progression to cirrhosis occurs, fatigue can complicate chronic 
infection and is unrelated to the degree of liver damage.
If hepatitis C infection is left untreated, progression from chronic hepa-
titis to cirrhosis may occur, with 20% developing cirrhosis over 20 years. 
Risk factors for progression include male gender, immunosuppression 
(such as co-infection with HIV), prothrombotic states and heavy alcohol 
misuse. Once cirrhosis is present, 2%–5% per year will develop primary 
hepatocellular carcinoma, although this rate falls by around 75% following 
successful antiviral therapy.
Investigations
Serology and virology
The HCV genome encodes a large polypeptide precursor that is modied 
post-translationally to at least 10 proteins, including several antigens that 
give rise to antibodies in an infected person; these are used in diagnosis. 
Following an acute infection (such as a needlestick injury), HCV RNA can 
be detected in the blood within 2–4 weeks but it may take 6–12 weeks 
for antibodies to appear. Anti-HCV antibodies persist in serum even after 
24.41  At-risk groups meriting hepatitis B vaccination in 
low-endemic areas
Parenteral drug users
Men who have sex with men
Close contacts of infected individuals:
Newborn of infected mothers
Regular sexual partners
Patients on chronic haemodialysis
Patients with chronic liver disease
Medical, nursing and laboratory personnel

[[p946]]
890    HEPATOLOGY
viral clearance, whether spontaneous or post-treatment. Anti-HCV anti-
bodies are used as the initial screening test for chronic infection but if 
positive, the presence of serum HCV RNA or hepatitis C core antigen is 
required to conrm active infection. In cases of suspected acute infec-
tion, negative testing should be repeated after 4 weeks.
Molecular analysis
There are six common viral genotypes, the distribution of which varies 
worldwide. The most common genotypes are 1 (45%) and 3 (25%). 
Genotype has no effect on progression of liver disease but historically 
had a major effect on response to treatment: genotype 1 was less easy 
to eradicate than genotypes 2 and 3 with traditional pegylated interferon 
alfa-/ribavirin-based treatments. All genotypes now have highly success-
ful treatment options, although genotype may still be used to guide the 
choice of direct-acting antiviral drugs.
Liver function tests
LFTs may be normal or show uctuating serum transaminases between 
50 and 200 U/L. Jaundice can occasionally occur during acute infection 
and confers an increased likelihood of spontaneous viral clearance, but 
otherwise only appears in end-stage cirrhosis.
Fibrosis assessment
Serum transaminase levels in hepatitis C are a poor predictor of the 
degree of liver brosis. This should be assessed at diagnosis using tran-
sient elastography, blood biomarkers or non-invasive brosis scoring 
systems such as the Fibrosis-4 (FIB4) score or aspartate aminotrans-
ferase to platelet ratio index (APRI). Where there is diagnostic uncertainty, 
a liver biopsy may be required to stage the extent of liver damage.
Management
The aim of treatment is to eradicate infection and all patients with chronic 
HCV infection should be treated where possible. Sustained virological 
response (SVR) refers to undetectable HCV RNA at least 12 weeks after 
treatment completion, and carries a very low chance (< 1%) of subse-
quent relapse. In recent years, there have been substantial advances 
in treatment, with rates of SVR rising from less than 40% a decade ago 
to levels approaching 100% with newer direct-acting antivirals (DAAs). 
Whilst the cost of these new treatments initially posed a signicant 
nancial challenge, the price of DAAs has fallen signicantly in recent 
years and the challenges now include identication and engagement of 
patients with infection.
Until 2013, the treatment of choice was combination therapy with 
pegylated interferon and ribavirin for up to 48 weeks. Treatment had many 
side-effects and a low SVR rate of 40%–70% depending on genotype.
Since 2013, new classes of DAAs have allowed interferon-free regimens 
with substantially shorter treatment duration, minimal side-effects and high 
cure rates. There are four main classes of DAA, which are dened accord-
ing to their mechanism of action and therapeutic target (Box 24.43). These 
compounds are targeted to specic steps in the hepatitis C viral life cycle 
to disrupt viral replication (Fig. 24.29). These drugs are now frequently 
combined into single pill combinations that can be taken once daily for 
8–12 weeks with SVR rates of over 95%. Whilst some DAA combinations 
are only licensed for specic viral genotypes, several pan-genotypic treat-
ments are now available.
Liver transplantation should be considered when complications of cir-
rhosis occur. However, DAAs can be safely used even in patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis, and successful treatment can be associated 
with an improvement in liver function. It is therefore becoming less com-
mon to require liver transplantation for liver failure secondary to hepatitis 
C, although it may still be required for hepatocellular carcinoma. Whilst 
most patients will now be able to have successful anti-viral treatment 
before transplantation, DAAs can also be used post-transplant and 
recurrent hepatitis C in the transplanted liver is now very rare.
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is an RNA virus that is now thought to be the 
most common cause of acute viral hepatitis worldwide. Four major gen-
otypes are described. Genotypes 1 and 2 exclusively infect humans via 
the faecal–oral route and cause waterborne epidemics, mainly in Asia. 
Genotypes 3 and 4 are mostly zoonotic (in pigs, wild boars and deer) and 
are transmitted to humans through undercooked meat. HEV can rarely 
be transmitted by blood transfusion, and blood donations in the United 
Kingdom are now routinely screened for hepatitis E.
HEV causes a self-limiting acute hepatitis that does not require any 
specic treatment. However, it can cause chronic hepatitis, progressing 
to cirrhosis, in immunocompromised patients, especially organ-trans-
plant recipients. This may require a reduction in the level of immunosup-
pression and/or treatment with ribavirin.
Infection with genotype 1 or 2 virus during pregnancy carries a high 
risk of acute liver failure, which has a high mortality. Hepatitis E also 
causes more severe disease in those with underlying cirrhosis, resulting 
in decompensation or acute-on-chronic liver failure. Extrahepatic mani-
festations are increasingly recognised and include neurological problems 
such as Guillain-Barré syndrome and neuralgic amyotrophy.
Diagnosis of acute infection is usually based on detection of anti-HEV 
IgM antibodies but it is possible to measure HEV RNA or capsid antigen 
in the blood and stool (especially in immunocompromised patients).
Other forms of viral hepatitis
Non-A–E hepatitis is the term used to describe hepatitis thought to be 
due to a virus that is not HAV, HBV, HCV or HEV. Although the viruses 
24.43 Direct-acting antiviral agents for hepatitis C
Drug class
Therapeutic target
Selected drugs
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Non-structural viral 
protein NS3/4 A 
(protease that cleaves 
the HCV polyprotein)
Paritaprevir
Grazoprevir
Voxilaprevir
Glecaprevir
Nucleoside polymerase 
inhibitors (NPIs)
Non-structural 
viral protein NS5B 
(RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase needed 
for viral replication)
Sofosbuvir
Non-nucleoside 
polymerase inhibitors 
(NNPIs)
Non-structural 
viral protein NS5B 
(RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase needed 
for viral replication)
Dasabuvir
NS5A replication 
complex inhibitors
Non-structural 
viral protein NS5A 
(assembly of viral 
replication complex)
Velpatasvir
Ledipasvir
Ombitasvir
Elbasvir
Pibrentasvir
Host-targeting antiviral 
drugs (HTAs)
Cyclophilin 
(pharmacological 
inhibitor targets host 
cell functions involved 
in the HCV life cycle)
Alisporivir
(HCV = hepatitis C virus)
24.42 Risk factors for the acquisition of chronic hepatitis C 
infection
 Intravenous drug use (95% of new cases in the UK)
 Unscreened infected blood products
 Vertical transmission (3% risk)
 Needlestick injury (3% risk)
 Iatrogenic parenteral transmission (e.g. contaminated vaccination needles)
 Sharing toothbrushes/razors
 Sexual transmission (uncommon)

[[p947]]
Infections and the liver    891
24
above account for the majority of clinically signicant hepatitis infec-
tions, other viruses can affect the liver. Cytomegalovirus and EBV infec-
tion causes abnormal LFTs in most patients and occasionally jaundice 
occurs. Herpes simplex is a rare cause of hepatitis in adults, most of 
whom are immunocompromised but can be very severe in pregnancy. 
Abnormal LFTs are also common in chickenpox, measles, rubella, acute 
HIV and COVID-19 infection.
HIV infection and the liver
Several causes of abnormal LFTs occur in HIV infection, as shown in 
Box 24.44. This topic is discussed in more detail in Chapter 14. 
Co-infection with HIV and HBV is discussed on page 889.
Liver abscess
Liver abscesses are classied as pyogenic (bacterial), hydatid (protozoal) 
or amoebic.
Pyogenic liver abscess
Pyogenic liver abscesses are uncommon but important because they 
are potentially curable but carry signicant morbidity and mortality if 
untreated. The mortality of liver abscesses is 5%–25%. Mortality is higher 
in those with multiple abscesses, underlying malignancy or other comor-
bidities, and delayed diagnosis.
Pathophysiology
Infection can reach the liver in several ways (Box 24.45). Pyogenic 
abscesses are most common in older patients and usually result from 
ascending infection due to biliary obstruction (cholangitis) or contiguous 
spread from an empyema of the gallbladder. They can also complicate 
dental sepsis or colonic pathology, e.g. cancer, diverticulitis or inam-
matory bowel disease causing portal pyaemia. Abscesses complicat-
ing suppurative appendicitis used to be common in young adults but 
are now rare. Immunocompromised or diabetic patients are particularly 
likely to develop liver abscesses. Multiple abscesses are usually due to 
biliary obstruction and may be polymicrobial. Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
pneumonia and Streptococcus milleri are the most common organisms; 
anaerobes such as Bacteroides can often be found when infection has 
been transmitted from large bowel pathology.
Clinical features
Patients are generally ill with fever and sometimes rigors and weight 
loss. Right upper quadrant abdominal pain is common, sometimes 
with radiation to the right shoulder. The pain may be pleuritic in nature. 
Tender hepatomegaly is found in more than 50% of patients. Mild jaun-
dice may be present, becoming severe if large abscesses cause biliary 
obstruction. Atypical presentations are common and include anorexia, 
diarrhoea, dyspnoea and pyrexia of unknown origin. Necrotic colorectal 
metastases can be misdiagnosed as hepatic abscess.
Investigations
A raised white cell count and neutrophilia is common. Alkaline phos-
phatase is often raised and albumin levels are low. Blood cultures are 
1 Receptor
   binding and
   endocytosis
2 Hepatocyte
   entry
3 Fusion and
   RNA coating
5 Polyprotein cleaved
   into functional
   proteins by protease
6 RNA replication
   by encoded
   polymerase
7 Lipoviral particle assembly
8 Transport
   and release
4 Translation of
   RNA into protein
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleus
Golgi apparatus
NS5A
inhibitors
NS3/4A
protease
inhibitors
NS5B
polymerase
inhibitors
Fig. 24.29 Direct-acting antiviral agents. These compounds are targeted to specic steps in the hepatitis C viral life cycle to disrupt replication. (NS = non-structural viral 
protein)
24.44  Causes of abnormal liver blood tests in HIV infection
Hepatitic blood tests
 Chronic hepatitis C
 Chronic hepatitis B
 Antiretroviral drugs
 Cytomegalovirus
Cholestatic blood tests
 Tuberculosis
 Atypical mycobacterium
 Sclerosing cholangitis due to cryptosporidia
24.45  Causes of pyogenic liver abscesses
 Biliary obstruction (cholangitis)
 Haematogenous:
Portal vein (intra-abdominal infections)
Hepatic artery (bacteraemia)
 Direct extension (cholecystitis)
 Trauma:
Penetrating or non-penetrating
 Infection of liver tumour or cyst

[[p948]]
892    HEPATOLOGY
positive in 50%–80%. The chest X-ray may show a raised right dia-
phragm and lung collapse, or an effusion at the base of the right lung. 
Liver imaging is key; ultrasound will detect at least 80% of pyogenic 
abscesses and CT with contrast will detect over 95%. Needle aspira-
tion under ultrasound guidance conrms the diagnosis and provides pus 
for culture. Abscesses caused by gut-derived organisms require active 
exclusion of signicant colonic pathology, such as a colonoscopy to 
exclude colorectal carcinoma.
Management
Pending the results of culture of blood and pus from the abscess, treat-
ment should be commenced with a combination of antibiotics, such as 
ampicillin, gentamicin and metronidazole. Percutaneous aspiration or 
drainage with a catheter placed in the abscess under ultrasound guid-
ance is required if the abscess is large or not responding to antibiotics. 
Any associated biliary obstruction and cholangitis require biliary drainage 
(preferably endoscopically). Surgical abscess drainage is rarely under-
taken, although hepatic resection may be indicated for a chronic persis-
tent abscess or ‘pseudotumour’.
Hydatid cysts and amoebic liver abscesses
These are described on pages 342 and 330.
Leptospirosis
This is described on page 305.
Alcohol-related liver disease
Alcohol is one of the most common causes of chronic liver disease 
worldwide, with consumption continuing to increase in some countries. 
Excessive alcohol consumption produces a spectrum of effects on the 
liver. Almost all heavy drinkers will have alcohol-related fatty liver, but only 
a minority will develop clinically signicant liver disease (alcoholic hepati-
tis or cirrhosis). A number of factors inuence the risk of developing the 
more severe features of alcohol-related liver disease (ALD):
 Amount of alcohol consumed. In the UK, a ‘unit’ of alcohol contains 
8 g of ethanol (Box 24.46). There is signicant variability between 
countries in advice with regard to alcohol consumption but current 
UK guidelines recommend drinking less than 14 units of alcohol 
per week. This threshold is based on a wide range of health issues, 
including cancer risk. The threshold of alcohol consumption required 
to develop liver disease varies considerably between individuals but 
begins at around 30 g/day (25–30 units/week) of ethanol. However, 
there is not a linear relationship between dose and liver damage. For 
many, consumption of more than 80 g/day, for more than 5 years, 
is required to confer signicant risk of advanced liver disease. The 
average alcohol consumption of a man with cirrhosis is 160 g/day 
for over 8 years. However, even at this level of consumption, many 
patients will not develop advanced liver disease.
 Drinking pattern. There are conicting data with regard to drinking 
pattern but it is generally thought that liver damage is more likely to 
occur in continuous rather than intermittent or ‘binge’ drinkers, as 
this pattern gives the liver a chance to recover. It is therefore recom-
mended that people should have at least two alcohol-free days each 
week. The type of beverage does not affect risk.
 Sex. Women who drink heavily are at higher risk of developing 
cirrhosis than men. This may relate to the higher blood ethanol 
levels seen in women compared to men after consuming the same 
amount of alcohol.
 Genetics. Genetic factors predispose to both alcohol use disorders 
and risk of disease progression. Polymorphisms in genes involved 
in alcohol metabolism (alcohol dehydrogenase and acetaldehyde 
dehydrogenase) and in neurotransmitter pathways (GABA receptor 
A2) are linked to alcohol dependence. The patatin-like phospholi-
pase domain-containing 3 (PNPLA3) gene, also known as adipo-
nutrin, is an important susceptibility gene for cirrhosis in both ALD 
and NAFLD (see next section).
 Nutrition. Being either obese or underweight increases mortality 
in alcohol-related liver disease. Ethanol itself produces 7 kcal/g 
(29.3 kJ/g) and many alcoholic drinks also contain sugar, which 
further increases the caloric value and may contribute to weight 
gain. Excess alcohol consumption is also frequently associated with 
nutritional deciencies such as thiamine and folate deciency.
 Coexistent liver disease. Patients with coexistent chronic hepatitis C 
or NAFLD who drink heavily have accelerated disease progression 
compared with non-drinkers.
Pathophysiology
Alcohol reaches peak blood concentrations after about 20 minutes, 
although this may be inuenced by stomach contents. It is metabolised 
almost exclusively by the liver via one of two pathways (Fig. 24.30).
Approximately 80% of alcohol is metabolised by alcohol dehydroge-
nase to acetaldehyde, and then by aldehyde dehydrogenase to ace-
tate. This process converts NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 
to NADH, altering the redox potential of the cell. Up to 20% of alcohol 
is metabolised by the microsomal ethanol-oxidising system (MEOS), 
predominantly through the inducible cytochrome p450 2E1, also gen-
erating acetaldehyde along with oxygen free radicals. The CYP2E1 
enzyme also metabolises acetaminophen, and hence chronic alcoholics 
are more susceptible to hepatotoxicity from low doses of paracetamol. 
Acetaldehyde from either pathway is toxic and causes structural alter-
ations of cellular proteins. This results in altered mitochondrial function 
and generation of reactive oxygen species, leading to oxidative stress. 
The altered ratio of reduced/oxidised NAD interrupts beta-oxidation of 
fatty acids and causes upregulation of sterol regulatory element-binding 
protein 1 (SREBP1), promoting fatty acid synthesis.
Damage to hepatocytes leads to stimulation of immune cells via dam-
age-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as mitochondrial DNA 
or necrotic debris. Alcohol also affects the gut leading to dysbiosis and 
increased gut permeability, delivering pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs) such as lipopolysaccharide and bacterial DNA via the 
portal vein which stimulate immune cells, leading to release of tumour 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2 and IL-8. All of 
these cytokines have been implicated in the pathogenesis of liver brosis 
(see Fig. 24.4).
The pathological features of ALD are shown in Box 24.47. The most 
common manifestation is accumulation of triglycerides within hepato-
cytes (hepatic steatosis), or alcohol-related fatty liver. This progresses in 
some patients to cause hepatocyte injury and inammation, or steato-
hepatitis. This can present acutely with a clinical syndrome of rapid onset 
jaundice (alcoholic hepatitis) or can result in progressive brosis leading 
24.46  Amount of alcohol in an average drink
Alcohol type
% Alcohol by 
volume
Amount
Units*
Beer
4
568 mL (1 pint)
2.3
Wine
13
175 mL
2.3
13
750 mL
10
‘Alcopops’
6
330 mL
2
Sherry
17.5
750 mL
13
Vodka/rum/gin
37.5
25 mL
1
Whisky/brandy
40
700 mL
28
40
1 L
40
*1 unit = 8 g.

[[p949]]
Alcohol-related liver disease    893
24
to cirrhosis; these two presentations can coexist. Iron deposition is com-
mon and does not necessarily indicate haemochromatosis. Fig. 24.31
shows the histological features of alcohol-related liver disease, which are 
identical to those of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
Clinical features
Three types of ALD are recognised (Box 24.48) but these may over-
lap. Alcohol misuse may also cause damage of other organs and this 
should be specically looked for (see Box 31.24). Dupuytren’s contrac-
ture (thickening of the palmar fascia) is associated with chronic alcohol 
excess, but is not predictive of underlying liver disease.
Alcohol-related fatty liver disease
Alcohol-related fatty liver disease (AFLD) usually presents with an inci-
dental nding of elevated transaminases or an echogenic liver on ultra-
sound. It is generally asymptomatic, has a good prognosis and steatosis 
usually disappears within 3 months of abstinence.
Alcoholic hepatitis
Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) presents with rapid onset jaundice in the context 
of recent heavy alcohol use. This is commonly associated with tender 
hepatomegaly and features of the systemic inammatory response syn-
drome. Unlike other types of hepatitis, the ALT level is only mildly raised 
A
B
Ethanol
Peroxisomes
1–5%
ADH
75–80%
MEOS/CYP2E1
Inducible, up to 20%
Acetaldehyde
Acetate
ROS
DAMPs
Kupffer cells
Gut-derived endotoxin
↑Gut permeability
TNF-α
TGF-β
Hepatocyte injury
Liver fibrosis
Lipid peroxidation
Protein/DNA adducts
Glutathione depletion
NADPH
to
NADP+
NAD+
to
NADH
NAD+
to
NADH
↑FA synthesis
 ↓FA oxidation
Fatty liver
Amount/pattern
Nutrition
Genetics
(e.g. PNPLA3)
Co-existent liver disease
(e.g. hepatitis C,
haemochromatosis)
Risk of
cirrhosis
Liver
Intestine
Fig. 24.30 Factors involved in the pathogenesis of alcohol-related liver disease. 
in pathogenesis of alcohol-related liver disease. (ADH = alcohol dehydrogenase; DAMPs = damage-associated molecular patterns; FA = fatty acid; MEOS = microsomal 
ethanol oxidising system; NAD = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH = NAD-hydrogen; NADP = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH = NADP-hydrogen; 
ROS = reactive oxygen species; TGF-β = transforming growth factor beta; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha)

[[p950]]
894    HEPATOLOGY
(< 300) and may even be normal, but the AST/ALT ratio is often greater 
than 1.5–2. It carries a signicant short-term risk of death, often due 
to sepsis or renal failure. Severe AH is associated with a 15% 1-month 
mortality and 50% 1-year mortality. Cirrhosis may coexist in patients 
with acute alcoholic hepatitis. Patients often deteriorate during the rst 
1–3 weeks in hospital. Even if they abstain, it may take up to 6 months 
for jaundice to resolve. In patients presenting with jaundice who sub-
sequently abstain, the 3- and 5-year survival is 70%. In contrast, those 
who continue to drink have 3- and 5-year survival rates of 60% and 34%, 
respectively.
Alcoholic cirrhosis
Palmar erythema, spider naevi and gynaecomastia are more common in 
alcoholic cirrhosis than in cirrhosis of other aetiologies. Alcoholic cirrho-
sis often presents with a serious complication, such as variceal haem-
orrhage or ascites, and only half of such patients will survive for 5 years 
from presentation. However, most who survive the initial illness and who 
become abstinent will survive beyond 5 years.
Investigations
Investigations aim to establish alcohol misuse, exclude alternative 
or additional coexistent causes of liver disease, and assess the 
severity of liver damage. The clinical history from patient, relatives and 
friends is important to establish alcohol misuse duration and severity. 
Biological markers, particularly macrocytosis in the absence of anae-
mia, may suggest and support a history of alcohol misuse. A raised 
GGT is commonly seen in alcohol-related fatty liver and generally 
falls within 2–6 weeks of abstinence but is not specic and may also 
be elevated in the presence of other conditions, including NAFLD. 
Carbohydrate-decient transferrin (CDT) is also a serum biomarker of 
recent alcohol excess.
The extent of brosis can be assessed using either serum brosis 
markers or transient elastography. A liver biopsy is occasionally required 
if there is diagnostic uncertainty.
In alcoholic hepatitis, a number of prognostic scoring systems are 
available. The prothrombin time (PT) and bilirubin are used to calculate 
a ‘modied discriminant function’ (mDF), also known as the Maddrey 
score, which enables the clinician to assess prognosis (serum bilirubin in 
µmol/L is divided by 17 to convert to mg/dL):
DF = [4.6 × Increase in PT (sec)] + Bilirubin (mg/dL)
24.47  Pathological features of alcohol-related liver disease
 Macrovesicular steatosis
 Alcoholic hepatitis:
Ballooning degeneration of hepatocytes
Neutrophil inltration
Mallory’s hyaline
Pericellular brosis
 Fibrous septa, leading to cirrhosis
 Lipogranuloma
 Central hyaline sclerosis
 Mega-mitochondria
Fat infiltration > 5%
with or without
mild inflammation
Steatosis +
necroinflammation
(ballooning, Mallory
bodies,
megamitochondria)
Increasing fibrosis,
eventually leading
to cirrhosis
Steatosis
NASH
Cirrhosis
TNF-α
Oxidant stress
Endotoxin
Immune factors
TGF-β
Stellate cell activation
↑FA influx
↓FA oxidation
↑FA synthesis
↓VLDL assembly
Insulin resistance
Fig. 24.31 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Rate of progression is determined by environmental (dietary) and genetic 
factors. (FA = fatty acid; TGF-β = transforming growth factor beta; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha; VLDL = very low-density lipoprotein)
24.48  Clinical syndromes of alcohol-related liver disease
Fatty liver (> 90%)
 Asymptomatic abnormal liver 
enzymes
 Bright (echogenic) liver on ultrasound
Alcoholic hepatitis (10%–35%)
 Rapid onset jaundice
 Coagulopathy
 Tender hepatomegaly
 High short-term mortality
Cirrhosis (10%–20%)
 Stigmata of chronic liver disease
 Ascites/varices/encephalopathy
 Nodular liver (large, normal or small)
 Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma

[[p951]]
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease    895
24
A value over 32 implies severe disease. Historically, this group had a 
40%–50% 1 month mortality but this has dropped to 15% in a recent 
large study, reecting improved medical management. A second scor-
ing system, the Glasgow Alcoholic Hepatitis Score, uses the age, white 
cell count and renal function, in addition to PT and bilirubin, to assess 
prognosis (Box 24.49). A score of 9 or more identies an even higher risk 
group with a 60% 1-month mortality.
Management
Cessation of alcohol consumption is the single most important treat-
ment and prognostic factor. Life-long abstinence is the best advice. 
General health and life expectancy are improved when this occurs, 
irrespective of the stage of liver disease. Abstinence is even effective 
at preventing progression, hepatic decompensation and death once 
cirrhosis is present. Treatment of alcohol dependency is discussed 
Chapter 31. In the acute presentation of ALD it is important to identify 
and anticipate alcohol withdrawal and Wernicke’s encephalopathy, in 
parallel with the liver disease.
Nutrition
Nutrition is very important, and calorie intake correlates with survival in 
severe alcoholic hepatitis. Enteral feeding via a ne-bore nasogastric 
tube may be needed in patients unable to meet their requirements.
Drug therapy
The optimal treatment of severe alcoholic hepatitis (Maddrey’s discrim-
inative score > 32) has been widely debated. The STOPAH study was 
a large, multicentre, double-blind, randomised trial in patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of severe alcoholic hepatitis. This showed no effect of 
pentoxifylline (a weak anti-TNF agent) on survival. There was a border-
line reduction in 28-day mortality with prednisolone, but no benet by 
3 months or 1 year. Prednisolone was associated with increased rates of 
sepsis and gastrointestinal bleeding. N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) may also 
limit oxidative stress but initial trials failed to show any benet. A single 
trial has suggested a benet of intravenous NAC in patients also treated 
with prednisolone. If the bilirubin has not fallen 7 days after starting glu-
cocorticoids, the drugs are unlikely to reduce mortality and should be 
stopped.
Liver transplantation
ALD is a common indication for liver transplantation in Europe and the 
United States. The outcome of transplantation for ALD is good, with sur-
vival rates similar to other indications and if the patient remains abstinent 
there is no risk of disease recurrence. The challenge is to identify patients 
with an unacceptable risk of returning to harmful alcohol consumption. 
Many programmes require a 6-month period of abstinence from alcohol 
before a patient is considered for transplantation. Although duration of 
abstinence is only one factor in predicting risk of relapse and the length 
required is debatable, a period of abstinence will allow recovery of liver 
function sufcient to avoid transplantation in some, as well as identify 
those at highest risk of early recidivism. Transplantation for alcoholic hep-
atitis has been described in highly selected individuals with acceptable 
short-term outcomes but it is seldom performed due to concerns about 
longer-term risk of recidivism.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Increasingly sedentary lifestyles and changing dietary patterns mean that 
the prevalence of obesity and insulin resistance has increased world-
wide, and so fat accumulation in the liver is a common nding during 
abdominal imaging studies and on liver biopsy. This results in a similar 
spectrum of liver disease to alcohol excess, so when these changes 
were observed in the absence of high alcohol consumption, this was 
called non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
NAFLD includes a spectrum of progressive liver disease. The major-
ity will have fatty inltration alone (steatosis) but a minority (10%–20%) 
will develop accompanying inammation (non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, 
NASH) and/or brosis, and may progress to cirrhosis and primary liver 
cancer. NAFLD is considered by many to be the hepatic manifestation 
of the ‘metabolic syndrome’ as it is strongly associated with obesity, 
type 2 diabetes, dyslipidaemia and hypertension. Initial denitions used 
a threshold of alcohol consumption (typically 28 units per week for men 
or 21 units for women) for diagnosis. However, an alternative nomencla-
ture of metabolic (dysfunction)-associated fatty liver disease, or MAFLD, 
has recently been proposed to reect our better understanding of the 
risk factors and to describe those patients in whom this coexists with 
alcohol excess.
Overall, NAFLD is estimated to have a global prevalence of 24%. A large 
European study found NAFLD to be present in 94% of obese patients 
(body mass index (BMI) > 30 kg/m2), 67% of overweight patients (BMI 
> 25 kg/m2) and 25% of normal-weight patients. The overall prevalence of 
NAFLD in patients with type 2 diabetes ranges from 40% to 70%. The fre-
quency of steatosis varies with ethnicity (45% in patients of Hispanic origin, 
33% in those of European ancestry and 24% in those of African ancestry) 
and gender (in those of European descent, 42% males vs 24% females).
Fibrosis is the main determinant of outcome. Patients with cirrhosis 
have a high risk of liver-related adverse outcomes, whereas those with 
less advanced brosis are more likely to have extra-hepatic cancers and 
vascular events. Patients with NASH have signicantly higher rates of 
brosis progression than those with simple steatosis. Due to its increas-
ing prevalence, NAFLD cirrhosis is predicted to become the main aetiol-
ogy in patients undergoing liver transplantation during the next 5 years.
Pathophysiology
The initiating events in NAFLD are typically based on the development 
of obesity and insulin resistance, leading to increased hepatic free fatty 
acid ux. This imbalance between the rate of import/synthesis and the 
rate of export/catabolism of fatty acids in the liver leads to the devel-
opment of steatosis. This may be an adaptive response through which 
hepatocytes store potentially toxic lipids as relatively inert triglyceride. A 
‘two-hit’ hypothesis has been proposed to describe the pathogenesis 
of NAFLD, the ‘rst hit’ causing steatosis that then progresses to NASH 
or brosis if a ‘second hit’ occurs. In reality, progression probably follows 
hepatocellular injury caused by a combination of several different ‘hits’, 
including:
 oxidative stress due to free radicals produced during fatty acid 
oxidation
 direct lipotoxicity from fatty acids and other metabolites in the liver
 endoplasmic reticulum stress
 gut-derived endotoxin
 cytokine release (TNF-α etc.) and immune-mediated hepatocellular 
injury.
24.49 How to assess prognosis using the Glasgow Alcoholic 
Hepatitis Score
Score
1
2
3
Age
< 50
> 50
White cell count
(×109/L)
< 15
> 15
Urea (mmol/L 
(BUN mg/dl))
< 5 (14 )
> 5 (14 )
PT ratio
< 1.5
1.5–2.0
> 2.0
Bilirubin (µmol/L 
(mg/dL))
< 125 (7.4 )
125–250 
(7.4–14.8 )
> 250 (14.8 )
A score of ≥ 9 is associated with a 40% 28-day survival, compared to  
80% for patients with a score of < 9.
(BUN = blood urea nitrogen; PT = prothrombin time)

[[p952]]
896    HEPATOLOGY
Cellular damage triggers cell death and inammation, which leads to 
stellate cell activation and development of hepatic brosis that culmi-
nates in cirrhosis (see Fig. 24.31).
As with many other liver diseases, genetic and environmental factors 
interact to determine disease progression:
 Genetics. Several genetic modiers of disease severity have been 
identied, with PNPLA3 and its product, adiponutrin, being the best 
validated.
 Demographics. Cirrhosis is more common with increasing age, 
although possibly just reecting longer duration of disease. Higher 
rates of brosis progression are observed in men and post-meno-
pausal women.
 Diet. Excessive alcohol consumption leads to increased brosis 
progression, whereas coffee consumption appears to be protective 
against brosis and HCC in NAFLD.
 Intestinal microbiota. Obesity, diabetes and NAFLD are all linked 
with gut dysbiosis, with several microbial signatures associated 
with advanced brosis. The gut microbiome may inuence intestinal 
permeability and delivery of pathogen-associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs) through the portal circulation that trigger liver inammation.
 Comorbidity. The presence of type 2 diabetes and severe obesity 
are associated with higher rates of cirrhosis in NAFLD.
NAFLD should not be confused with acute fatty liver, which can occur 
in hepatic mitochondrial cytopathies, e.g. acute fatty liver of pregnancy 
or drug toxicity (sodium valproate, tetracyclines), or with bacterial toxins 
(e.g. Bacillus cereus). In these, defective mitochondrial beta-oxidation of 
lipids leads to fat droplet accumulation in hepatocytes and microvesic-
ular steatosis.
Clinical features
NAFLD is frequently asymptomatic, although it may be associated with 
fatigue and mild right upper quadrant discomfort. It is commonly identi-
ed as an incidental biochemical abnormality during routine blood tests 
or as a fatty liver on abdominal imaging. Alternatively, patients may pres-
ent late in the natural history of the disease with complications of cir-
rhosis and portal hypertension, such as variceal haemorrhage, or with 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
The average age of NAFLD cirrhosis patients is currently 50–60 
years; however, the emerging epidemic of childhood obesity means that 
NAFLD is present in increasing numbers of younger patients. NAFLD is 
also associated with polycystic ovary syndrome and obstructive sleep 
apnoea.
Investigations
Investigation of patients with suspected NAFLD should aim to conrm 
the presence of fat in the liver and determine the extent of brosis. It is 
important to assess alcohol consumption as a contributory factor and 
check for medications that cause fatty liver, such as tamoxifen, amiodar-
one and corticosteroids. Investigations should exclude other coexistent 
liver diseases (including viral, autoimmune and inherited causes).
Biochemical tests
There is no single diagnostic blood test for NAFLD. Serum GGT is often 
raised. ALT and AST may be normal or modestly raised, usually less 
than twice the upper limit of normal. ALT levels fall as hepatic brosis 
increases and the normal AST : ALT ratio of <  1 reverses as advanced 
brosis develops. Other laboratory abnormalities that may be present 
include low-titre antinuclear antibody (ANA) in 20%–30% of patients and 
elevated ferritin levels.
Although routine blood tests are unable to determine the degree of 
liver brosis accurately, several calculated scores, such as the NAFLD 
Fibrosis Score and FIB-4 Score, which are based on the results of rou-
tinely available blood tests and anthropometrics, have a high negative 
predictive value for advanced brosis/cirrhosis (Box 24.50). A low score 
can therefore be used to rule out advanced brosis in many NAFLD 
patients, allowing care to focus on those most likely to have advanced 
disease. Specic serum brosis markers such as the Enhanced Liver 
Fibrosis panel may also be used.
Imaging
Ultrasound is most often used and provides a qualitative assessment of 
hepatic fat content, as the liver appears ‘bright’ due to increased echo-
genicity; however, sensitivity is limited when fewer than 33% of hepato-
cytes are steatotic. CT, MRI or MR spectroscopy offer greater sensitivity 
for detecting lesser degrees of steatosis, but these are resource-inten-
sive and not widely used. No routine imaging modality can distinguish 
simple steatosis from steatohepatitis or accurately quantify hepatic bro-
sis short of cirrhosis.
Transient elastography
Transient elastography (TE) is often used to assess those with indetermi-
nate brosis scores. Liver stiffness can predict the likelihood of advanced 
brosis and is well validated in NAFLD, although readings may get less 
reliable with BMI over 40. Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) is an 
ultrasound-based technique which can be performed simultaneously 
with TE to quantify steatosis non-invasively.
Liver biopsy
Although it is frequently not required for either diagnosis or staging, 
liver biopsy remains the ‘gold standard’ investigation for diagnosis and 
assessment of degree of inammation and extent of liver brosis. The 
histological changes seen in NAFLD are identical to those described in 
ALD (see previous section). The denition of NASH is based on a combi-
nation of three lesions (steatosis, hepatocellular injury and inammation; 
see Fig. 24.31) with a mainly centrilobular, acinar zone 3 distribution. 
Perisinusoidal brosis is a characteristic feature of NAFLD. Histological 
scoring systems are widely used to assess both necroinammation and 
brosis severity semi-quantitatively.
It is important to note that hepatic fat content tends to diminish as 
cirrhosis develops and so NAFLD is likely to be under-diagnosed in the 
setting of advanced liver disease, where it is thought to be the underlying 
cause of 30%–75% of cases in which no specic aetiology is readily 
identied (so-called ‘cryptogenic cirrhosis’).
24.50 Simple non-invasive scores for NAFLD/brosis1
Test
Key variables
Thresholds
Age < 65 yr
Age > 65 yr
NAFLD 
Fibrosis 
Score 
(NFS)2
Age
BMI
Diabetes/IFG
AST
ALT
Platelets
Albumin
High risk
>0.676
Indeterminate risk
1.455–0.676
Low risk
<−1.455
High risk
>0.676
Indeterminate risk
0.12–0.676
Low risk
<0.12
FIB-4 
Score3
Age
AST
Platelets
ALT
High risk
>2.67
Indeterminate risk
1.30–2.67
Low risk
<1.30
High risk
>2.67
Indeterminate risk
2.00–2.67
Low risk
<2.00
1Predict advanced brosis and cirrhosis (F3–4). Simple scores like NFS and FIB-4 are based on 
the results of routinely available blood tests and anthropometrics. 2www.nadscore.com. 3http://
gihep.com/calculators/hepatology/brosis-4-score/.
NFS from Angulo P, Hui JM, Marchesini G, et al. The NAFLD Fibrosis Score. A noninvasive system 
that identies liver brosis in patients with NAFLD. Hepatology 2007;45(4):846–854; FIB-4 from 
Vallet-Pichard A, Mallet V, Nalpas B, et al. FIB-4: an inexpensive and accurate marker of brosis 
in HCV infection. comparison with liver biopsy and brotest. Hepatology 2007; 46(1):32–36.
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; BMI = body mass index; 
IFG = impaired fasting glucose)

[[p953]]
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease    897
24
Management
As it is a marker of the metabolic syndrome, identication of NAFLD 
should prompt screening for and treatment of cardiovascular risk fac-
tors in all patients. It is also necessary to assess whether patients 
have advanced brosis so that liver-targeted treatment can be focused 
particularly on those patients. An example of an algorithm for the 
assessmentand risk stratication of patients with NAFLD is provided 
in Fig.24.32
Non-pharmacological treatment
Current treatment comprises lifestyle interventions to promote weight 
loss and improve insulin sensitivity through dietary changes and phys-
ical exercise. Sustained weight reduction of 7%–10% is associated with 
signicant improvement in histological and biochemical NASH severity. 
However, this is only achieved by a small proportion of patients, focusing 
attention on other strategies. A Mediterranean diet pattern and reduced 
fructose consumption may also be helpful.
Pharmacological treatment
No pharmacological agents are currently licensed specically for 
NAFLD therapy. Treatment directed at coexisting metabolic disorders, 
such as dyslipidaemia and hypertension, should be given. Although 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) do not ameliorate NAFLD, 
there does not appear to be any increased risk of hepatotoxicity or 
other side-effects, and so they may be used safely to treat dyslip-
idaemia. Specic insulin-sensitising agents, in particular glitazones, 
may help selected patients. Positive results with high-dose vitamin 
E (800 U/day) have been tempered by evidence that high doses may 
be associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer and all-cause 
mortality, which has limited its use. Obeticholic acid, a farnesoid X 
receptor agonist, appears to improve brosis in non-cirrhotic NASH 
in an interim analysis but the trial is ongoing. Several other new med-
icines are currently in late-phase clinical trials and so liver-targeted 
pharmacological treatments are likely to be available within the next 
few years.
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease
The liver is an important target for autoimmune injury. The clinical picture 
is dictated by the nature of the autoimmune process and, in particular, the 
target cell for immune injury. The disease patterns are quite distinctive for 
primary hepatocellular injury (autoimmune hepatitis) and biliary epithelial 
cell injury (primary biliary cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis).
Autoimmune hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a disease of immune-mediated injury tar-
geting hepatocytes, which can present either as an acute severe hepa-
titis or chronic hepatitis leading to cirrhosis. It is a lifelong disease which 
often runs a relapsing and remitting course. It can develop at any age, 
with peaks around the second and sixth decades. It is more common in 
women with a 5:1 predominance. It has a strong association with other 
autoimmune diseases (Box 24.51).
Pathophysiology
It is characterised by the presence of serum antibodies and peripheral 
blood T lymphocytes reactive with self-proteins, and high levels of serum 
immunoglobulins – in particular, IgG. The reasons for the breakdown in 
immune tolerance in autoimmune hepatitis remain unclear. There are 
strong HLA associations (typically DR3 and DR4), indicating an under-
lying genetic predisposition, with a presumed environmental trigger. 
Exposure to the antibiotic nitrofurantoin can induce autoimmune hepa-
titis in a small number of cases, and cross-reactivity to viruses such as 
HAV and EBV has been proposed as an alternative trigger.
Clinical features
Some patients may be asymptomatic, with a raised ALT detected on 
blood tests. The onset of symptoms is usually insidious, with fatigue, 
anorexia and arthralgia. The non-specic nature of the early features can 
lead to the diagnosis being missed in the early disease stages. In about 
one-quarter of patients the onset is acute, resembling viral hepatitis, but 
TE > 7.8 kPa
or
ELF > 9.5
Calculate FIB-4 score
(Age, AST, ALT, platelets)
Transient elastography
or
ELF test
Manage in primary care
Lifestyle advice
Address cardiovascular risks
Reassess in 2–5 years
Refer to hepatology clinic
Lifestyle advice
Address cardiovascular risks
Assess for portal hypertension/HCC
TE ≤ 7.8 kPa
or
ELF ≤ 9.5
Age <65, FIB-4 1.3–2.67
Age >65, FIB-4 2–2.67
FIB-4 >2.67
Age <65, FIB-4 <1.3
Age >65, FIB-4 <2
Low risk
Indeterminate risk
High risk
Suspected NAFLD
(risk factors, steatosis on imaging,
alternative diagnoses excluded)
Reassess in 2–5 years
Fig. 24.32 Assessment and risk stratication of patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). (ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate 
aminotransferase; ELF = enhanced liver brosis; FIB-4 = brosis-4; HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma; TE = transient elastography)

[[p954]]
898    HEPATOLOGY
resolution does not occur. This acute presentation can lead to extensive 
liver necrosis and liver failure. Signs of chronic liver disease, especially 
spider naevi and hepatosplenomegaly, can be present. Approximately 
25% of patients will have cirrhosis at diagnosis, and some will progress 
to cirrhosis despite treatment.
Investigations
There is no single diagnostic test for autoimmune hepatitis. Liver enzymes 
typically show raised ALT and AST, although these uctuate. Serological 
tests for autoantibodies are often positive (Box 24.52). The most fre-
quently seen autoantibody pattern is high titre of antinuclear and/or anti-
smooth muscle antibodies, typically associated with raised IgG levels, 
frequently seen in young adult females. Disease characterised by the 
presence of anti-liver–kidney microsomal (LKM) antibodies, recognising 
cytochrome P450-IID6 expressed on the hepatocyte membrane, is typ-
ically seen in paediatric populations and can be more resistant to treat-
ment than ANA-positive disease. More recently, a pattern of antibody 
reactivity with anti-soluble liver antigen (anti-SLA) has been described 
typically in adult patients, often with aggressive disease and lacking 
autoantibodies of other specicities.
It should be noted that low titres of these antibodies occur in some 
healthy people and in patients with other inammatory liver diseases. 
ANA also occur in connective tissue diseases and other autoimmune 
diseases (with an identical pattern of homogenous nuclear staining) while 
anti-smooth muscle antibody has been reported in infectious mononu-
cleosis, chronic hepatitis C infection and a variety of malignant diseases.
Elevated serum IgG levels are an important diagnostic and treatment 
response feature if present, but the diagnosis is still possible in the presence 
of normal IgG levels. If the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis is suspected, 
liver biopsy should be performed both to conrm the diagnosis before com-
mencing long-term immunosuppression and to stage any liver brosis. It 
typically shows an abundance of lymphocytes and plasma cells around the 
portal tracts (portal lymphoplasmacytic hepatitis) with inammation extend-
ing out from the edge of the portal tracts into the lobule (interface hepatitis). 
Scoring systems, such as the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group 
(IAIHG) criteria, are useful for epidemiological study and for assessing trial 
eligibility but are complex for normal clinical practice.
Management
Treatment with glucocorticoids is life-saving in autoimmune hepatitis, 
particularly during exacerbations of active and symptomatic disease. 
Initially, prednisolone (30–40 mg/day) is given orally; the dose is then 
gradually reduced as the patient and LFTs improve. Budesonide may 
be used in non-cirrhotic patients if steroid side-effects are problem-
atic. Maintenance therapy is usually with azathioprine (1–2 mg/kg daily), 
although introduction of this is often delayed by around a month to allow 
the liver enzymes to settle in case it causes drug-induced hepatotoxicity. 
Maintenance azathioprine can be used as monotherapy, or may be com-
bined with low-dose prednisolone (ideally, below 5 mg/day). Second-line 
therapies are unlicensed with little long-term outcome data. However, in 
case series, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) appears effective in patients 
who are azathioprine-intolerant, but less so in azathioprine non-respond-
ers. Similarly, tacrolimus appears helpful in refractory disease.
The aims of treatment are to achieve resolution of symptoms and to 
completely control inammatory activity to prevent progressive brosis, 
especially in younger patients or those with cirrhosis. As ares may be 
asymptomatic but increase the risk of cirrhosis or decompensation, dis-
ease activity (indicated by rising ALT and IgG levels) should be monitored 
regularly. Maintenance treatment is required for at least 3 years and is 
often continued long term, as relapse rates are high if immunosuppres-
sion is withdrawn.
Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC, formerly known as primary biliary cirrho-
sis until 2015, when the name was changed to reect the large proportion 
of non-cirrhotic patients) is a chronic, progressive cholestatic liver disease 
that predominantly affects women aged 30 and over. It is strongly asso-
ciated with the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA), which in 
combination with cholestatic liver enzymes are diagnostic of PBC. It is 
characterised by granulomatous inammation of the portal tracts, leading 
to progressive damage and eventually loss of the small and middle-sized 
bile ducts. This, in turn, leads to brosis and cirrhosis of the liver.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of PBC varies across the world. It is relatively common in 
northern Europe and North America but is rare in Africa and Asia. There 
is a strong female-to-male predominance of 9:1; it is also more common 
among cigarette smokers. Clustering of cases has been reported, sug-
gesting an environmental trigger in susceptible individuals.
Pathophysiology
Immune mechanisms are clearly involved. The condition is closely asso-
ciated with other autoimmune non-hepatic diseases, such as thyroid 
disease, and there is a genetic association with HLA-DR8, together with 
polymorphisms in a number of other genes regulating the nature of the 
immune response (e.g. IL-12 and its receptor). AMA is directed at pyru-
vate dehydrogenase complex, a mitochondrial enzyme complex that 
plays a key role in cellular energy generation. PBC-specic ANAs (such 
as those directed at the nuclear pore antigen gp210) have a character-
istic staining pattern in immunouorescence assays (selectively binding 
to the nuclear rim or nuclear dots), which means that they should not be 
mistaken for the homogenously staining ANA seen in autoimmune hepa-
titis. Increases in serum immunoglobulin levels are frequent but, unlike in 
autoimmune hepatitis, it is typically IgM that is elevated.
Pathologically, chronic granulomatous inammation destroys the inter-
lobular bile ducts; progressive lymphocyte-mediated inammatory dam-
age causes brosis, which spreads from the portal tracts to the liver 
parenchyma and eventually leads to cirrhosis.
Clinical features
PBC may be detected incidentally on routine blood tests, but systemic 
symptoms such as fatigue and generalised itch are common. The sever-
ity of these symptoms does not correlate with the severity of the liver 
24.51 Conditions associated with autoimmune hepatitis
 Autoimmune thyroiditis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 Coeliac disease
 Type 1 diabetes
 Dermatomyositis
 Coombs-positive haemolytic anaemia
 Ulcerative colitis
24.52  Frequency of autoantibodies in chronic non-viral liver 
diseases and in healthy people
Disease
Antinuclear 
antibody 
(%)
Anti-smooth 
muscle 
antibody (%)
Antimitochondrial 
antibody*
Healthy controls
5
1.5
0.01
Autoimmune 
hepatitis
80
70
15
Primary biliary 
cholangitis
25
35
95
Cryptogenic 
cirrhosis
40
30
15
*
have primary biliary cholangitis (see text).

[[p955]]
Autoimmune liver and biliary disease    899
24
disease. Although there may be right upper abdominal discomfort, the 
typical biliary-type pain, fever and rigors seen with bacterial cholangitis 
do not occur in PBC. Bone pain or fractures can rarely result from oste-
omalacia (fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption) or, more commonly, from 
osteoporosis. Xanthomatous deposits occur in a minority, especially 
around the eyes. Scratch marks may be found in patients with severe 
pruritus.
Associated diseases
Autoimmune and connective tissue diseases occur with increased fre-
quency in PBC, particularly the sicca syndrome, systemic sclerosis, 
coeliac disease and thyroid diseases. Hypothyroidism should always be 
considered in patients with fatigue.
Diagnosis and investigations
The LFTs show a pattern of cholestasis (see Box 24.2). Hyper-
cholesterolaemia is common and worsens as disease progresses but 
appears not to be associated with increased cardiovascular risk. AMA is 
present in over 95% of patients; when it is absent, the diagnosis should 
not be made without obtaining histological evidence and considering 
cholangiography (typically MRCP) to exclude other biliary disease. Due 
to the peripheral nature of the ducts affected by PBC, the biliary tree 
should appear normal on imaging. ANA and anti-smooth muscle anti-
bodies are present in around 15% of patients (see Box 24.52); autoanti-
bodies found in associated diseases may also be present. Fibrosis stage 
should be assessed, usually using transient elastography. Liver biopsy is 
necessary only if there is diagnostic uncertainty. The histological features 
of PBC correlate poorly with the clinical features; portal hypertension can 
develop before the histological onset of cirrhosis.
Management
The hydrophilic bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), at a dose of 
13–15 mg/kg daily, improves bile ow, replaces toxic hydrophobic bile 
acids in the bile acid pool and reduces apoptosis of the biliary epithelium. 
Clinically, UDCA improves LFTs, may slow down histological progression 
and has few side-effects; it is therefore widely used in the treatment of 
PBC and should be regarded as the optimal rst-line treatment. Eighty 
percent of patients will have a good biochemical response to UDCA with 
a reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase to normal or near-normal lev-
els, and this corresponds to very good long-term outcomes. However, 
a signicant minority of patients, especially those presenting under the 
age of 50 years, show an inadequate response to UDCA, and have an 
increased risk of developing end-stage liver disease. Obeticholic acid 
(OCA) is a second-generation bile acid therapeutic that acts as an ago-
nist for the nuclear farnesoid X receptor. It improves alkaline phosphatase 
in more than half of patients who did not respond to or tolerate UDCA, 
and is licensed for second-line therapy in PBC. Bezabrate, a perox-
isome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARα) agonist used pre-
dominantly to treat hyperlipidaemia, has also been shown to improve 
alkaline phosphatase in the majority of UDCA non-responders, although 
it is not licensed for this use. Due to the short-term nature of the studies, 
neither drug has yet been shown to alter clinically signicant outcomes. 
Despite the autoimmune aetiology, immunosuppressants, such as glu-
cocorticoids, azathioprine, penicillamine and ciclosporin, have all failed to 
show any overall benet when given to unselected PBC patients.
Liver transplantation should be considered once liver failure has devel-
oped and may also be indicated in patients with intractable pruritus. 
Serum bilirubin remains the most reliable marker of declining liver func-
tion. Transplantation is associated with an excellent 5-year survival of 
over 80%, although the disease will recur in over one-third of patients 
at 10 years.
Pruritus
This is the main symptom requiring treatment. The cause is unknown, 
but up-regulation of opioid receptors and increased levels of endog-
enous opioids may play a role. First-line treatment is with the anion-
binding resin colestyramine, which probably acts by binding potential 
pruritogens in the intestine and increasing their excretion in the stool. A 
dose of 4–16 g/day orally is used. The powder is mixed in orange juice and 
the main dose (8 g) taken before and after breakfast, when maximal duo-
denal bile acid concentrations occur. Colestyramine may bind other drugs 
in the gut (most obviously UDCA) and adequate spacing should be used 
between drugs. Colestyramine is sometimes ineffective and can be dif-
cult for some patients to tolerate. Alternative treatments include rifampicin 
(150 mg/day, titrated up to a maximum of 600 mg/day as required with 
close monitoring of LFTs), naltrexone (an opioid antagonist; 25 mg/day 
initially, increasing up to 300 mg/day), plasmapheresis and a liver support 
device (e.g. a molecular adsorbent recirculating system, MARS).
Fatigue
Fatigue affects about one-third of patients with PBC. The cause is 
unknown but it may reect intracerebral changes due to cholestasis. 
Unfortunately, once depression, hypothyroidism and coeliac disease 
have been excluded, there is currently no specic treatment. The impact 
on patients’ lives can be substantial.
Malabsorption
Prolonged cholestasis is associated with steatorrhoea and malabsorp-
tion of fat-soluble vitamins, which should be replaced as necessary. 
Coeliac disease should be excluded since its incidence is increased in 
PBC.
Bone disease
Osteopenia and osteoporosis are common and normal post-menopau-
sal bone loss is accelerated. Baseline bone density should be meas-
ured and treatment started with replacement calcium and vitamin D3. 
Bisphosphonates should be used if there is evidence of osteoporosis. 
Osteomalacia is rare.
Overlap syndromes
AMA-negative PBC (‘autoimmune cholangitis’)
A few patients demonstrate the clinical, biochemical and histological 
features of PBC but do not have detectable AMA in the serum. Serum 
transaminases, serum immunoglobulin levels and titres of ANA tend to 
be higher than in AMA-positive PBC. The clinical course mirrors classical 
PBC, however, and these patients should be considered as having a 
variant of PBC.
PBC/autoimmune hepatitis overlap
A few patients with AMA and cholestatic LFTs have elevated transami-
nases, high serum immunoglobulin IgG levels and interface hepatitis on 
liver histology. In such individuals, a trial of glucocorticoid therapy may 
be benecial.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is an immune-mediated choles-
tatic liver disease characterised by multifocal stricturing of the larger bile 
ducts of the extra- and/or intrahepatic biliary tree, often in association 
with inammatory bowel disease. This is also associated with progres-
sive hepatic brosis which can lead to cirrhosis and portal hypertension, 
along with an increased risk of various cancers (cholangiocarcinoma, 
gallbladder, colon).
The incidence is about 6.3/100 000 in people of European ancestry. 
Unlike most other autoimmune diseases, PSC is twice as common in men 
as women. Most patients present at age 25–40 years, although the con-
dition may be diagnosed at any age and is an important cause of chronic 
liver disease in children. The generally accepted diagnostic criteria are:
 generalised beading and stenosis of the biliary system on cholangi-
ography (Fig. 24.33)
 absence of choledocholithiasis (or history of bile duct surgery)
 exclusion of bile duct cancer, by prolonged follow-up.

[[p956]]
900    HEPATOLOGY
The term ‘secondary sclerosing cholangitis’ is used to describe the 
typical changes described above when a clear predisposing factor for 
duct brosis can be identied. The causes of secondary sclerosing chol-
angitis are shown in Box 24.53
Pathophysiology
The cause of PSC is unknown but there is a close association with 
inammatory bowel disease, particularly ulcerative colitis (Box 24.54). 
About 70%–80% of PSC patients have coexisting ulcerative colitis, and 
PSC is the most common form of chronic liver disease in ulcerative coli-
tis. Between 3% and 10% of patients with ulcerative colitis develop PSC, 
particularly those with extensive colitis or pancolitis. The distribution of 
PSC-associated colitis is often predominantly right-sided with relative 
distal sparing, and may be less symptomatic that non-PSC IBD. The 
prevalence of PSC is lower in patients with Crohn’s colitis (about 1%). 
Patients with PSC and ulcerative colitis are at greater risk of colorectal 
neoplasia than those with ulcerative colitis alone, and individuals who 
develop colorectal neoplasia are at greater risk of cholangiocarcinoma.
PSC is thought to be an immunologically mediated disease, triggered 
in genetically susceptible individuals by toxic or infectious agents, which 
may gain access to the biliary tract through a leaky, diseased colon. A 
close link has been identied with HLA haplotype A1-B8-DR3-DRW52A, 
which is commonly found in association with other organ-specic auto-
immune diseases (e.g. autoimmune hepatitis).
Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) have been 
detected in the sera of 60%–80% of patients with PSC with or with-
out ulcerative colitis, and in 30%–40% of patients with ulcerative colitis 
alone. The antibody is not specic for PSC and is found in other chronic 
liver diseases (e.g. 50% of patients with autoimmune hepatitis), so is of 
little diagnostic use on its own.
Clinical features
The diagnosis is often made incidentally when persistently raised 
serum ALP is discovered in an individual with ulcerative colitis. Patients 
may present with episodes of biliary obstruction, or with symptoms of 
cirrhosis or portal hypertension. Common symptoms include fatigue, 
intermittent jaundice, weight loss, right upper quadrant abdominal pain 
and pruritus. Attacks of acute cholangitis are uncommon and usually 
follow biliary instrumentation.
Investigations
Biochemical screening usually reveals a cholestatic pattern of LFTs but 
ALP and bilirubin levels may vary widely in individual patients during the 
course of the disease. For example, ALP and bilirubin values increase 
during acute cholangitis, decrease after therapy and sometimes uctuate 
for no apparent reason. Modest elevations in serum transaminases are 
usually seen, whereas hypoalbuminaemia and clotting abnormalities are 
found at a late stage only. In addition to ANCA, low titres of serum ANA 
and anti-smooth muscle antibodies may be found in PSC but have no 
diagnostic signicance; serum AMA is absent.
The key investigation is MRCP, which is usually diagnostic and reveals 
multiple irregular stricturing and dilatation (see Fig. 24.33). ERCP should 
be reserved for therapeutic interventions.
On liver biopsy, the characteristic early features of PSC are periductal 
‘onion skin’ brosis and inammation, with portal oedema and bile duc-
tular proliferation resulting in expansion of the portal tracts (Fig. 24.34). 
Later, brosis spreads, progressing inevitably to biliary cirrhosis; obliter-
ative cholangitis leads to the so-called ‘vanishing bile duct syndrome’.
The link with IBD and associated colon cancer risk is sufciently strong 
that all patients diagnosed with PSC should undergo an initial colonos-
copy, even in the absence of bowel symptoms.
Management
There is no cure for PSC but management of cholestasis and its com-
plications and specic treatment of the disease process are indicated. 
UDCA is widely used, although the evidence to support this is limited. 
UDCA may have benet in terms of reducing colon carcinoma risk.
The course of PSC is variable. Overall, the median time from diag-
nosis to death or transplant is around 20 years. Prognosis is worse in 
Fig. 24.33 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram showing typical 
changes of primary sclerosing cholangitis. There is intrahepatic bile duct beading, 
stricturing and dilatation. The extrahepatic bile duct is also diffusely strictured. 
Courtesy of Dr Dilip Patel, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.
24.53 Causes of secondary sclerosing cholangitis
 Previous bile duct surgery with stricturing and cholangitis
 Bile duct stones causing cholangitis
 Traumatic or ischaemic bile duct injury
 Critical illness ischaemic cholangiopathy
 Intrahepatic infusion of 5-uorodeoxyuridine
 Insertion of formalin into hepatic hydatid cysts
 Insertion of alcohol into hepatic tumours
 Parasitic infections (e.g. Clonorchis)
 Autoimmune pancreatitis/immunoglobulin G4-associated cholangitis
 Acquired immunodeciency syndrome (AIDS; probably infective as a result of 
cytomegalovirus or Cryptosporidium)
24.54 Comparison of primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) and 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
PBC
PSC
Gender (F : M)
9 : 1
1:3
Age
Older: median age 50–55 
years
Younger: median age 
20–40 years
Disease associations
Non-organ-specic 
autoimmune disease 
(e.g. Sjögren syndrome) 
and autoimmune thyroid 
disease
Ulcerative colitis
Autoantibody prole
90% AMA +ve
65%–85% pANCA 
+ve (but this is 
non-specic and not 
diagnostic)
Predominant bile-duct 
injury
Intrahepatic
Extrahepatic >
intrahepatic
(AMA = antimitochondrial antibody; pANCA = perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody)

[[p957]]
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions    901
24
symptomatic patients, possibly reecting a later disease stage at diag-
nosis. In recent series, the leading cause of death in PSC is cholangio-
carcinoma (58% of deaths), with lower rates attributable to liver failure 
(30%) and variceal bleeding (9%). Immunosuppressive agents, including 
prednisolone, azathioprine, methotrexate and ciclosporin, have been 
tried; results have generally been disappointing.
Symptomatic patients often have pruritus. Management is as for PBC. 
Fatigue appears to be less prominent than in PBC, although it is still 
present in some patients.
Cancer screening
Patients with PSC should have annual ultrasound scans to assess for 
gallbladder polyps, to aid early detection of gallbladder cancer. Patients 
with PSC and colitis should undergo annual colonoscopy to screen for 
colorectal cancer. There is not an established role for routine screening 
for cholangiocarcinoma with either imaging or serum CA19-9 levels, due 
to both the low specicity and the low likelihood of successful interven-
tion, even with earlier diagnosis.
Management of complications
Broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g. ciprooxacin) should be given for acute 
attacks of cholangitis. If new symptoms or worsening liver tests, non-in-
vasive imaging such as MRCP and/or contrast CT should be performed 
to assess for a dominant stricture (which may be either inammatory 
or malignant). If a dominant stricture is associated with either jaundice 
or infection, ERCP may be performed for sampling (via brush cytology) 
to exclude cholangiocarcinoma and to relieve the obstruction, usu-
ally through balloon dilatation rather than stenting. Fat-soluble vitamin 
replacement is necessary in jaundiced patients. Metabolic bone disease 
(usually osteoporosis) is a common complication that requires treatment.
Surgical treatment
Surgical resection of the extrahepatic bile duct and biliary reconstruc-
tion have a limited role in the management of non-cirrhotic patients with 
dominant extrahepatic disease. Orthotopic transplantation is the only 
surgical option in patients with advanced liver disease; 5-year survival is 
80%–90% in most centres. Unfortunately, the condition may recur in the 
graft in around 20% of patients and there are no identied therapies able 
to prevent this. Cholangiocarcinoma is a contraindication to transplanta-
tion. Colon carcinoma risk persists following transplantation (and may be 
increased because of immunosuppression) so colonoscopic surveillance 
should continue.
A comparison of PBC and PSC is shown in Box 24.53
IgG4-associated cholangitis
This disease (as well as its nomenclature) is closely related to autoim-
mune pancreatitis (which is present in more than 90% of the patients). 
IgG4-associated cholangitis (IAC) often presents in middle-aged to older 
men with obstructive jaundice (due to either hilar stricturing/intrahepatic 
sclerosing cholangitis or a low bile duct stricture). Cholangiographic 
appearances can resemble PSC or hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Patients 
may have past or concurrent evidence of IgG4 disease in other organs 
(Box 24.55).The serum IgG4 is often raised and liver biopsy shows a 
lymphoplasmacytic inltrate, with IgG4-positive plasma cells. It is impor-
tant not to miss the diagnosis as it responds well to glucocorticoid ther-
apy, often with complete normalisation of liver enzymes and resolution of 
strictures on serial imaging.
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions
Identication of a hepatic mass lesion is common, both in patients with 
known pre-existing liver disease and as a primary presentation. Although 
primary and secondary malignant tumours are important potential diag-
noses, benign disease is frequent. The critical steps to be taken in diag-
nosing hepatic mass lesions are:
 determining the presence, nature and severity of any underlying 
chronic liver disease, as the differential diagnosis is very different in 
patients with and those without chronic liver disease
 using optimal (usually multiple) imaging modalities.
Primary malignant tumours
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver 
tumour, and the sixth most frequent cause of cancer worldwide. Cirrhosis 
is present in 75%–90% of individuals with HCC and is an important risk 
factor for the disease. The risk is between 1% and 5% in cirrhosis caused 
by hepatitis B and C. There is also an increased risk in cirrhosis due to 
haemochromatosis, alcohol, NAFLD and alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency. 
In northern Europe, 90% of those with HCC have underlying cirrhosis, 
compared with 30% in Taiwan, where hepatitis B is the main risk factor. 
The age-adjusted incidence rates vary from 28 per 100 000 in South-
east Asia (reecting the prevalence of hepatitis B) to 10 per 100 000 in 
southern Europe and 5 per 100 000 in northern Europe. Chronic hepatitis 
B infection increases the risk of HCC 100-fold and is the major risk factor 
worldwide. The risk of HCC is 0.4% per year in the absence of cirrhosis 
and 2%–6% in cirrhosis. The risk is four times higher in HBeAg-positive 
individuals than in those who are HBeAg-negative. Hepatitis B vaccina-
tion has led to a fall in HCC in countries with a high prevalence of hep-
atitis B. The incidence in Europe and North America has risen recently, 
probably related to the increased prevalence of hepatitis C and NAFLD 
cirrhosis. The risk is higher in men and rises with age.
Macroscopically, the tumour usually appears as a single mass in the 
absence of cirrhosis, or as a single nodule or multiple nodules in the 
presence of cirrhosis. It takes its blood supply from the hepatic artery 
and tends to spread by invasion into the portal vein and its radicals. 
Lymph node metastases are common, while lung and bone metastases 
are rare. Well-differentiated tumours can resemble normal hepatocytes 
and can be difcult to distinguish from normal liver.
Fig. 24.34 Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Note onion skin scarring (arrows) 
surrounding a bile duct.
24.55  Manifestations of IgG4-related disease
 Autoimmune pancreatitis
 Sialadenitis (especially submandibular gland)
 Dacryoadenitis (lacrimal gland)
 Retroperitoneal brosis
 Riedel’s thyroiditis
 Retro-orbital tumours
 Periaortitis and periarteritis

[[p958]]
902    HEPATOLOGY
Clinical features
HCC may present with symptoms or through screening of high-risk 
patients. Commonly, liver function deteriorates in those with underlying 
cirrhosis, with worsening ascites, jaundice or variceal haemorrhage. Other 
symptoms can include weight loss, anorexia and abdominal pain. This 
often rapid deterioration may be the rst presentation of previously undi-
agnosed cirrhosis. Examination may reveal hepatomegaly or a right hypo-
chondrial mass. Tumour vascularity can lead to an abdominal bruit, and 
hepatic rupture with intra-abdominal bleeding may occur. The advanced 
nature of disease that presents in this way makes curative therapy unlikely.
HCC found through screening is typically detected much earlier in its 
natural history, signicantly increasing the treatment options.
Investigations
Serum markers
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is produced by 60% of HCCs. Levels increase 
with the size of the tumour and are often normal or only minimally ele-
vated in small tumours detected by ultrasound screening. Serum AFP 
can also rise in the presence of active hepatitis B and C viral replication; 
very high levels are seen following acute hepatic necrosis, such as that 
following paracetamol toxicity. AFP is used in conjunction with ultrasound 
in screening but, in view of low sensitivity and specicity, levels need to 
be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, in the absence of active liver 
inammation, a signicantly elevated or progressively rising AFP warrants 
an aggressive search for HCC (normal range is < 10 ng/ml [8 IU/ml]). In 
HCC patients with elevated AFP levels, serial measurements can be a 
useful biomarker of disease progression or response to treatment.
Imaging
Ultrasound will detect focal liver lesions as small as 1 cm. The use of ultra-
sound contrast agents has increased sensitivity and specicity but is highly 
user-dependent. Ultrasound may also show evidence of portal vein involve-
ment and features of coexistent cirrhosis. The diagnosis is usually conrmed 
on either multi-phase contrast-enhanced CT or MRI, which demonstrate 
the typical hallmarks of HCC: arterial enhancement with washout on the 
portal venous phase (Fig. 24.35). Small lesions of less than 2 cm can be 
difcult to differentiate from hyperplastic nodules in cirrhosis. A combination 
of imaging modalities (CT and MRI) may be required for indeterminate or 
probable HCC when the typical radiological features are absent (Fig. 24.36).
Liver biopsy
Histological conrmation is advisable in patients with large tumours who 
do not have cirrhosis or hepatitis B, in order to conrm the diagnosis and 
exclude metastatic tumour. Biopsy should be avoided in patients who 
may be eligible for transplantation or surgical resection because there is 
a small (1.8%–4%) risk of tumour seeding along the needle tract. In all 
cases of potential HCC where biopsy is being considered, the impact 
that a conrmed diagnosis will have on therapy must be weighed against 
the risks of bleeding.
Role of screening
Screening for HCC, by ultrasound scanning, with or without AFP meas-
urements, every 6 months is indicated in high-risk patients who would be 
suitable for therapy if diagnosed with HCC. The risk is highest in patients 
with chronic hepatitis B and cirrhosis due to viral hepatitis and haemo-
chromatosis, and lower in patients with cirrhosis due to Wilson’s disease 
and autoimmune hepatitis. Cost-effectiveness studies suggest that HCC 
surveillance is warranted in cirrhotic patients where there is an annual 
incidence of HCC of ≥ 1.5% per year. Screening may also be indicated 
in those with chronic hepatitis B (who carry an increased risk of HCC, 
even in the absence of cirrhosis). Although many studies investigating 
the efcacy of HCC surveillance are affected by lead-time and length-
time bias, the current evidence base supports the continued use of HCC 
surveillance. Screening identies smaller tumours, often less than 3 cm in 
size, which are more likely to be cured by surgical resection, local ablative 
therapy or transplantation.
Management
This is different for patients with cirrhosis and those without. In the pres-
ence of cirrhosis, treatment options depend on tumour size and number, 
severity of liver disease (Child–Pugh score) and performance status. An 
algorithm for managing those with cirrhosis is shown in Fig. 24.36
Hepatic resection
This is the treatment of choice for non-cirrhotic patients. The 5-year 
survival in this group is about 50%. There is a 50% recurrence rate at 
5 years, however, which may be due to a second de novo tumour or 
recurrence of the original tumour. Few patients with cirrhosis are suit-
able for hepatic resection because of the high risk of hepatic failure. 
Nevertheless, surgery can be safely performed in cirrhotic patients with 
small tumours, good liver function (Child–Pugh A) and the absence of 
clinically relevant portal hypertension (HVPG ≤ 10 mmHg). In experienced 
centres, advances in surgical technique and pre-operative assessment 
have permitted liver resection to be performed safely in selected patients 
with more advanced liver disease and tumour burden.
Liver transplantation
Transplantation has the benet of curing underlying cirrhosis and remov-
ing the risk of a second, de novo tumour in an at-risk patient. The 
requirement for immunosuppression creates its own risks of reactivation, 
A
B
Fig. 24.35 Contrast-enhanced MRI liver showing a large hepatocellular carcinoma. The tumour (marked by the arrows) demonstrates contrast uptake (enhancement) in 
the arterial phase (A) and washout in the portal venous phase (B). Courtesy of Dr Hamish Ireland, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.

[[p959]]
Liver tumours and other focal liver lesions    903
24
however, if residual or metastatic disease is present, and assessment of 
patients for suitability for liver transplantation focuses on the exclusion of 
extrahepatic disease and vascular invasion. The 5-year survival follow-
ing liver transplantation is 75% for patients with single tumours of less 
than 5 cm in size or three tumours smaller than 3 cm (the Milan criteria). 
Extended criteria have been developed in a number of countries, includ-
ing the UK, allowing patients to be transplanted with a greater number of 
small tumours (≤ 5) or larger single tumours (5–7 cm) that have demon-
strated stability after a period of observation (6 months), either with or 
without locoregional therapy.
Ablative therapy
Ablative therapies use a number of different techniques to achieve local-
ised destruction of tumour tissue. US or CT-guided thermal ablative tech-
niques, including radiofrequency ablation (RFA) and microwave ablation, 
have largely replaced percutaneous ethanol injection in the treatment of 
HCC. Alternative techniques include cryoablation and irreversible elec-
troporation. Loco-regional ablative therapies may be curative for patients 
with early HCC. Thermal ablation in single tumours < 3 cm in size is an 
alternative to surgery based on technical factors (position of the tumour), 
severity of underlying liver disease and comorbidity.
Transarterial chemoembolisation
Transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) is the most widely used pal-
liative treatment for patients with HCC not amenable to surgery or 
potentially curative ablative techniques. TACE involves the selective 
intra-arterial infusion of chemotherapeutic agents followed by embo-
lisation of the tumour feeding vessels with absorbable gelatin powder 
(Gelfoam) to achieve localised tumour necrosis and devascularisation. 
Conventional TACE achieves response rates of 52% with 1-year and 
3-year survival rates of 70% and 40%, respectively. Modications of this 
technique include the use of drug-eluting beads. TACE should not be 
used in patients with advanced liver or renal dysfunction, vascular inva-
sion or extra-hepatic spread. TACE is widely used as a bridging therapy 
for patients awaiting liver transplant and increasingly has found a role in 
down-staging therapy in patients being considered for liver transplant. 
Selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) involves intra-arterial infusion 
of radioactive substances or microspheres into the hepatic artery. Its use 
is being investigated as an alternative to TACE or systemic therapy and 
as a bridging therapy to liver transplant.
Systemic therapy
Sorafenib improves survival from 8 to 11 months in cirrhotic patients, 
but often with signicant side-effects. The drug is a multikinase inhibi-
tor with activity against Raf, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signalling, and is the rst 
systemic therapy to prolong survival in HCC. Levantinib is an alterna-
tive oral multi-kinase inhibitor that has demonstrated non-inferiority to 
soranib but with a different side-effect prole. Second-line therapies 
include regorafenib and cabozantinib. Trials of immune therapy are 
Ablation
Resection Transplant
Ablation
Hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic liver
Prognostic
stage
Treatment
>5 years
TACE
Solitary
2-3 nodules*
< 3 cm
Yes
No
Yes
No
Optimal surgical
candidate
Transplant
candidate
>2.5 years
Systemic therapy
≥10 months
Best supportive
care
3 months
Median
survival
 Very early stage (0)
Single <2 cm
Preserved
liver function
PS0
 Early stage (A)
Single or 2-3
nodules < 3 cm
Preserved
liver function
PS0
 Intermediate
stage (B)
Multinodular/
unresectable
Preserved
liver function
PS0
 Advanced stage (C)
Portal invasion/
extrahepatic spread
Preserved
liver function
PS1-2
 Terminal stage (D)
Non-transplantable
HCC
End-stage
liver function
PS3-4
Fig. 24.36 Management of hepatocellular carcinoma complicating cirrhosis. Modied Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system. Patient management is 
determined by the size and number of tumours, evidence of portal invasion or extrahepatic spread, severity of underlying liver cirrhosis and performance status. Preserved liver 
function refers to Childs–Pugh A cirrhosis without ascites. Performance status (PS): 0 = fully active, no symptoms, >2 = limited self-care, conned to bed or chair for more 
than 50% of waking hours. Optimal surgical candidate refers to a global assessment of a patient’s suitability based on compensated liver disease (Child–Pugh A), acceptable 
grade of portal hypertension, acceptable amount of remaining parenchyma and possibility of using a laparoscopic or minimally invasive approach.
*In some countries, including the United Kingdom, transplant may be considered in patients with up to ve tumours, each less than 3 cm. (HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma; 
TACE = transarterial chemoembolisation) Adapted from European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) Clinical Practice Guidelines: Management of Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma. Journal of Hepatology. 2018: 69;182–236.

[[p960]]
904    HEPATOLOGY
ongoing. Pre-treatment with sorafenib 2–3 weeks before TACE appears 
to improve progression-free survival, as reported in the TACTICS trial.
Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma
This rare variant differs from HCC in that it occurs in young adults, equally 
in males and females, in the absence of hepatitis B infection and cirrhosis. 
The tumours are often large at presentation and the AFP is usually nor-
mal. Histology of the tumour reveals malignant hepatocytes surrounded 
by a dense brous stroma. The treatment of choice is surgical resection. 
This variant of HCC has a better prognosis following surgery than an 
equivalent-sized HCC, two-thirds of patients surviving beyond 5 years.
Other primary malignant tumours
These are rare but include haemangio-endothelial sarcomas. Cholan-
giocarcinoma (bile duct cancer) typically presents with bile duct 
obstruction rather than as a hepatic mass lesion, although intra-hepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma can present as a focal liver tumour.
Secondary malignant tumours
These are common and usually originate from carcinomas in the lung, 
breast, abdomen or pelvis. They may be single or multiple. Peritoneal 
dissemination frequently results in ascites.
Clinical features
The primary neoplasm is asymptomatic in 50% of patients, being 
detected on either radiological, endoscopic or blood biochemistry 
screening. There is liver enlargement and weight loss; jaundice may be 
present.
Investigations
A raised ALP activity is the most common biochemical abnormality but 
LFTs may be normal. Ascitic uid, if present, has a high protein content 
and may be blood-stained; cytology sometimes reveals malignant cells. 
Imaging shows lling defects (Fig. 24.37); laparoscopy may reveal the 
tumour and facilitates liver biopsy.
Management
Hepatic resection can improve survival for slow-growing colonic carci-
noma metastases, and is an approach that should be actively explored 
in patients who are t for liver resection and have had the primary tumour 
resected, once extrahepatic disease has been excluded. Patients with 
neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs), such as gastrinomas, insulinomas and 
glucagonomas, and those with lymphomas may benet from surgery, 
hormonal treatment or chemotherapy. Unfortunately, palliative treatment 
to relieve pain is all that is available for most patients.
Benign tumours
The increasing use of ultrasound scanning has led to more frequent iden-
tication of incidental benign focal liver lesions.
Hepatic adenomas
These are rare benign hepatocellular tumours that may present as an 
abdominal mass or with abdominal pain but now more typically present 
as an incidental nding on imaging.
They are more common in women (female : male ratio 10:1) and are 
associated with oral contraceptive, androgen and anabolic steroid use. 
Hepatic adenomas can increase in size during pregnancy. Large or rap-
idly growing adenomas can rarely rupture, causing intraperitoneal bleed-
ing. In women, resection is indicated for hepatic adenomas ≥ 5 cm in 
diameter or with exophytic protrusion, as this is associated with higher 
rates of bleeding. Hepatic adenomas < 5 cm rarely bleed and there is a 
low rate of malignant transformation. Management involves avoidance of 
the oral contraceptive pill and weight loss. Resection is recommended 
for hepatic adenoma in men, irrespective of size because of a higher rate 
of malignant transformation.
Haemangiomas
These are the most common benign liver tumours and are present in 
1%–20% of the population. Most are smaller than 3 cm and rarely cause 
symptoms. The diagnosis is usually made by ultrasound but CT/MRI may 
show a low-density lesion with delayed arterial lling. Surgery is needed 
only for very large symptomatic lesions or where the diagnosis is in doubt.
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is a benign polyclonal hepatocellular 
proliferation resulting from an arterial malformation. FNH is more com-
mon in women (female : male ratio 9:1) and typically present between 
35 and 50 years. Most are solitary and < 5 cm but 20%–30% are mul-
tiple. The lesions are usually asymptomatic. They can be differentiated 
from adenoma by a focal central scar seen on CT or MRI (Fig. 24.38). 
Histologically, they consist of nodular regeneration of hepatocytes 
without brosis. In the absence of symptoms, surgical resection is not 
required. If a condent diagnosis of FNH can be made then follow-up 
imaging is not required. There is no need to discontinue the oral contra-
ceptive pill or monitor in pregnancy.
Cystic liver disease and liver abscess
Isolated or multiple simple cysts are common in the liver and are a rela-
tively frequent nding on ultrasound screening. They can be associated 
with polycystic renal disease (Fig. 24.39). They are intrinsically benign 
and require no therapy, other than in rare cases where the mass effect of 
very large or multiple cysts causes abdominal discomfort. In such cases, 
percutaneous or surgical debulking can be attempted but recurrence 
is typical. Liver transplant may rarely be required in severe cases. Liver 
abscesses are discussed on page 891.
Drugs and the liver
The liver is the primary site of drug metabolism and an important target 
for drug-induced injury. Pre-existing liver disease may affect the capacity 
of the liver to metabolise drugs and unexpected toxicity may occur when 
patients with liver disease are given drugs in normal doses. Box 24.56
Fig. 24.37 CT liver showing multiple hypo-attenuating liver metastases 
(arrows). Courtesy of Dr Hamish Ireland, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh.

[[p961]]
Drugs and the liver    905
24
also shows drugs that should be avoided in patients with cirrhosis, as 
they can exacerbate known complications of cirrhosis. The possibility 
of undiagnosed underlying liver injury should always be considered in 
patients exhibiting unexpected effects following drug exposure.
Drug-induced liver injury
Drug toxicity should always be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of patients presenting with acute liver failure, jaundice or abnormal liver 
biochemistry. Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) can be classied as either 
intrinsic (predictable dose-related toxicity occurring in a large proportion 
of individuals exposed to a drug) or idiosyncratic (occurring unpredicta-
bly in a small proportion of patients exposed to a drug). Typical patterns 
of drug toxicity are listed in Box 24.57; the most common picture is 
a mixed cholestatic hepatitis. The presence of jaundice indicates more 
severe liver damage. Although acute liver failure can occur, most drug 
reactions are self-limiting and chronic liver damage is rare. Abnormal 
LFTs often take weeks to normalise following a drug-induced hepatitis, 
and it may be months before they normalise after a cholestatic hepatitis. 
Occasionally, permanent bile duct loss (ductopenia) follows a choles-
tatic drug reaction, such as that due to co-amoxiclav, resulting in chronic 
cholestasis with persistent symptoms such as itching.
The key to diagnosis is a detailed drug history (Box 24.58), looking for 
temporal relationships between drug exposure and onset of liver abnor-
mality (bearing in mind the fact that liver injury can frequently take weeks 
or even months to develop following exposure). A liver biopsy should be 
considered if there is suspicion of pre-existing liver disease or if blood 
tests fail to improve when the suspect drug is withdrawn.
Where drug-induced liver injury is suspected or cannot be excluded, 
the potential culprit drug should be discontinued unless it is impossible 
to do so safely.
Types of liver injury
Different histological patterns of liver injury may occur with drug injury.
Fig. 24.38 MRI liver showing a large focal nodular hyperplasia with central scar 
(arrow) Courtesy of Dr Hamish Ireland, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh
Fig. 24.39 CT abdomen from a patient with polycystic liver and kidney disease. 
Multiple low attenuation cysts are seen within the liver (highlighted in blue) and left 
kidney (red). Courtesy of Dr Hamish Ireland, Royal Inrmary of Edinburgh
24.56  Drugs to be avoided in cirrhosis
Drug
Problem
Toxicity
Non-steroidal anti-
inammatory drugs
Reduced renal blood 
ow
Mucosal ulceration
Hepatorenal failure
Bleeding varices
Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors
Reduced renal blood 
ow
Hepatorenal failure
Codeine
Constipation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
Narcotics
Constipation, drug 
accumulation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
Anxiolytics
Drug accumulation
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
24.57  Examples of common causes of drug-induced 
hepatotoxicity
Pattern
Drug
Cholestasis
Chlorpromazine
High-dose oestrogens
Cholestatic hepatitis
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Co-amoxiclav
Statins
Acute hepatitis
Rifampicin
Isoniazid
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Amiodarone
Venous outow obstruction
Busulfan
Azathioprine
Fibrosis
Methotrexate
Autoimmune hepatitis-like
Nitrofurantoin
Checkpoint inhibitors (nivolumab/
pembrolizumab)
24.58  Diagnosing acute drug-induced liver disease
 Tabulate the drugs taken:
Prescribed and self-administered
 Establish whether hepatotoxicity is reported in the literature
 Relate the time the drugs were taken to the onset of illness: 4 days to 8 weeks 
(usual)
 Establish the effect of stopping the drugs on normalisation of liver biochemistry:
Hepatitic liver function tests (2 months)
Cholestatic/mixed liver function tests (6 months)
N.B Challenge tests with drugs should be avoided
 Exclude other causes:
Viral hepatitis
Biliary disease
 Consider liver biopsy

[[p962]]
906    HEPATOLOGY
Cholestasis
Pure cholestasis (selective interference with bile ow in the absence of 
liver injury) can occur with oestrogens; this was common when high con-
centrations of oestrogens (50 µg/day) were used as contraceptives. Both 
the current oral contraceptive pill and hormone replacement therapy can 
be safely used in chronic liver disease.
Chlorpromazine and antibiotics such as ucloxacillin are examples of 
drugs that cause cholestatic hepatitis, which is characterised by inam-
mation and canalicular injury. Co-amoxiclav is the most common anti-
biotic to cause abnormal LFTs but, unlike other antibiotics, it may not 
produce symptoms until 10–42 days after it is stopped. Anabolic steroids 
used by body-builders may also cause a cholestatic hepatitis. In some 
cases (e.g. NSAIDs and cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors), there is 
overlap with acute hepatocellular injury.
Hepatocyte necrosis
Many drugs cause an acute hepatocellular necrosis with high serum 
transaminase concentrations; paracetamol is the best known. Inammation 
is not always present but does accompany necrosis in liver injury due to 
diclofenac (an NSAID) and isoniazid (an anti-tuberculous drug). Granulomas 
may be seen in liver injury following the use of allopurinol. Acute hepatocel-
lular necrosis has also been described following the use of several herbal 
remedies, including germander, comfrey and jin bu huan. Recreational 
drugs, including cocaine and ecstasy, can also cause severe acute 
hepatitis.
Steatosis
Microvesicular hepatocyte fat deposition, due to direct effects on mito-
chondrial beta-oxidation, can follow exposure to tetracyclines and 
sodium valproate. Macrovesicular hepatocyte fat deposition has been 
described with tamoxifen, and amiodarone toxicity can produce a similar 
histological picture to NASH.
Vascular/sinusoidal lesions
Drugs such as the alkylating agents used in oncology can damage the 
vascular endothelium and lead to hepatic venous outow obstruction. 
Chronic overdose of vitamin A can damage the sinusoids and trigger 
local brosis that can result in portal hypertension.
Hepatic brosis
Most drugs cause reversible liver injury and hepatic brosis is very 
uncommon. Methotrexate, however, as well as causing acute liver injury 
when it is started, can lead to cirrhosis when used in high doses over a 
long period of time. Risk factors for drug-induced hepatic brosis include 
pre-existing liver disease and a high alcohol intake.
Autoimmune hepatitis-like
Nitrofurantoin is a commonly used antibiotic for urinary tract infec-
tions which can cause a liver injury with the features of autoim-
mune hepatitis, with raised ALT and IgG levels and anti-nuclear or 
anti-smooth muscle antibodies. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (such 
as nivolumab and pembrolizumab) are increasingly used as immu-
notherapy in cancer treatments. A well-recognised side-effect is the 
development of orid organ-specic autoimmune disease, including 
an autoimmune hepatitis which can require high-dose steroids to 
control it.
Inherited liver diseases
The inherited diseases are an important and probably under-diagnosed 
group of liver diseases. In addition to the ‘classical’ conditions, such as 
haemochromatosis and Wilson’s disease, the important role played by 
the liver in the expression of the inborn errors of metabolism should be 
remembered, as should the potential for genetic underpinning for intra-
hepatic cholestasis.
Haemochromatosis
Haemochromatosis is a condition in which the amount of total body iron 
is increased; the excess iron is deposited in, and causes damage to, 
several organs, including the liver. It may be primary or secondary to 
other diseases (Box 24.59).
Genetic haemochromatosis
In genetic haemochromatosis (GH), iron is deposited throughout the 
body and total body iron may reach 20–60 g (normally 4 g). The impor-
tant organs involved are the liver, pancreatic islets, endocrine glands, 
joints and heart. In the liver, iron deposition occurs rst in the periportal 
hepatocytes, extending later to all hepatocytes, with associated brosis 
and eventually cirrhosis.
Pathophysiology
Body iron content is controlled by regulation of iron absorption from diet 
and its storage in the reticuloendothelial system. The hormone hepci-
din inhibits iron transport by binding to ferroportin on enterocytes and 
macrophages (see Fig. 25.20). Approximately 90% of GH patients 
are homozygous for a single point mutation resulting in a cysteine to 
tyrosine substitution at position 282 (C282Y) in the HFE protein, which 
leads to reduced hepcidin levels and ultimately, uncontrolled increased 
iron absorption. This is one of the most frequent genetic disorders in 
Northern European populations. However, penetrance is variable and 
fewer than 50% of C282Y homozygotes will develop clinical features of 
haemochromatosis. Iron loss in menstruation and pregnancy can delay 
the onset of GH in females. A single copy of the C2828Y mutation can 
also cause GH if also accompanied by a histidine-to-aspartic acid muta-
tion at position 63 (H63D), referred to as compound heterozygosity. This 
genotype has a lower risk of iron overload and typically causes a less 
severe form of haemochromatosis. A number of other rare autosomal 
recessive mutations leading to GH are described. The second most 
common form of inherited iron disorder is ferroportin disease, an auto-
somal dominant disorder which typically has a milder clinical phenotype 
than HFE-associated haemochromatosis.
Clinical features
Symptomatic disease usually presents in men over 40 years of age with 
features of liver disease (often with hepatomegaly), diabetes or heart 
failure. Fatigue and arthropathy are early symptoms but are frequently 
absent. Leaden-grey skin pigmentation can sometimes occur due to 
excess melanin, especially in exposed parts, axillae, groins and genitalia: 
hence the term ‘bronzed diabetes’. Impotence, loss of libido and testic-
ular atrophy are recognised complications, as are early-onset osteoar-
thritis targeting unusual sites such as the metacarpophalangeal joints, 
chondrocalcinosis and pseudogout. Cardiac failure or cardiac dysrhyth-
mia may occur due to iron deposition in the heart.
24.59  Causes of haemochromatosis
Primary haemochromatosis
 HFE-associated haemochromatosis (AR)
 Juvenile haemochromatosis (hemojuvelin/hepcidin mutation, AR)
 Transferrin receptor 2 deciency (TFR2 mutation, AR)
 Ferroportin disease (SLC40A1 mutation, AD)
Secondary iron overload
 Transfusional or dietary iron overload
 Iron-loading anaemia (thalassaemia, sideroblastic anaemia, chronic haemolytic 
anaemias)
 Liver disease (ALD, NAFLD, hepatitis C)
(AD = autosomal dominant, AR = autosomal recessive)

[[p963]]
Inherited liver diseases    907
24
Investigations
In the absence of inammation, serum ferritin is proportional to iron 
stores and is used as a screening test for iron overload. Patients with GH 
have raised ferritin and raised transferrin saturations (> 40% in women, 
> 50% in men), and this pattern should prompt molecular testing for 
HFE mutations. If HFE-associated GH is conrmed, those with raised 
transaminases or a ferritin over 1000 µg/L (100 µg/dL) are at highest risk 
for liver disease and should also undergo brosis assessment (usually 
with transient elastography). If GH is suspected but HFE genotyping is 
normal, MRI liver or liver biopsy can be used to assess for signicant 
iron overload to identify patients requiring extended genetic testing. Liver 
biopsy allows assessment of the distribution of iron, with deposition 
predominantly within hepatocytes being characteristic of haemochro-
matosis, while accumulation within reticuloendothelial cells is more sug-
gestive of secondary iron overload. The Hepatic Iron Index (HII) provides 
quantication of liver iron (µmol of iron per gram dry weight of liver/age 
in years). An HII of more than 1.9 suggests genetic haemochromatosis 
(Fig. 24.40). The differential diagnoses for elevated ferritin are systemic 
inammatory diseases, alcohol-related liver disease and NAFLD. Very 
signicant ferritin elevation can be seen in adult Still’s disease.
Management
Treatment consists of weekly venesection of 500 mL blood (250 mg iron) 
to reduce ferritin to under 50 µg/L (5 µg/dL) and transferrin saturations 
to under 50%. Thereafter, venesection is continued as required to main-
tain these parameters. Liver and cardiac problems improve after iron 
removal, but joint pain is less predictable and can improve or worsen 
after iron removal. Diabetes does not resolve. First-degree family mem-
bers should be investigated, preferably by genetic screening, to identify 
and treat other cases early.
Pre-cirrhotic patients with GH have a normal life expectancy, and even 
cirrhotic patients have a good prognosis compared with other forms of 
cirrhosis (three-quarters of patients are alive 5 years after diagnosis). 
This is probably because liver function is often well preserved at diagno-
sis and improves with therapy. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma 
(p. 901) is mandatory because this is the main cause of death, affect-
ing one-third of patients with cirrhosis. Venesection reduces but does 
not abolish the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in the presence of 
cirrhosis.
Secondary haemochromatosis
Many conditions, including chronic haemolytic disorders, sideroblastic 
anaemia, other conditions requiring multiple blood transfusion (generally 
over 50 L), porphyria cutanea tarda, dietary iron overload and occasionally 
alcohol-related cirrhosis, are associated with widespread secondary iron 
overload. The features are similar to those of primary haemochromatosis 
but the history and clinical ndings point to the true diagnosis. Some 
patients are heterozygotes for HFE mutations and this may contribute to 
the development of iron overload.
Wilson’s disease
Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is a rare but important 
autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabolism caused by a vari-
ety of mutations in the ATP7B gene. Pathological copper accumulation 
leads to damage to liver, brain and other organs.
Pathophysiology
Copper acts as a cofactor for a number of essential enzymes. Dietary 
absorption is usually balanced by excretion into bile. The ATP7B gene 
encodes a transmembrane copper-transporting ATPase which excretes 
copper into bile, and loss of function causes excessive copper accu-
mulation. This transporter is also required for synthesis of functional 
caeruloplasmin, the circulating copper-binding protein. The amount of 
copper in the body at birth is normal but thereafter it increases steadily; 
the organs most affected are the liver, basal ganglia of the brain, eyes, 
kidneys and skeleton.
At least 700 different mutations have been described. Most cases 
are compound heterozygotes with two different mutations in ATP7B. 
Attempts to correlate the genotype with the mode of presentation and 
clinical course have not shown any consistent patterns. The large num-
ber of culprit mutations means that, in contrast to haemochromatosis, 
genetic diagnosis is not routine in Wilson’s disease, although it may have 
a role in screening families following identication of the genotype in an 
index patient.
Clinical features
Symptoms usually arise between the ages of 5 and 45 years. Hepatic 
disease occurs predominantly in childhood and early adolescence. 
Neurological damage causes movement disorders and dementia, which 
tends to present in later adolescence. These features can occur alone or 
simultaneously. Other manifestations include renal tubular damage and 
osteoporosis, but these are rarely presenting features.
Liver disease
There is a wide spectrum of acute and chronic presentations of liver 
disease, including asymptomatic elevated liver enzymes, acute hepati-
tis, recurrent jaundice and silent progression to cirrhosis. Fulminant liver 
failure can occur, especially in young women. This causes the liberation 
of free copper into the blood stream, causing massive haemolysis and 
renal tubulopathy. The possibility of Wilson’s disease should be consid-
ered in any patient under the age of 40 presenting with recurrent acute 
hepatitis or chronic liver disease of unknown cause, especially when this 
is accompanied by haemolytic anaemia.
Neurological disease
Clinical features include a variety of extrapyramidal features, particu-
larly tremor, choreoathetosis, dystonia, parkinsonism and dementia. 
Neurological disease typically develops after the onset of liver disease 
and can be prevented by effective treatment. This increases the impor-
tance of diagnosis in the liver phase beyond just allowing effective man-
agement of liver disease.
Kayser–Fleischer rings
These constitute the most important single clinical clue to the diag-
nosis and can be seen in 60% of adults with Wilson’s disease (less 
often in children but almost always in neurological Wilson’s disease), 
but require slit-lamp examination for correct identication. Kayser–
Fleischer rings are characterised by greenish-brown discoloration of 
the corneal margin appearing rst at the upper periphery. They disap-
pear with treatment.
Fig. 24.40 Liver histology: haemochromatosis. This Perls stain shows 
accumulating iron within hepatocytes, which is stained blue. There is also 
accumulation of large fat globules in some hepatocytes (macrovesicular steatosis). 
Iron also accumulates in Kupffer cells and biliary epithelial cells.

[[p964]]
908    HEPATOLOGY
Investigations
Diagnosis of Wilson’s disease is based on algorithms incorporating 
symptoms and signs, measures of copper metabolism and DNA anal-
ysis. A low serum caeruloplasmin is the best single laboratory clue to 
the diagnosis. However, advanced liver failure from any cause can also 
reduce the serum caeruloplasmin, and conversely a normal value does 
not exclude the diagnosis if there is a high index of suspicion. Other 
features of disordered copper metabolism should therefore be sought; 
these include a high free serum copper concentration, a high urine cop-
per excretion of greater than 0.6 µmol/24 hrs (38 µg/24 hrs) and a very 
high hepatic copper content. Measuring 24-hour urinary copper excre-
tion while giving D-penicillamine is a useful conrmatory test; more than 
25 µmol/24 hrs is considered diagnostic of Wilson’s disease.
Management
Pharmacological treatment is with either chelating-agents (D-penicillamine 
or trientene) that increase urinary copper excretion, or zinc salts, which 
reduce absorption of dietary copper. The copper-binding agent penicil-
lamine is the drug of choice. The dose given must be sufcient to pro-
duce cupriuresis and most patients require 1.5 µg/day (range 1–4 µg). 
The dose can be reduced once the disease is in remission but treatment 
must continue for life, even through pregnancy. Care must be taken to 
ensure that re-accumulation of copper does not occur. Abrupt discon-
tinuation of treatment must be avoided because this may precipitate 
acute liver failure. Toxic effects occur in one-third of patients and include 
rashes, protein-losing nephropathy, lupus-like syndrome and bone mar-
row depression. If these arise, trientine dihydrochloride (1.2–2.4 µg/day) 
and zinc (50 mg 3 times daily) are potential alternatives.
Prognosis is excellent with early treatment, and presymptomatic 
patients compliant with treatment have comparable survival to the gen-
eral population. Liver transplantation is indicated for fulminant liver failure 
or for advanced cirrhosis with liver failure. The value of liver transplanta-
tion in severe neurological Wilson’s disease is unclear. Siblings and chil-
dren must be investigated and treatment should be given to all affected 
individuals, even if they are asymptomatic.
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (α1-AT) is a serine protease inhibitor (Serpin, or Pi) 
produced by the liver and secreted into the circulation. One of its main 
functions is the breakdown of neutrophil elastase. Circulating levels 
of α1-AT can double during the acute phase response and play a key 
anti-inammatory role, preventing damage to normal tissue. Numerous 
variants of the SERPINA1 gene have been described but there are two 
common mutations. The wild type is known as the M allele. Ninety-ve 
percent of cases of severe deciency are due to homozygosity of the 
Z allele. Mild deciency can result from the less-severe S allele. The 
mutated α1-AT forms polymers within the endoplasmic reticulum of 
hepatocytes, with reduced secretion into the blood. The accumulation 
of polymers within hepatocytes causes the liver toxicity, whereas the 
unopposed neutrophil elastase activity causes damage to structural pro-
teins in the lungs. Homozygous individuals (PiZZ) have low plasma α1-AT 
concentrations, although globules containing α1-AT are found in the liver, 
and these people may develop hepatic and pulmonary disease. Liver 
manifestations include cholestatic jaundice in the neonatal period (neo-
natal hepatitis), which can resolve spontaneously; and chronic hepatitis 
leading to cirrhosis in adults. Alpha1-AT deciency is an exacerbating 
factor for liver disease of other aetiologies, and the possibility of dual 
pathology should be considered when severity of disease, such as ALD, 
appears disproportionate to the level of underlying insult.
There are no clinical features that distinguish liver disease due to α1-AT 
deciency from liver disease due to other causes, and the diagnosis is 
made from the low plasma α1-AT concentration and genotyping for the 
presence of the mutation. Alpha1-AT-containing globules can be demon-
strated in the liver (Fig. 24.41) but this is not necessary to make the 
diagnosis.
There is no specic treatment. The risk of severe and early-onset 
emphysema means that all patients should be advised to stop smoking.
Gilbert syndrome
Gilbert syndrome is by far the most common inherited disorder of bil-
irubin metabolism (see Box 24.12). It is an autosomal recessive trait 
when caused by a mutation in the promoter region of the gene for 
UDP-glucuronyl transferase enzyme (UGT1A1), which leads to reduced 
enzyme expression. It can be inherited in a dominant fashion when there 
is a missense mutation in the gene. This results in decreased conjugation 
of bilirubin, which accumulates as unconjugated bilirubin in the blood. 
The levels of unconjugated bilirubin increase during fasting, as fasting 
reduces levels of UDP-glucuronyl transferase.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with isolated elevation of bilirubin, typically, 
although not exclusively, in the setting of physical stress or illness. There 
are no stigmata of chronic liver disease other than jaundice. Increased 
excretion of bilirubin and hence stercobilinogen leads to normal-coloured 
or dark stools, and increased urobilinogen excretion causes the urine to 
turn dark on standing as urobilin is formed. In the presence of haemol-
ysis, pallor due to anaemia and splenomegaly due to excessive reticulo-
endothelial activity are usually present.
Investigations
The plasma bilirubin is usually less than 100 µmol/L (~6 mg/dL) and the 
LFTs are otherwise normal. There is no bilirubinuria because the hyperbil-
irubinaemia is predominantly unconjugated. Hepatic histology is normal 
and liver biopsy is not recommended for the investigation of patients with 
possible Gilbert syndrome. The condition is not associated with liver injury 
and thus has an excellent prognosis, needs no treatment, and is clinically 
important only because it may be mistaken for more serious liver disease.
Vascular liver disease
Metabolically, the liver is highly active and has large oxygen require-
ments. This places it at risk of ischaemic injury in settings of impaired 
perfusion. The risk is mitigated, however, by the dual perfusion of the liver 
(via the portal vein as well as hepatic artery), with the former representing 
a low-pressure perfusion system that offers protection against the poten-
tial effects of arterial hypotension. The single outow through the hepatic 
vein and the low-pressure perfusion system of the portal vein make the 
liver vulnerable to venous thrombotic ischaemia in the context of Budd–
Chiari syndrome and portal vein thrombosis, respectively.
Fig. 24.41 Liver histology in alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency. Accumulation of 
periodic acid–Schiff-positive granules (arrows) within individual hepatocytes is shown 
in this section from a patient with α1-AT deciency.

[[p965]]
Vascular liver disease    909
24
Hepatic arterial disease
Liver ischaemia
Liver ischaemic injury (ischaemic hepatitis) is relatively common during 
hypotensive or hypoxic events and is under-diagnosed. The character-
istic pattern is one of rising transaminase values in the days following 
such an event (e.g. prolonged seizures). Ischaemic hepatitis is more 
common in patients with pre-existing hepatic congestion (e.g. conges-
tive cardiac failure) or underlying liver disease. Liver synthetic dysfunction 
and encephalopathy are uncommon but can occur. Liver failure is very 
rare. Diagnosis typically rests on clinical suspicion and exclusion of other 
potential aetiologies. Treatment is aimed at optimising liver perfusion and 
oxygen delivery. Outcome is dictated by the morbidity and mortality asso-
ciated with the underlying disease, given that liver ischaemia frequently 
occurs in the context of other organ ischaemia in high-risk patients.
Liver arterial disease
Hepatic arterial disease is rare outside the setting of liver transplanta-
tion and is difcult to diagnose. It can cause signicant liver damage. 
Hepatic artery occlusion may result from inadvertent injury during biliary 
surgery or may be caused by emboli, neoplasms, polyarteritis nodosa, 
blunt trauma or radiation. It usually causes severe upper abdominal pain 
with or without signs of circulatory shock. LFTs show raised transami-
nases (AST or ALT usually > 1000 U/L), as in other causes of acute liver 
damage. Patients usually survive if the liver and portal blood supply are 
otherwise normal.
Hepatic artery aneurysms are extrahepatic in three-quarters of cases 
and intrahepatic in one-quarter. Atheroma, vasculitis, bacterial endocar-
ditis and surgical or biopsy trauma are the main causes. They usually 
lead to bleeding into the biliary tree, peritoneum or intestine. CT scans 
are helpful in identifying the location of the aneurysm, adjacent struc-
tures and evidence of rupture. Angiography remains the gold standard 
for diagnosis. Treatment is radiological or surgical. Any of the vasculitides 
can affect the hepatic artery but this rarely causes symptoms.
Hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) is a recognised complication of liver 
transplantation and typically occurs in the early post-transplant period. 
Clinical features are often related to bile duct rather than liver ischae-
mia because of the dominant role of the hepatic artery in extrahepatic 
bile duct perfusion. Manifestations can include bile duct anastomotic 
failure with bile leak or the development of late bile duct strictures 
(ischaemic cholangiopathy). Diagnosis and initial intervention are 
radiological in the rst instance, with ERCP and biliary stenting being 
the principal approaches to the treatment of biliary strictures causing 
 signicant cholestasis.
Portal venous disease
Portal hypertension
See page 881.
Portal vein thrombosis
Portal venous thrombosis as a primary event is rare but can occur in any 
condition predisposing to thrombosis. It may also complicate intra-ab-
dominal inammatory or neoplastic disease and is a recognised cause of 
portal hypertension. Acute portal venous thrombosis causes abdominal 
pain and diarrhoea, and may rarely lead to bowel infarction, requiring 
surgery. Underlying thrombophilia needs to be excluded. Treatment is 
based on anticoagulation, which is associated with increased recanalisa-
tion rates following acute portal vein thrombosis. Subacute thrombosis 
can be asymptomatic but may subsequently lead to extrahepatic por-
tal hypertension. Ascites is unusual in non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, 
unless the albumin is particularly low.
Portal vein thrombosis can arise as a secondary event in patients with 
cirrhosis and portal hypertension, and is a recognised cause of decom-
pensation in patients with previously stable cirrhosis. In individuals show-
ing such decompensation, portal vein patency should be assessed 
by ultrasound with Doppler ow studies. The role of anticoagulation 
in patients with chronic portal vein thrombosis is unclear, but it is rec-
ommended in potential transplant candidates to reduce the risk of clot 
propagation. Chronic portal vein thrombosis can be a cause of portal 
hypertension.
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
This condition is characterised by resistant hypoxaemia (PaO2 < 9.3 kPa 
(70 mmHg)), intrapulmonary vascular dilatation in patients with cirrhosis, 
and portal hypertension. Clinical features include nger clubbing, cyano-
sis and a characteristic reduction in arterial oxygen saturation on stand-
ing (orthodeoxia). The hypoxia is due to intrapulmonary shunting through 
direct arteriovenous communications. Nitric oxide (NO) over-production 
may be important in pathogenesis. The hepatopulmonary syndrome 
can be treated by liver transplantation but, if severe (PaO2 < 6.7 kPa 
(50 mmHg)), is associated with an increased operative risk.
Portopulmonary hypertension
This unusual complication of portal hypertension is similar to ‘primary 
pulmonary hypertension’ (p. 549). It is dened as pulmonary hyperten-
sion with increased pulmonary vascular resistance and a normal pulmo-
nary artery wedge pressure in a patient with portal hypertension. The 
condition is caused by vasoconstriction and obliteration of the pulmo-
nary arterial system and leads to breathlessness and fatigue.
Hepatic venous disease
Obstruction to hepatic venous blood ow can occur in the small central 
hepatic veins, the large hepatic veins, the inferior vena cava or the heart. 
The clinical features depend on the cause and on the speed with which 
obstruction develops, and can mimic many other forms of chronic liver 
disease, sometimes leading to delayed diagnosis. Congestive hepato-
megaly and ascites are the most consistent features. The possibility of 
hepatic venous obstruction should always be considered in patients with 
an atypical liver presentation.
Budd–Chiari syndrome
This uncommon condition is caused by thrombosis of the larger hepatic 
veins and sometimes the inferior vena cava. Many patients have haem-
atological disorders such as myelobrosis, primary proliferative poly-
cythaemia, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, or antithrombin III, 
protein C or protein S deciencies (Ch. 25). Pregnancy and oral con-
traceptive use, obstruction due to tumours (particularly carcinomas of 
the liver, kidneys or adrenals), congenital venous webs and occasionally 
inferior vena caval stenosis are the other main causes. The underlying 
cause cannot be found in about 30% of patients, although this percent-
age is falling as molecular diagnostic tools (e.g. for the JAK2 mutation 
in myelobrosis) increase the capacity to diagnose underlying haemato-
logical disorders. Hepatic congestion affecting the centrilobular areas is 
followed by centrilobular brosis, and eventually cirrhosis supervenes in 
those who survive long enough.
Clinical features
Acute venous occlusion causes rapid development of upper abdominal 
pain, marked ascites and occasionally acute liver failure. More gradual 
occlusion causes gross ascites and, often, upper abdominal discomfort. 
Hepatomegaly, frequently with tenderness over the liver, is almost always 
present. Peripheral oedema occurs only when there is inferior vena cava 
obstruction. Features of cirrhosis and portal hypertension develop in 
those who survive the acute event.

[[p966]]
910    HEPATOLOGY
Investigations
The LFTs vary considerably, depending on the presentation, and can 
show the features of acute hepatitis. Ascitic uid analysis shows a pro-
tein concentration above 25 g/L (2.5 g/dL) (exudate) in the early stages; 
however, this often falls later in the disease. Doppler ultrasound may 
reveal obliteration of the hepatic veins and reversed ow or associated 
thrombosis in the portal vein. CT may show enlargement of the caudate 
lobe, as this often has a separate venous drainage system that is not 
involved in the disease. CT and MRI may also demonstrate occlusion 
of the hepatic veins and inferior vena cava. Liver biopsy demonstrates 
centrilobular congestion with brosis, depending on the duration of the 
illness. Venography is needed only if CT and MRI are unable to demon-
strate the hepatic venous anatomy clearly.
Management
Predisposing causes should be treated as far as possible; where recent 
thrombosis is suspected, thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator or streptokinase, followed by heparin and oral antico-
agulation, should be considered. Long-term anticoagulation is required. 
Ascites is initially treated medically but often with only limited success. 
Short hepatic venous strictures can be treated with angioplasty. In the 
case of more extensive hepatic vein occlusion, many patients can be 
managed successfully by insertion of a covered TIPSS, followed by 
anticoagulation. Surgical shunts, such as portacaval shunts, are rarely 
performed now that TIPSS is available. Approximately 40% of patients 
will require TIPSS following failure of medical management. Survival 
at 1 year and 5 years following TIPSS is 88% and 78%, respectively. 
Occasionally, a web can be resected or an inferior vena caval stenosis 
dilated. Progressive liver failure is an indication for liver transplantation 
and life-long anticoagulation.
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (veno-occlusive 
disease)
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS; previously known as veno-
occlusive disease) is a rare condition characterised by widespread occlu-
sion of the small central hepatic veins. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in Senecio
and Heliotropium plants used to make teas, as well as cytotoxic drugs 
and hepatic irradiation, are all recognised causes. SOS may develop 
in 10%–20% of patients following haematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation (usually within the rst 20 days) and carries a 90% mortality in 
severe cases. Pathogenesis involves obliteration and brosis of termi-
nal hepatic venules due to deposition of red cells, haemosiderin-laden 
macrophages and coagulation factors. In this setting, SOS is thought to 
relate to pre-conditioning therapy with irradiation and cytotoxic chemo-
therapy. The clinical features are similar to those of the Budd–Chiari 
syndrome (see above). Investigations show evidence of venous out-
ow obstruction histologically but, in contrast to Budd–Chiari, the large 
hepatic veins appear patent radiologically. Transjugular liver biopsy (with 
portal pressure measurements) may facilitate the diagnosis. Treatment 
involves close supportive care/uid management to maintain intravascu-
lar lling, and in severe cases, debrotide, a drug that binds to vascular 
endothelial cells, promoting brinolysis and suppressing coagulation, is 
recommended.
Cardiac disease
Hepatic damage, due primarily to congestion, may develop in all forms of 
right heart failure; usually, the clinical features are predominantly cardiac. 
Very rarely, long-standing cardiac failure and hepatic congestion give rise 
to cardiac cirrhosis. Liver cirrhosis is a recognised complication of some 
forms of congenital heart disease. Fontan-associated liver disease devel-
ops in patients with diverse forms of congenital cardiac disease result-
ing in a single functioning ventricle, treated with the Fontan procedure. 
Chronic hepatic congestion resulting from passive lling of the pulmonary 
arterial circulation results in progressive liver brosis and cirrhosis. Severe 
left ventricular dysfunction is a cause of ischaemic hepatitis. Cardiac 
causes of acute and chronic liver disease are typically under-diagnosed. 
Treatment is principally that of the underlying heart disease with support-
ive treatment for the liver component.
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia of the liver
This is the most common cause of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension 
in developed countries; it is characterised by small hepatocyte nod-
ules throughout the liver without brosis, which can result in sinusoidal 
compression. It is believed to be due to damage to small hepatic arte-
rioles and portal venules. It occurs in older people and is associated 
with many conditions, including connective tissue disease, haemato-
logical diseases and immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine. 
The condition is usually asymptomatic but occasionally presents with 
portal hypertension or with an abdominal mass. The diagnosis is made 
by liver biopsy, which, in contrast to cirrhosis, shows nodule formation 
in the absence of brous septa. Liver function is good and the prog-
nosis is very favourable. Management is based on treatment of the 
portal hypertension.
Pregnancy and the liver
The inter-relationship between liver disease and pregnancy can be a 
complex one and a source of real anxiety for both patient and clinician. 
Three possibilities need to be borne in mind when treating a pregnant 
woman with a liver abnormality:
 This represents a worsening of pre-existing chronic liver or biliary 
disease (although pregnancy may be the rst time a woman’s liver 
biochemistry has been tested, so this may not have previously been 
diagnosed).
 This represents a genuine rst presentation of liver disease that is 
not intrinsically related to pregnancy.
 This represents a genuine pregnancy-associated liver injury process.
It is critical to obtain information relating to liver disease risk factors 
and pre-pregnancy liver status to establish whether any abnormality was 
present before pregnancy. In general, the earlier in pregnancy that liver 
abnormality presents, the more likely it is to represent either pre-exist-
ing liver disease or non-pregnancy-related acute liver disease. Equally, 
the best outcome for both mother and baby results from optimising the 
physical condition of the mother, and in situations of deteriorating liver 
function (which can be steep in late pregnancy) consideration should 
always be given to early delivery if the fetus is viable. Joint management 
between hepatologists and obstetricians is essential.
Intercurrent and pre-existing liver disease
Acute hepatitis A can occur during pregnancy but has no effect on 
the fetus. Chronic hepatitis B requires identication in pregnancy 
because of long-term health implications for the mother and the effec-
tiveness of perinatal vaccination (with or without pre-delivery maternal 
antiviral therapy) in reducing neonatal acquisition of chronic hepa-
titis B. Maternal transmission of hepatitis C occurs in 1% of cases 
and there is no convincing evidence that the mode of delivery affects 
this. Hepatitis E (genotypes 1 and 2) is reported to progress to acute 
liver failure much more commonly in pregnancy, with a 20% mater-
nal mortality. Pregnancy may be associated with either worsening or 
improvement of autoimmune hepatitis, although improvement during 
pregnancy and rebound post-partum is the most common pattern 
seen. Complications of portal hypertension may be a particular issue 
in the second and third trimesters.
Gallstones are more common during pregnancy and may present with 
cholecystitis or biliary obstruction. The diagnosis can usually be made 

[[p967]]
Liver transplantation    911
24
with ultrasound. In biliary obstruction due to gallstones, therapeutic 
ERCP can be safely performed but lead protection for the fetus is essen-
tial and X-ray screening must be kept to a minimum.
Pregnancy-associated liver disease
Several conditions occur only during pregnancy, may recur in subsequent 
pregnancies and resolve after delivery of the baby, and these are dis-
cussed in Chapter 32. The causes of abnormal LFTs in pregnancy, which 
include pregnancy-associated liver disease, are shown in Box 24.60
Liver transplantation
Liver transplantation is an effective treatment for end-stage liver disease. 
However, the number of procedures is limited by cadaveric donor avail-
ability and 5%–15% of those listed for liver transplantation will die while 
awaiting a donor liver. The main complications of liver transplantation 
relate to long-term immunosuppression, rejection or disease recurrence 
in the liver graft.
Indications and contraindications
More than 30 000 liver transplants are performed worldwide each 
year. The main indications vary between regions. In Europe, the 
majority of liver transplants are for decompensated cirrhosis (56%), 
most frequently due to alcohol, hepatitis C or NAFLD, followed by 
hepatocellular carcinoma (17%), with 8% for acute liver failure. Fig. 
24.42 shows indications for transplantation in the UK. In Asia, the 
most common indication is hepatocellular carcinoma related to hep-
atitis B. Patterns are changing over time, with reducing need for 
transplant in hepatitis C as a result of improved antiviral therapy, but 
increasing prevalence of NAFLD. Liver transplantation is increasingly 
being undertaken in older patients, with 30% of liver transplants in 
Europe now in patients aged over 60 years, but only a very small 
number aged over 70 years.
Transplant may be undertaken to improve survival in advanced liver 
disease or to alleviate symptoms. Common indications for elective 
transplant assessment are listed in Box 24.61. There are various criteria 
for HCC based on the size and number of lesions and level of serum 
alpha-fetoprotein (as these factors predict risk of recurrence post-trans-
plant). Current UK guidelines allow transplant for a single lesion below 
5 cm, or up to ve lesions all below 3 cm, provided there is no macrovas-
cular invasion or extrahepatic spread. Larger lesions may be suitable if 
stable following treatment. Specic criteria exist for patients with acute 
liver failure, depending on aetiology.
The main contraindications to transplantation are extrahepatic sepsis 
or malignancy, active alcohol or other substance misuse, and signicant 
cardiorespiratory disease.
Patients are matched for ABO blood group and size but do not require 
HLA matching with donors, as the liver is a relatively immune-privileged 
organ compared with the heart or kidneys.
Organ allocation is often based on greatest need, estimating short-
term mortality using the MELD or UKELD scores (see Box 24.32). The 
United Kingdom has recently moved to a national allocation system 
based on Transplant Benet Score, which uses donor and recipient vari-
ables to calculate the difference between the mortality without transplant 
(need) and the predicted 5-year survival with transplant (utility), to identify 
those with the greatest net benet.
Approaches to increase the availability of donor organs include:
 Split liver transplantation. Due to the liver’s regenerative capacity, a 
cadaveric donor liver can be split into two, with the larger right lobe 
used in an adult and the smaller left lobe used in a child.
Box 24.60  Abnormal liver function tests in pregnancy
Liver function tests: alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels and albumin normally 
fall in pregnancy. ALP levels can rise due to the contribution of placental ALP.
Pre-existing liver disease: pregnancy is uncommon in cirrhosis because 
cirrhosis causes relative infertility. Varices can enlarge in pregnancy, and ascites 
should be treated with amiloride rather than spironolactone. Penicillamine 
for Wilson’s disease and azathioprine for autoimmune liver disease should 
be continued during pregnancy. Autoimmune liver disease can are up post 
partum.
Incidental: viral, autoimmune and drug-induced hepatitis must be excluded in 
the presence of an elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Immunoglobulin/
vaccination given to the fetus at birth prevents transmission of hepatitis B to 
the fetus if the mother is infected. Gallstones are more common in pregnancy 
and post partum, and are a cause of a raised ALP level. Biliary imaging 
with ultrasound and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography is safe. 
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography to remove stones can be 
performed safely with shielding of the fetus from radiation.
Pregnancy-related liver diseases: occur predominantly in the third trimester 
and resolve post partum. Maternal and fetal mortality and morbidity are reduced 
by expediting delivery.
1%
3%
8%
9%
6%
12%
15%
20%
26%
Alcohol
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metabolic
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Primary biliary cholangitis
Autoimmune hepatitis/cryptogenic
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis B
Other
Fig. 24.42 Indications for elective adult liver transplantation in the UK, 
2019–2020.
24.61  Indications for liver transplant assessment for cirrhosis
Complications
 First episode of bacterial peritonitis
 Diuretic-resistant ascites
 Recurrent variceal haemorrhage
 Hepatocellular carcinoma
 Persistent hepatic encephalopathy
Poor liver function
 Bilirubin > 100 µmol/L (5.8 mg/dL) in primary biliary cholangitis
 MELD score > 12 (Box 24.32)
 UKELD score ≥ 49
 Child–Pugh grade C (Box 24.31)
(MELD = Model for End-stage Liver Disease; UKELD United Kingdom Model for End-stage 
Liver Disease)

[[p968]]
912    HEPATOLOGY
 Living donor transplantation. This is normally performed using 
the left lateral segment or the right lobe from a healthy donor. 
The donor mortality is signicant, at 0.5%–1%. Pre-operative 
assessment includes looking at donor liver size and psychological 
status.
 Use of marginal grafts. Higher-risk livers (older donors, steatotic liv-
ers, non-heart-beating donors) are being used in selected patients. 
Novel organ perfusion technologies may help to improve graft selec-
tion and outcomes in this group.
 Increased donation. Improved infrastructure to support organ dona-
tion, increased public awareness of transplantation and changes to 
consent process (‘opt-out’, or presumed consent) may all increase 
donation rates.
Complications
Early complications
Primary graft non-function
This is due to a severe ischaemia–-reperfusion injury, resulting in irrevers-
ible graft failure and requiring early re-transplantation in around 4%–6% 
of recipients. Factors that increase the likelihood of primary non-function 
include increasing donor age, degree of steatosis in the liver and the 
length of ischaemia.
Technical complications
These include hepatic artery thrombosis, which may necessitate 
re-transplantation. Anastomotic biliary strictures can also occur; these 
may respond to endoscopic stenting, or require surgical reconstruction. 
Portal vein thrombosis following transplant is rare.
Rejection
Lifelong immunosuppression is required in most liver transplant recipi-
ents, although at lower levels than with kidney or heart/lung transplants. 
Immunosuppression is maximal in the early post-operative period, with 
reducing levels over time. A number of different regimens are used but 
the majority include a calcineurin inhibitor (usually tacrolimus) with or 
without an antimetabolite (azathioprine or mycophenolate) or tapering 
steroids. Some patients can eventually be maintained on a single agent. 
Acute cellular rejection occurs in 15%–25% of patients, commonly pre-
senting as raised liver enzymes at 5–30 days post-transplant, but can 
arise later. This normally responds to 3 days of high-dose intravenous 
methylprednisolone.
Infections
Bacterial infections, such as pneumonia and wound infections, can occur 
in the rst few weeks after transplantation. Opportunistic infections are 
also seen, and prophylaxis against fungal infections and Pneumocystis 
jirovecii may be given during the rst few months. Cytomegalovirus (pri-
mary infection or reactivation) is common in the 3 months after transplan-
tation and can cause fevers, bone marrow suppression and hepatitis. 
Patients who have never had cytomegalovirus infection but who receive 
a liver from a donor who has been exposed are at greatest risk and 
are usually given prophylactic antiviral therapy, such as valganciclovir. 
Patients with latent tuberculosis should receive prophylaxis against 
reactivation.
Late complications
Late complications are mostly consequences of long-term immunosup-
pression. These include malignancy (especially skin cancers and lym-
phoma), renal failure and cardiovascular disease. Weight gain is common 
following liver transplantation, leading to obesity and diabetes. Chronic 
rejection is rare, occurring in only 5% of cases. Recurrence of the initial 
disease can occur, especially with autoimmune liver diseases or hepato-
cellular carcinoma.
Prognosis
Current UK data show 1-year survival for patients transplanted for cirrho-
sis of 94%, with 5-year survival of 84%. Outcomes are worse in patients 
transplanted for acute liver failure as they often have multi-organ failure 
at the time of transplantation, and in patients transplanted for hepatocel-
lular carcinoma, due to disease recurrence.
Cholestatic and biliary disease
The concepts of biliary and cholestatic disease, and the important dis-
tinctions between them, can be a source of confusion. ‘Cholestasis’ 
relates to impaired bile ow, usually detected as a biochemical abnor-
mality (typically, elevation of ALP and elevation in serum bile acid levels 
and bilirubin). This can be due to failure of bile acid transport across the 
hepatocyte membrane, or physical obstruction of the bile duct. ‘Biliary 
disease’ relates to pathology at any level from the small intrahepatic 
bile ducts to the sphincter of Oddi. Although there is very signicant 
overlap between cholestatic and biliary disease, there are scenarios 
where cholestasis can exist without biliary disease (transporter disease 
or pure drug-induced cholestasis) and where biliary disease can exist 
without cholestasis (when disease of the bile duct does not impact on 
bile ow).
Chemical cholestasis
Pure cholestasis can occur as an inherited condition (p. 906), as a con-
sequence of cholestatic drug reactions (p. 906) or as acute cholestasis of 
pregnancy. A more frequent, but less recognised, acquired biochemical 
cholestasis occurs in sepsis (‘cholangitis lenta’). This biochemical phe-
nomenon is one of the causes of LFT abnormality in sepsis. Also termed 
subacute non-suppurative cholangitis, it is characterised by inspissated 
bile plugs in dilated bile ductules in the absence of mechanical obstruc-
tion. It does not require specic treatment and has a prognostic signi-
cance conferred by the underlying septic process.
Mutations in the biliary transporter proteins on the hepatocyte 
canalicular membrane (familial intrahepatic cholestasis 1, FIC1), illus-
trated in Fig. 24.7, have been shown to cause an inherited intrahe-
patic biliary disease in childhood, characterised by raised ALP levels 
and progression to a biliary cirrhosis. It is also becoming increasingly 
clear that these proteins contribute to intrahepatic biliary disease in 
adulthood.
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC) is a rare autoso-
mal recessive genetic disorder characterised by recurrent episodes of 
cholestatic jaundice lasting weeks to months. It usually presents in ado-
lescence. Prodromal symptoms include pruritus, nausea, vomiting and 
weight loss. Patients are asymptomatic between episodes. Blood tests 
typically show conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia with elevated alkaline 
phosphatase. Cholangiography shows no evidence of biliary obstruction. 
Liver biopsy shows cholestasis during episodes but is normal between 
episodes.
BRIC is associated with mutations in the genes for two bile acid trans-
porters: ATP8B1 (BRIC1) encoding FIC1 and ABCB11 (BRIC2) encoding 
the bile salt export pump (BSEP). Treatment is required to relieve symp-
toms and the long-term prognosis is good.

[[p969]]
Cholestatic and biliary disease    913
24
Intrahepatic biliary disease
Inammatory and immune disease
The small intrahepatic bile ducts appear to be specically vulnerable to 
immune injury, and ductopenic injury (‘vanishing bile duct syndrome’) 
can be a feature of a number of chronic conditions, including graft-
versus-host disease (GVHD), sarcoidosis and, in the setting of liver 
transplantation, ductopenic rejection. Intrahepatic small bile duct injury 
occurs most frequently in primary biliary cholangitis, an autoimmune 
cholestatic disease, and less frequently in primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(see Box 24.54).
Caroli’s disease
Caroli’s disease and Caroli’s syndrome are rare congenital disorders 
characterised by multifocal saccular dilatation of the intrahepatic bile 
ducts. Bile duct ectasia may involve the entire liver, a lobe or a sin-
gle segment. In Caroli’s disease, biliary ectasia occurs in isolation. 
However, in the more common variant, Caroli’s syndrome, the bile duct 
dilatation is associated with congenital hepatic brosis. The molecular 
pathogenesis is incompletely understood. Most cases are transmitted 
in an autosomal recessive manner and are associated with autoso-
mal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). In both conditions, 
focal dilatation of bile ducts leads to cholestasis with formation of biliary 
sludge and intraductal calculi. Recurrent attacks of cholangitis require 
antibiotic therapy and predispose to hepatic abscess formation. There 
is an increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma affecting 2.5%–16% of 
patients. Prognosis is generally poor. Localised disease may be treated 
by segmental liver resection. Patients with diffuse disease complicated 
by recurrent biliary sepsis or portal hypertension may require liver 
transplantation.
Congenital hepatic brosis
Congenital hepatic brosis (CHF) is a rare developmental disorder 
characterised by broad bands of brous tissue linking portal tracts 
and irregular-shaped proliferating bile ducts, resulting from ductal 
plate malformation. CHF may be inherited in an autosomal reces-
sive manner and is associated with a range of disorders with multi-
system involvement, including: Caroli’s syndrome, polycystic kidney 
disease, Joubert syndrome and Bardet–Biedl syndrome. The renal 
tubules may show cystic dilatation (medullary sponge kidney) and 
renal cysts/renal failure may develop. The condition typically present in 
childhood or early adulthood, although late presentation is described. 
Patients may present with symptoms of portal hypertension, includ-
ing painful splenomegaly and variceal bleeding with preserved hepatic 
function, or with symptoms of cholestasis and recurrent cholangitis 
(Caroli’s syndrome). However, patients frequently present with symp-
toms related to other organ systems (e.g. kidney, central nervous 
system).
Cystic brosis
The term cystic brosis-associated liver disease (CFLD) encompasses 
the range of liver disease seen in patients with cystic brosis. Liver 
function test abnormalities are common, with persistent abnormalities 
affecting 40% of patients with cystic brosis. Biliary cirrhosis develops 
in 5%–10% of individuals by adolescence/early adulthood when com-
plications such as variceal haemorrhage may occur. Non-cirrhotic portal 
hypertension may develop as a consequence of pre-sinusoidal oblitera-
tive portal venopathy. UDCA improves liver biochemistry but it is unclear 
whether the drug can prevent progression of liver disease. Deciency of 
fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) may need to be treated in view of 
biliary and pancreatic disease.
Extrahepatic biliary disease
Diseases of the extrahepatic biliary tree typically present with the clini-
cal features of impaired bile ow (jaundice, itch and fat malabsorption). 
Obstructive disease is frequently a consequence of ductal gallstones, 
sometimes with associated infection or inammatory strictures, or 
post-surgical strictures. Malignant diseases (cholangiocarcinoma or car-
cinoma of the head of pancreas) should be considered in all patients with 
extrahepatic biliary obstruction. PSC frequently involves the extrahepatic 
biliary tree and its differential, IgG4 disease, is an important and poten-
tially treatable cause of disease.
Choledochal cysts
Choledochal cysts are uncommon congenital cysts of the biliary tree (Fig. 
24.43). They are usually diagnosed in the rst decade of life. The majority 
cause diffuse dilatation of the common bile duct (type I). Others represent 
true diverticulae of the common bile duct (type II), dilatation of the intra-
duodenal bile duct at the pancreatico-biliary junction (type III) or dilatation 
of the intrahepatic and/or the extrahepatic biliary ducts (type IV). Type IV 
choledochal cysts are subdivided into those affecting the intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic ducts (type IVA) or multiple cysts affecting extrahepatic ducts 
with normal intrahepatic ducts (type IVB). Type V choledochal cysts refer 
to one or more cystic dilatations of intrahepatic ducts with normal extrahe-
patic ducts, with multiple cystic dilatations of intrahepatic ducts referred to 
as Caroli’s disease. Children may present with abdominal mass, jaundice 
or biliary peritonitis from cyst rupture. Adults more commonly present with 
jaundice, abdominal pain and cholangitis. Liver abscess and biliary cirrho-
sis may develop. There is an increased incidence of cholangiocarcinoma. 
Cyst excision with hepaticojejunostomy is the treatment of choice.
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis develops after prolonged large duct biliary 
obstruction due to gallstones, benign bile duct strictures or scleros-
ing cholangitis (see below). Carcinomas rarely cause secondary biliary 
cirrhosis because few patients survive long enough. The clinical features 
are those of chronic cholestasis with episodes of ascending cholangitis 
or even liver abscess. Cirrhosis, ascites and portal hypertension are late 
features. Relief of biliary obstruction may require endoscopic or surgical 
intervention. Cholangitis dictates treatment with antibiotics, which can be 
given continuously if attacks recur frequently.
Gallstones
Gallstone formation is the most common disorder of the biliary tree and 
it is unusual for the gallbladder to be diseased in the absence of gall-
stones. In high-income countries, gallstones occur in 7% of males and 
15% of females aged 18–65 years, with an overall prevalence of 11%. In 
individuals under 40 years there is a 3:1 female preponderance, whereas 
in older people the sex ratio is about equal. Gallstones are less frequent 
in Asia and Africa. There has been much debate over the role of diet 
Type I
(50–80%)
Type II
(2%)
Type III
(1–5%)
Type IV
(15–35%)
Type V
(20%)
Fig. 24.43 Classication and frequency of choledochal cysts. Adapted from the 
Todani Classication of Choledochal Cysts (1977).

[[p970]]
914    HEPATOLOGY
in cholesterol gallstone disease; an increase in dietary cholesterol, fat, 
total calories and rened carbohydrate or lack of dietary bre has been 
implicated.
Pathophysiology
Gallstones are conventionally classied into cholesterol or pigment 
stones, although the majority are of mixed composition. Gallstones con-
tain varying quantities of calcium salts, including calcium bilirubinate, 
carbonate, phosphate and palmitate, which are radio-opaque. Gallstone 
formation is multifactorial and the factors involved are related to the type 
of gallstone (Boxes 24.62 and 24.63).
Cholesterol gallstones
Cholesterol is held in solution in bile by its association with bile acids and 
phospholipids in the form of micelles and vesicles. Biliary lipoproteins 
may also have a role in solubilising cholesterol. In gallstone disease, the 
liver produces bile that contains an excess of cholesterol because there 
is either a relative deciency of bile salts or a relative excess of choles-
terol (‘lithogenic’ bile). Abnormalities of bile salt synthesis and circulation, 
cholesterol secretion and gallbladder function may make production of 
lithogenic bile more likely.
Pigment stones
Brown, crumbly pigment stones are almost always the consequence of 
bacterial or parasitic biliary infection. They are common in the Far East, 
where infection allows bacterial β-glucuronidase to hydrolyse conjugated 
bilirubin to its free form, which then precipitates as calcium bilirubinate. 
The mechanism of black pigment gallstone formation in high-income 
countries is not satisfactorily explained. Haemolysis is important as a 
contributing factor for the development of black pigment stones that 
occur in chronic haemolytic disease.
Biliary sludge
This describes gelatinous bile that contains numerous microspheroliths 
of calcium bilirubinate granules and cholesterol crystals, as well as gly-
coproteins; it is an important precursor to the formation of gallstones in 
the majority of patients. Biliary sludge is frequently formed under nor-
mal conditions but then either dissolves or is cleared by the gallbladder; 
only in about 15% of patients does it persist to form cholesterol stones. 
Fasting, parenteral nutrition and pregnancy are also associated with 
sludge formation.
Clinical features
Only 10% of individuals with gallstones develop clinical evidence of gall-
stone disease. However, once symptoms occur they are likely to recur. 
Symptomatic stones within the gallbladder (Box 24.64) manifest as 
either biliary pain (‘biliary colic’) or cholecystitis (see below). If a gallstone 
becomes acutely impacted in the cystic duct, the patient will experience 
pain. The term ‘biliary colic’ is a misnomer because the pain does not 
rhythmically increase and decrease in intensity like other forms of colic. 
Typically, the pain occurs suddenly and persists for several hours; if it 
continues for more than 6 hours, a complication such as cholecystitis or 
pancreatitis may be present. Pain is usually felt in the epigastrium (70% 
of patients) or right upper quadrant (20%) and radiates to the interscap-
ular region or the tip of the right scapula, but other sites include the left 
upper quadrant and the lower chest. The pain can mimic intrathoracic 
disease, oesophagitis, myocardial infarction or aortic dissection.
Combinations of fatty food intolerance, dyspepsia and atulence not 
attributable to other causes have been referred to as ‘gallstone dys-
pepsia’. These symptoms are not now recognised as being caused by 
gallstones and are best regarded as functional dyspepsia. Acute and 
chronic cholecystitis is described below.
A mucocele may develop if there is slow distension of the gallbladder 
from continuous secretion of mucus; if this material becomes infected, 
an empyema supervenes. Calcium may be secreted into the lumen of the 
hydropic gallbladder, causing ‘limey’ bile, and if calcium salts are precip-
itated in the gallbladder wall, the radiological appearance of ‘porcelain’ 
gallbladder results.
Gallstones in the gallbladder (cholecystolithiasis) migrate to the com-
mon bile duct (choledocholithiasis; p. 916) in approximately 10%–20% of 
patients and can cause biliary colic. Rarely, stones can stulate between 
the gallbladder and the gastric outlet or duodenum (causing obstruction, 
known as Bouveret syndrome) or colon. If this occurs, air will be seen in 
the biliary tree on plain abdominal X-rays. If a stone larger than 2.5 cm 
in diameter has migrated into the gut, it may then impact either at the 
terminal ileum or sigmoid colon. The resultant intestinal obstruction may 
be followed by ‘gallstone ileus’. Gallstones impacted in the cystic duct 
may cause obstruction to the common hepatic duct and the clinical pic-
ture of extrahepatic biliary diseases (‘Mirizzi syndrome’, with its important 
differential of malignant bile duct stricture). The more common cause 
of jaundice due to gallstones is a stone passing from the cystic duct 
into the common bile duct (choledocholithiasis), which may also result 
in cholangitis or acute pancreatitis. It is usually very small stones that 
precipitate acute pancreatitis, due to oedema at the ampulla as the stone 
24.62  Risk factors and mechanisms for cholesterol gallstones
↑Cholesterol secretion
 Old age
 Female gender
 Pregnancy
 Obesity
 Rapid weight loss
Impaired gallbladder emptying
 Pregnancy
 Gallbladder stasis
 Fasting
 Total parenteral nutrition
 Spinal cord injury
↓Bile salt secretion
 Pregnancy
24.63  Composition of and risk factors for pigment stones
Black
Brown
Composition
Polymerised calcium bilirubinates*
Calcium bilirubinate crystals*
Mucin glycoprotein
Mucin glycoprotein
Calcium phosphate
Cholesterol
Calcium carbonate
Calcium palmitate/stearate
Cholesterol
Risk factors
Haemolysis
Infected bile
Age
Stasis
Hepatic cirrhosis
Ileal resection/disease
*Major component.
24.64  Clinical features and complications of gallstones
Clinical features
 Asymptomatic (80%)
 Biliary colic
 Acute cholecystitis
 Chronic cholecystitis
Complications
 Empyema of the gallbladder
 Porcelain gallbladder
 Choledocholithiasis
 Acute pancreatitis
 Fistulae from gallbladder to 
duodenum/colon
 Pressure on/inammation of the 
common hepatic duct by a gallstone 
in the cystic duct (Mirizzi syndrome)
 Gallstone ileus
 Cancer of the gallbladder

[[p971]]
Cholestatic and biliary disease    915
24
passes into the duodenum. No stone is seen within the bile duct in 80% 
of cases of presumed gallstone pancreatitis, suggesting stone passage. 
Previous stone passage is also the likely cause of most cases of benign 
papillary brosis, which is most commonly seen in patients with previous 
or present gallstone disease. It presents with biliary pain (often following 
cholecystectomy) with cholestatic LFTs and biliary dilatation, or acute 
pancreatitis, and is treated by ERCP and sphincterotomy.
Cancer of the gallbladder is increasing in frequency but in over 85% 
of cases is associated with the presence of gallstones. Previously, 
the diagnosis was typically made as an incidental histological nding 
following cholecystectomy for gallstone disease. Increasing awareness 
of the risk of gallbladder carcinoma and of the role played by polyps in 
the natural history has led to an increase in screening activity and pro-
spective diagnosis. Biliary disease is common in the elderly and can be 
challenging to manage in frail patients (Box 24.65).
Investigations
Ultrasound is the investigation of choice for diagnosing gallstones. Most 
stones are diagnosed by transabdominal ultrasound, which has more 
than 84% sensitivity and 99% specicity for gallbladder stones (see 
Fig. 24.8). CT, MRCP (Fig. 24.44) and, increasingly, EUS are excellent 
modalities for detecting complications of gallstones (distal bile duct stone 
or gallbladder empyema) but are inferior to ultrasound in dening their 
presence in the gallbladder. When recurrent attacks of otherwise unex-
plained acute pancreatitis occur, they may result from ‘microlithiasis’ in 
the gallbladder or common bile duct and are best assessed by EUS.
Management
Asymptomatic gallstones found incidentally in the gallbladder should 
not be treated because the majority will never cause symptoms. 
Symptomatic gallstones are best treated surgically by laparoscopic chol-
ecystectomy; the severity of symptoms should be balanced against the 
individual patient surgical risk in order to decide whether surgery is war-
ranted. Asymptomatic common bile duct stones should also be removed 
due to the high risk of complications (Box 24.66).
Cholecystitis
Acute cholecystitis
Pathophysiology
Acute cholecystitis is almost always associated with obstruction of the 
gallbladder neck or cystic duct by a gallstone. Occasionally, obstruction 
may be by mucus, parasitic worms or a biliary tumour, or may follow 
endoscopic bile duct stenting. The pathogenesis is unclear but the initial 
inammation is possibly chemically induced. This leads to gallbladder 
mucosal damage, which releases phospholipase, converting biliary lec-
ithin to lysolecithin, a recognised mucosal toxin. At the time of surgery, 
approximately 50% of cultures of the gallbladder contents are sterile. 
Infection occurs eventually, and in older patients or those with diabe-
tes mellitus a severe infection with gas-forming organisms can cause 
emphysematous cholecystitis. Acalculous cholecystitis can occur in the 
intensive care setting and in association with parenteral nutrition, sickle 
cell disease and diabetes mellitus.
Clinical features
The cardinal feature is pain in the right upper quadrant but also in the epigas-
trium, the right shoulder tip or the interscapular region. Differentiation between 
biliary colic and acute cholecystitis may be difcult; features suggesting chol-
ecystitis include severe and prolonged pain, fever and leucocytosis.
Examination shows right hypochondrial tenderness with guarding, 
worse on inspiration (Murphy’s sign) and occasionally a gallbladder mass 
(30% of cases). Fever is present but rigors are unusual and suggest 
cholangitis. Jaundice occurs in less than 10% of patients and is usually 
due to passage of stones into the common bile duct, or to compression 
or even stricturing of the common bile duct following stone impaction 
in the cystic duct (Mirizzi syndrome). Gallbladder perforation occurs in 
10%–15% of cases and gallbladder empyema may arise.
Investigations
Peripheral blood leucocytosis is common, except in older patients, in 
whom the signs of inammation may be minimal. Minor increases of 
transaminases and amylase may be encountered. Amylase should be 
measured to detect acute pancreatitis, which may be a potentially seri-
ous complication of gallstones. Only when the amylase is higher than 
1000 U/L can pain be condently attributed to acute pancreatitis, since 
moderately elevated levels of amylase can occur with many other causes 
of abdominal pain. Plain X-rays of the abdomen and chest may show 
radio-opaque gallstones, and rarely intrabiliary gas due to stulation of 
a gallstone into the intestine; they are important in excluding lower lobe 
pneumonia and a perforated viscus. Ultrasonography detects gallstones 
and gallbladder thickening due to cholecystitis but gallbladder empyema 
or perforation is best assessed by CT.
C
Fig. 24.44 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram showing multiple small 
stones in the gallbladder (large arrow), two larger stones in the distal common 
bile duct (smaller arrows) and also a cystic lesion in the head of pancreas (C).
24.66  Treatment of gallstones
Gallbladder stones
 Cholecystectomy: laparoscopic or open
 Oral bile acids: chenodeoxycholic or ursodeoxycholic (low rate of stone 
dissolution)
Bile duct stones
 Endoscopic sphincterotomy and stone extraction
 Surgical bile duct exploration
 Lithotripsy (endoscopic or extracorporeal shock wave, ESWL)
24.65  Gallbladder disease in old age
 Gallstones: by the age of 70 years, prevalence is around 30% in women and 
19% in men.
 Acute cholecystitis: tends to be severe, may have few localising signs and 
is associated with a high frequency of empyema and perforation. If such 
complications supervene, mortality may reach 20%.
 Cholecystectomy: mortality after urgent cholecystectomy for acute 
uncomplicated cholecystitis is not signicantly higher than in younger patients.
 Endoscopic sphincterotomy and removal of common duct stones: well 
tolerated by older patients, with lower mortality than surgical common bile duct 
exploration.
 Cancer of the gallbladder: a disease of old age, with a 1-year survival of 10%.

[[p972]]
916    HEPATOLOGY
Management
Medical
Medical management consists of bed rest, pain relief, antibiotics and intra-
venous uids. Moderate pain can be treated with NSAIDs but more severe 
pain should be managed with opiates. A cephalosporin (such as cefuroxime) 
or piperacillin/tazobactam is the usual antibiotic of choice, but metronida-
zole is normally added in severely ill patients and local prescribing prac-
tice may vary. Cholecystitis usually resolves with medical treatment but the 
inammation may progress to an empyema or perforation and peritonitis.
Surgical
Urgent surgery is the optimal treatment when cholecystitis progresses in 
spite of medical therapy and when complications such as empyema or 
perforation develop. The operation should be carried out within 5 days of 
the onset of symptoms. Delayed surgery after 2–3 months is no longer 
favoured. When cholecystectomy may be difcult due to extensive 
inammatory change, percutaneous gallbladder drainage can be per-
formed, with subsequent cholecystectomy 4–6 weeks later. Recurrent 
biliary colic or cholecystitis is frequent if the gallbladder is not removed.
Chronic cholecystitis
Chronic inammation of the gallbladder is almost invariably associated 
with gallstones. The usual symptoms are those of recurrent attacks of 
upper abdominal pain, often at night and following a heavy meal. The 
clinical features are similar to those of acute calculous cholecystitis but 
milder. Patients may recover spontaneously or following analgesia and 
antibiotics. They are usually advised to undergo elective laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy.
Acute cholangitis
Acute cholangitis is caused by bacterial infection of bile ducts and occurs 
in patients with other biliary problems, such as choledocholithiasis (see 
below), biliary strictures or tumours, or after ERCP. Jaundice, fever (with 
or without rigors) and right upper quadrant pain are the main presenting 
features (‘Charcot’s triad’). Treatment is with antibiotics, relief of biliary 
obstruction and removal (if possible) of the underlying cause.
Choledocholithiasis
Stones in the common bile duct (choledocholithiasis) occur in 10%–15% 
of patients with gallstones (Fig. 24.45), which have usually migrated 
from the gallbladder. Primary bile duct stones are rare but can develop 
within the common bile duct many years after a cholecystectomy, and 
are sometimes related to biliary sludge arising from dysfunction of the 
sphincter of Oddi. In Far Eastern countries, primary common bile duct 
stones are thought to follow bacterial infection secondary to parasitic 
infections with Clonorchis sinensis, Ascaris lumbricoides or Fasciola 
hepatica. Common bile duct stones can cause bile duct obstruction and 
may be complicated by cholangitis due to secondary bacterial infection, 
sepsis, liver abscess and biliary stricture.
Clinical features
Choledocholithiasis may be asymptomatic, may be found incidentally by 
operative cholangiography at cholecystectomy or on abdominal imaging, 
or may manifest as biliary colic, jaundice, cholangitis or pancreatitis. If 
the gallbladder is still present, it is usually small, brotic and impalpable.
Investigations
The LFTs show a cholestatic pattern. If cholangitis is present, the patient 
usually has a leucocytosis. Initial imaging is with transabdominal ultra-
sound which often show dilated extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts, 
together with gallbladder stones (Fig. 24.46), but does not always reveal 
the cause of the obstruction in the common bile duct; 50% of bile duct 
stones are missed on ultrasound, particularly those in the distal common 
bile duct. MRCP and EUS both have a high sensitivity for ductal stones, 
and can also help to dene biliary anatomy prior to intervention. MRCP is 
often preferred as it is non-invasive.
Management
Cholangitis should be treated with analgesia, intravenous uids and 
broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as cefuroxime and metronidazole (local 
prescribing practice may vary). Blood cultures should be taken before the 
antibiotics are administered. Patients also require urgent decompression 
of the biliary tree and stone removal. ERCP with biliary sphincterotomy 
and stone extraction is the treatment of choice and is successful in about 
90% of patients. In some complex cases cholangioscopy (‘SpyGlass’™) 
with electrohydraulic lithotripsy may be required. If ERCP fails, other 
approaches include percutaneous transhepatic drainage and combined 
(‘rendezvous’) endoscopic procedures, extracorporeal shock wave litho-
tripsy (ESWL) and surgery.
Surgical treatment of choledocholithiasis is performed less frequently 
than ERCP. The CBD may be explored laparoscopically, either trans-
cystic (via the gallbladder) or trans-ductal, or at laparotomy.
Fig. 24.45 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram showing common 
duct stones (arrows).
CBD
Fig. 24.46 Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) image showing a prominent 
common bile duct (CBD) containing a small stone (arrow) causing acoustic 
shadowing.

[[p973]]
Cholestatic and biliary disease    917
24
Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis
This disease occurs predominantly in South-east Asia. Biliary sludge, 
calcium bilirubinate concretions and stones accumulate in the intra-
hepatic bile ducts, with secondary bacterial infection. Patients present 
with recurrent attacks of upper abdominal pain, fever and cholestatic 
jaundice. Investigation of the biliary tree demonstrates that both the 
intrahepatic and the extrahepatic portions are lled with soft biliary mud. 
Eventually, the liver becomes scarred and liver abscesses and secondary 
biliary cirrhosis develop. The condition is difcult to manage and requires 
drainage of the biliary tract with extraction of stones, antibiotics and, in 
certain patients, partial resection of damaged areas of the liver.
Tumours of the gallbladder and bile duct
Carcinoma of the gallbladder
This is an uncommon tumour, occurring more often in females and usually 
in those over the age of 70 years. More than 90% are adenocarcinomas; 
the remainder are anaplastic or, rarely, squamous tumours. Gallstones 
are present in 70%–80% of cases and are thought to be important in 
the aetiology of the tumour. Individuals with a calcied gallbladder (‘por-
celain gallbladder’) are at high risk of malignant change, and gallbladder 
polyps greater than 1 cm in size are associated with increased risk of 
malignancy; preventative cholecystectomy should be considered in such 
patients. Chronic infection with Salmonella, especially in areas where 
typhoid is endemic, is also a risk factor.
Carcinoma of the gallbladder may be diagnosed incidentally and is 
found in 0.2%–3% of gallbladders removed at cholecystectomy for gall-
stone disease. It may manifest as repeated attacks of biliary pain and, 
later, persistent jaundice and weight loss. A gallbladder mass may be 
palpable in the right hypochondrium. LFTs show cholestasis, and cal-
cication of the gallbladder wall (‘porcelain gallbladder’) may be found 
on X-ray. The tumour can be diagnosed by ultrasonography and staged 
by CT. The treatment is surgical excision but local extension of the 
tumour beyond the wall of the gallbladder into the liver, lymph nodes 
and surrounding tissues is common at diagnosis. Only a minority of 
pre-operatively diagnosed gallbladder cancers are suitable for resection. 
Palliative management is usually all that can be offered. Survival is gen-
erally short, death typically occurring within 1 year in patients presenting 
with symptoms.
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is an uncommon tumour that can arise any-
where in the biliary tree, from the intrahepatic bile ducts (20%–25% of 
cases) and the conuence of the right and left hepatic ducts at the liver 
hilum (50%–60%) to the distal common bile duct (20%). It accounts for 
only 1.5% of all cancers but the incidence is increasing. The cause is 
unknown but the tumour is associated with gallstones, primary and sec-
ondary sclerosing cholangitis, Caroli’s disease and choledochal cysts (see 
Fig. 24.43). In the Far East, particularly northern Thailand, chronic liver uke 
infection (Clonorchis sinensis) is a major risk factor for the development of 
CCA in men. Primary sclerosing cholangitis carries a lifetime risk of CCA of 
5%–20%, although only 5% of CCAs relate to primary sclerosing cholan-
gitis. Cirrhosis is a risk factor for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Chronic 
biliary inammation appears to be a common factor in the development of 
biliary dysplasia and cancer that is shared by all the predisposing causes.
Tumours typically invade the lymphatics and adjacent vessels, with 
a predilection for spread within perineural sheaths. The presentation is 
usually with obstructive jaundice. About 50% of patients also have upper 
abdominal pain and weight loss. The diagnosis is made using a combi-
nation of CT and MRI (see Fig. 24.10) but can be difcult to conrm in 
patients with sclerosing cholangitis. Serum levels of the tumour marker 
CA19-9 are elevated in up to 80% of cases, although this may occur 
in biliary obstruction of any cause. In the setting of biliary obstruction, 
ERCP may result in positive biliary cytology. The sensitivity of biliary brush-
ing cytology is low (20%–43%) but can be improved with analysis for 
chromosomal aneuploidy using uorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH). 
Endoscopic ultrasound–ne needle aspiration (EUS–FNA) of bile duct 
masses or lymph nodes is sometimes possible, and in specialist centres 
cholangioscopy with biopsy is now established. CCAs can be treated sur-
gically in about 20% of patients, which improves 5-year survival from less 
than 5% to 20%–40%. Surgery involves excision of the extrahepatic biliary 
tree with or without a liver resection and a Roux loop reconstruction. Liver 
transplant is generally not recommended as a treatment for CCA due to 
high recurrence rate and poor long-term survival. Neoadjuvant chemo-
therapy followed by liver transplant is effective in highly selected patients 
with perihilar CCA, but is not a widely accepted or available treatment.
Most patients with CCA are treated with stent insertion across the 
malignant biliary stricture, using endoscopic or percutaneous tran-
shepatic techniques to achieve relief of jaundice (Fig. 24.47). Patients 
with unresectable disease may receive chemotherapy and selected 
B
A
Left
Fig. 24.47 Cholangiocarcinoma. 
self-expanding metallic stent (SEMS) has been placed across the stricture to relieve jaundice (arrow).

[[p974]]
918    HEPATOLOGY
patients may benet from combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy. 
Loco-regional therapies with chemotherapy may be effective for locally 
advanced unresectable tumours, but particularly intrahepatic CCA. 
Palliation with endoscopic photodynamic therapy has provided encour-
aging results for extrahepatic CCA.
Carcinoma at the ampulla of Vater
Nearly 40% of all adenocarcinomas of the small intestine arise in rela-
tionship to the ampulla of Vater and present with pain, anaemia, vom-
iting and weight loss. Jaundice may be intermittent or persistent. The 
diagnosis is made by duodenal endoscopy and biopsy of the tumour 
but staging by CT/MRI and EUS is essential. Ampullary carcinoma must 
be differentiated from carcinoma of the head of the pancreas and a CCA 
because these last two conditions both have a worse prognosis. Imaging 
may show a ‘double duct sign’ with dilatation of both the common bile 
duct and pancreatic duct due to obstruction at the ampulla. EUS is the 
most sensitive method of assessing and staging ampullary or periamp-
ullary tumours.
Curative surgical treatment can be undertaken by pancreaticoduo-
denectomy and the 5-year survival may be as high as 50%. If resection 
is impossible, palliative surgical bypass or stenting may be necessary.
Benign gallbladder tumours
These are uncommon, often asymptomatic and usually found inciden-
tally at operation or postmortem. Cholesterol polyps, sometimes associ-
ated with cholesterolosis, papillomas and adenomas, are the main types.
Miscellaneous biliary disorders
Functional gallbladder disorder
Functional gallbladder disorder refers to symptoms of biliary-type pain 
in the absence of gallstones, sludge or microlithiasis. Gallstone disease 
needs to be excluded by means of abdominal US ± EUS to exclude micro-
lithiasis. Other diagnostic tests may be required to exclude peptic ulcer 
disease, pancreatitis or musculoskeletal syndromes. Cholecystokinin-
stimulated hepatobiliary scintigraphy can be used to evaluate gallbladder 
ejection fraction.
Symptoms suggestive of functional gallbladder disorder often improve 
spontaneously so urgent surgical intervention is not required. Management 
involves patient education and reassurance. Pharmacological therapy 
with analgesia, neuromodulators and antispasmodics may be benecial. 
Cholecystectomy can improve symptoms in many patients with recur-
rent functional biliary pain. It is suggested that a low gallbladder ejection 
fraction (< 40%) may identify a subset of patients likely to benet from 
surgery but evidence is contradictory.
Post-cholecystectomy syndrome
Post-cholecystectomy syndrome refers to a complex of heterogeneous 
symptoms including abdominal pain and dyspepsia that recur and/or per-
sist following cholecystectomy. It occurs in 10%–30% of patients depend-
ing on how the condition is dened, how actively symptoms are sought 
and what the original indication for cholecystectomy was. The syndrome 
occurs most frequently in women, in patients who have had symptoms for 
more than 5 years before cholecystectomy, and in cases when the oper-
ation was undertaken for non-calculous gallbladder disease. An increase 
in bowel frequency resulting from bile acid diarrhoea occurs in about 
5%–10% of patients after cholecystectomy and often responds to colesty-
ramine (4–8 g daily). Severe post-cholecystectomy syndrome occurs in 
only 2%–5% of patients. The main causes are listed in Box 24.67
The usual symptoms include right upper quadrant pain, atulence, 
fatty food intolerance and occasionally jaundice and cholangitis. The LFTs 
may be abnormal and sometimes show cholestasis. Ultrasonography is 
used to detect biliary obstruction, and EUS or MRCP to seek common 
bile duct stones. If retained bile duct stones are excluded, sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction should be considered (see below). Other investigations 
that may be required include upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, small 
bowel radiology and pancreatic function tests. The possibility of a func-
tional illness should also be considered.
Functional biliary sphincter disorders (‘sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction’)
The sphincter of Oddi is a small smooth-muscle sphincter situated 
at the junction of the bile duct and pancreatic duct in the duodenum. 
It has been believed that sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (SOD) was 
characterised by an increase in contractility that produces a benign 
non-calculous obstruction to the ow of bile or pancreatic juice. 
This may cause pancreaticobiliary pain, deranged LFTs or recurrent 
pancreatitis. Classication systems, based on clinical history, labora-
tory results, ndings on investigation and response to interventions, 
are difcult because of the uctuating nature of symptoms and the 
well-recognised placebo effect of interventions. SOD was previously 
classied into types I–III but these have been replaced by newer 
terminology (Boxes 24.68 and 24.69).
Clinical features
Patients with functional biliary sphincter disorders, who are predom-
inantly female, present with symptoms and signs suggestive of either 
biliary or pancreatic disease:
 Patients with biliary sphincter disorders experience recurrent, epi-
sodic biliary-type pain. They have often had a cholecystectomy but 
the gallbladder may be intact.
 Patients with pancreatic sphincter disorders usually present with 
unexplained recurrent attacks of pancreatitis.
Investigations
The diagnosis is established by excluding gallstones, including micro-
lithiasis, and by demonstrating a dilated or slowly draining bile duct. The 
gold standard for diagnosis is sphincter of Oddi manometry. This is not 
widely available, however, and is associated with a high rate of proce-
dure-related pancreatitis. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy may have value in 
the second-line investigation of post-cholecystectomy syndrome.
Management
All patients with organic stenosis are treated with endoscopic sphincter-
otomy. The results are good but patients should be warned that there is 
a high risk of complications, particularly acute pancreatitis (10%–15%). 
Manometry should ideally be performed in all suspected functional 
sphincter of Oddi disorder patients, and results of sphincterotomy 
in those with high pressures are good, but this should be avoided in 
24.67  Causes of post-cholecystectomy symptoms
Immediate post-surgical
 Bleeding
 Biliary peritonitis
 Abscess
 Bile duct trauma/transection
 Fistula
Biliary
 Common bile duct stones
 Benign stricture
 Tumour
 Cystic duct stump syndrome
 Disorders of the ampulla of Vater (e.g. 
benign papillary brosis; sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction)
Extrabiliary
 Functional dyspepsia
 Peptic ulcer
 Pancreatic disease
 Gastro-oesophageal reux
 Irritable bowel syndrome
 Functional abdominal pain

[[p975]]
24
Further information    919
patients with functional biliary-type pain as it is of no benet. Medical 
therapy with nifedipine and/or low-dose amitriptyline may be tried. 
Pancreatic SOD can be treated with biliary sphincterotomy, carried out in 
specialist centres, but this should be undertaken with caution and careful 
consideration.
Routine prophylactic pancreatic duct stenting in patients under-
going ERCP for sphincter of Oddi disorders is no longer encouraged. 
Prophylactic administration of rectal NSAIDs (e.g. diclofenac 100 mg) 
is recommended instead because this signicantly reduces the risk of 
procedure-related acute pancreatitis.
Cholesterolosis of the gallbladder
In this condition, lipid deposits in the submucosa and epithelium appear 
as multiple yellow spots on the pink mucosa, giving rise to the descrip-
tion ‘strawberry gallbladder’. Cholesterolosis of the gallbladder is usually 
asymptomatic. Larger polypoid deposits occur in a third of cases leading to 
the formation of cholesterol polyps that can detach resulting in complica-
tions similar to small gallstones, including right upper quadrant pain. Small, 
xed lling defects may be visible on ultrasonography; the radiologist can 
usually differentiate between gallstones and cholesterolosis. The condition 
is usually diagnosed at cholecystectomy; if the diagnosis is made radiologi-
cally, cholecystectomy may be indicated, depending on symptoms.
Adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder
In this condition, there is hyperplasia of the muscle and mucosa of the 
gallbladder. The projection of pouches of mucous membrane through 
weak points in the muscle coat produces Rokitansky–Aschoff sinuses. 
There is much disagreement over whether adenomyomatosis is a cause 
of right upper quadrant pain or other gastrointestinal symptoms. It may 
be diagnosed by oral cholecystography, when a halo or ring of opaci-
ed diverticula can be seen around the gallbladder. Other appearances 
include deformity of the body of the gallbladder or marked irregularity of 
the outline. Localised adenomyomatosis in the region of the gallbladder 
fundus causes the appearance of a ‘Phrygian cap’. Most patients are 
treated by cholecystectomy but only after other diseases in the upper 
gastrointestinal tract have been excluded.
IgG4-associated cholangitis
This often presents with obstructive jaundice and is described on page 
901.
Further information
Books and journal articles
EASL Clinical practice guidelines: Autoimmune hepatitis. J Hepatol 2015; 
63:971–1004.
EASL Clinical practice guidelines: The diagnosis and treatment of primary biliary 
cholangitis. J Hepatol 2017; 67(1):145–172.
EASL Clinical practice guidelines: Liver transplantation. J Hepatol 2016; 
64:433–485.
EASL Recommendations on the treatment of hepatitis C. J Hepatol 2018; 
69(2):461–511.
EASL 2017 Clinical practice guidelines on the management of hepatitis B 
infection. J Hepatol 2017; 67(2):370–398.
EASL Clinical practice guidelines: Management of hepatocellular carcinoma. J 
Hepatol 2018; 69(1):182–236.
EASL–EASD–EASO Clinical practice guidelines for the management of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 2016; 64:1388–1402.
Williams R, Aithal G, Alexander GJ, et al. Unacceptable failures: the nal report of 
the Lancet Commission into liver disease in the UK. Lancet 2020; 395:226-239.
Websites
aasld.org American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (guidelines 
available)
bsg.org.uk British Society of Gastroenterology (guidelines available)
easl.eu European Association for the Study of the Liver (guidelines available)
eltr.org European Liver Transplant Registry
unos.org United Network for Organ Sharing: US transplant register
24.68  Classication of biliary sphincter of Oddi dysfunction 
(SOD)
Organic stenosis (formerly SOD type I)
 Biliary-type pain
 Abnormal liver enzymes (ALP or ALT/AST > twice normal on two or more 
occasions)
 Dilated common bile duct (> 12 mm diameter on US or > 10 mm on 
cholangiography)
 Delayed drainage of ERCP contrast beyond 45 mins
Functional sphincter of Oddi disorder (formerly SOD type II)
 Biliary-type pain
 Absence of bile duct stones or other structural abnormalities
 Elevated liver enzymes or dilated bile duct (but not both)
Functional biliary-type pain (formerly SOD type III)
 Biliary-type pain with no other abnormalities
(ALT = alanine aminotransferase; ALP = alkaline phosphatase; AST = aspartate 
aminotransferase; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography;  
US = ultrasound)
24.69  Criteria for pancreatic sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
 Recurrent attacks of acute pancreatitis – pancreatic-type pain with amylase or 
lipase 3 times normal and/or imaging evidence of acute pancreatitis
 Other aetiologies of acute pancreatitis excluded
 Normal pancreas at endoscopic ultrasound
 Abnormal sphincter manometry

[[p976]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p977]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 24.1 
A 52-year-old homeless man with a history of alcohol 
dependency is admitted to hospital with a 2-month history 
of weight loss, fever, cough and abdominal distension. Liver 
ultrasound scan shows moderate ascites with normal liver 
appearance with patent portal/hepatic veins and no focal 
lesions. A diagnostic ascitic tap is performed:
Microscopy: WCC 350 cell/mm3, polymorphs 100 cells/
mm3, lymphocytes 250 cells/mm3. No organisms seen.
Ascitic protein: 28 g/L
Ascitic albumin: 19 g/L
Serum albumin: 26 g/L
Cytology: inammatory cells only.
What is the most likely cause of this patient’s ascites?
 
A. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
 
B. Tuberculosis
 
C. Budd–Chiari syndrome
 
D. Pancreatic cancer
 
E. Alcohol-related liver disease with cirrhosis
Answer: B.
Tuberculosis is a cause of high-protein ascites with a low serum–
ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) (< 11 g/L). Elevated lymphocytes are 
typically seen on ascites microscopy. Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) may be 
seen but prolonged TB culture may be required for denitive diagnosis. 
Budd–Chiari syndrome is a cause of ascites with high SAAG (> 11 g/L). 
Disseminated malignancy with peritoneal involvement is a cause of 
exudative ascites with low SAAG (< 11 g/L) but normal CT imaging and 
ascites cytology makes this diagnosis less likely. Ascites due to liver 
cirrhosis has a high SAAG (> 11 g/L). Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
is diagnosed by the nding of elevated polymorphs (> 250 cells/mm3) 
in ascitic uid.
 24.2 
A 56-year-old woman with autoimmune hepatitis and cirrhosis 
is admitted with agitation and confusion. Examination reveals 
a apping tremor and a diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy 
is made. Which of the following would be suitable rst-line 
therapy?
 
A. Dietary protein restriction
 
B. Oral lactulose
 
C. Rifaximin
 
D. L-ornithine L-aspartate (LOLA)
 
E. Benzodiazepines
Answer: B.
Hepatic encephalopathy is caused by disturbed brain function pro-
voked by gut-derived neurotoxins that are normally metabolised by 
the liver and excluded from the systemic circulation. Treatment aims to 
reduce toxin production in the bowel. First-line therapy is with lactulose 
(15–30 mL three times daily) to promote regular bowel motions. Rifaximin 
is a non-absorbable antibiotic that reduces bacterial load in the gut and 
is helpful in treating recurrent episodes of encephalopathy. L-ornithine 
L-aspartate (LOLA) is an amino acid supplement that may be useful in 
reducing ammonia levels and improving encephalopathy in patients with 
refractory disease. Dietary protein restriction is no longer recommended 
in the treatment of encephalopathy and may worsen nutritional state. 
Sedative drugs including opiates and benzodiazepines may precipitate/
worsen encephalopathy in cirrhotic patients and should be avoided in 
these patients.
 24.3 
An 18-year-old man presents to his family doctors having 
noticed mild jaundice having been treated with a course of 
oral amoxicillin for lower respiratory tract infection. Abdominal 
ultrasound is normal. His liver biochemistry reveals:
Bilirubin 60 μmol/L
Direct bilirubin 9 μmol/ L
ALT 23 U/L
ALP 82 U/L
GGT 35 U/L
Albumin 40 g/L
What is the most likely diagnosis?
 
A. Drug-induced liver injury
 
B. Primary sclerosing cholangitis
 
C. Gilbert syndrome
 
D. Dubin–Johnston syndrome
 
E. Hepatitis E infection
Answer: C.
Gilbert syndrome is an inherited disorder of bilirubin metabolism 
characterised by isolated elevation of bilirubin, usually in the context of 
physical stress or illness. It presents with isolated elevation of uncon-
jugated bilirubin (indirect bilirubin) and otherwise normal liver enzymes. 
Drug-induced liver injury may present with jaundice but there would be 
additional liver enzyme disturbance following either a hepatitic, choles-
tatic or mixed pattern. Dubin–Johnston syndrome is an inherited disorder 
of bilirubin metabolism associated with conjugated (direct) hyperbilirubin-
aemia. Hepatitis E infection may present with jaundice in associated with 
an acute hepatitis with elevated transaminase levels (ALT/AST).
 24.4 
A 42-year-old man presents with abnormal liver enzymes, on a 
background of early onset emphysema. His serum α1-AT level 
is 0.03 g/L (normal range 1.1–2.1g/L). Which of the following 
statements about alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency is true?
A.
Most liver disease is due to the PiMM genotype
B.
Lung disease occurs due to the accumulation of abnormally 
folded protein in alveolar cells
 
C. Inheritance is autosomal dominant
 
D. It can present as neonatal jaundice
E. A liver biopsy is required for diagnosis
Answer: D.
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deciency can present in a range of ways, from 
neonatal cholestatic jaundice through to adult-onset cirrhosis. Inheritance 
is autosomal recessive. The normal genotype is PiMM and most disease 
is due to PiZZ. Liver disease occurs due to accumulation of abnormally 
folded protein in hepatocytes, whereas lung disease is a result of unop-
posed neutrophil elastase activity. Diagnosis is usually based on serum 
α1-AT levels and genotyping.

[[p978]]
 24.5 
A 56-year-old man with alcohol-related cirrhosis is admitted with 
ascites and hepatic encephalopathy, and is noted to have loss 
of muscle mass. The Na is 131 mmol/L (normal range 135–145). 
Which of the following would you advise the patient?
 
A. Salt intake should be increased in view of hyponatraemia
 
B. Fluid intake should be restricted
 
C.  Protein intake should be restricted in view of 
encephalopathy
 
D. Calorie intake should be 15–20 kCal/kg per day
 
E. A bedtime snack is recommended
Answer: E.
Malnutrition is common in cirrhosis. A bedtime snack will avoid pro-
longed fasting which can trigger catabolism. Calorie intake should 
be atleast 35 kCal/kg perday, with a protein intake of 1.2–1.5 g/kg. 
Ano-added-salt diet is recommended in ascites, and uid restriction is 
rarely needed (and may exacerbate renal impairment in this case).

[[p979]]
Haematology and 
transfusion medicine
25
HG Watson
DJ Culligan
LM Manson
Clinical examination in blood disease 922
Functional anatomy and physiology 924
Haematopoiesis 924
Blood cells and their functions 924
Haemostasis 927
Investigation of diseases of the blood 930
The full blood count 930
Blood lm examination 930
Bone marrow examination 930
Investigation of coagulation 930
Presenting problems in blood disease 932
Anaemia 932
High haemoglobin 933
Leucopenia (low white cell count) 933
Leucocytosis (high white cell count) 935
Lymphadenopathy 935
Splenomegaly 937
Bleeding 937
Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) 938
Thrombocytosis (high platelet count) 938
Pancytopenia 939
Infection 939
Principles of management of haematological disease 939
Blood components and transfusion 939
Anti-cancer drugs 943
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 945
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic therapy 947
Anaemias 950
Iron deciency anaemia 950
Anaemia of chronic disease 952
Megaloblastic anaemia 952
Haemolytic anaemia 955
Haemoglobinopathies 959
Sickle-cell anaemia 960
Other abnormal haemoglobins 962
Thalassaemias 962
Haematological malignancies 962
Leukaemias 963
Lymphomas 971
Paraproteinaemias 975
Aplastic anaemia 978
Myeloproliferative neoplasms 979
Bleeding disorders 980
Disorders of primary haemostasis 980
Coagulation disorders 981
Thrombotic disorders 985
Venous thromboembolic disease (venous thromboembolism) 985
Inherited and acquired thrombophilia and prothrombotic states 986

[[p980]]
922    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Clinical examination in blood disease
Observation
Hands
Perfusion
Telangiectasia
Skin crease pallor
Koilonychia
Pulse
Rate
Mouth
Lips: angular stomatitis,
telangiectasia
Gum hypertrophy
Tongue: colour, smoothness
Buccal mucosa: petechiae
Tonsils: size
Conjunctivae
Pallor
Jaundice
Lymph nodes
(see opposite)     
Abdomen
Masses
Ascites
Hepatomegaly
Splenomegaly
Inguinal and femoral lymph
nodes
Feet
Peripheral circulation
Toes: gangrene
Joints
Deformity
Swelling
Restricted movement
 General well-being
 Colour: pallor, plethora
 Breathlessness
Urinalysis
Blood
Urobilinogen
Hereditary haemorrhagic
telangiectasia
Fundi
Hyperviscosity
  Engorged veins
  Papilloedema
  Haemorrhage
Fundal haemorrhage in
thrombocytopenia
Purpura/petechiae in
thrombocytopenia
Gangrenous toe in
thrombocytosis
Swollen joint in haemophilia
Koilonychia in iron
deficiency
Skin
Purpura
Bruising
Gum hypertrophy in
acute myeloid leukaemia
Glossitis and angular
stomatitis in iron deficiency
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
6
7
9
11
10
8
5
1
2
4
3
Insets (Glossitis) From Hoffbrand VA, John E, Pettit JE, Vyas P. Color atlas of clinical hematology, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Mosby, Elsevier Inc.; 2010; (Petechiae) From Young 
NS, Gerson SL, High KA (eds). Clinical hematology. St Louis: Mosby, Elsevier Inc.; 2006.

[[p981]]
Clinical examination in blood disease    923
Abnormalities detected in the blood are 
caused not only by primary diseases of the 
blood and lymphoreticular systems, but also 
by diseases affecting other systems of the 
body. The clinical assessment of patients with 
haematological abnormalities must include 
a general history and examination, as well as 
a search for symptoms and signs of specic 
primary haematological and other disorders 
that result in abnormalities of red cells, white 
cells, platelets, coagulation, lymph nodes and 
lymphoreticular tissues.
Anaemia
Symptoms and signs help to indicate the 
clinical severity of anaemia. A full history and 
examination is needed to identify the underlying 
cause.
Lymphadenopathy
Lymphadenopathy can be caused by benign or malignant disease. The clinical points to clarify 
are shown in the box.
Pre-auricular
Parotid
Submandibular
Submental
Posterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Anterior cervical
Supraclavicular
Axillary
Epitrochlear
Inguinal
Femoral
Popliteal
fossa
Examination of the spleen
Move your hand up from the right iliac  
fossa, towards the left upper quadrant on  
expiration.
Keep your hand still and ask the patient to take a 
deep breath through the mouth to feel the spleen 
edge being displaced downwards.
Place your left hand around the patient’s lower ribs 
and approach the costal margin to pull the spleen 
forwards.
To help palpate a spleen that is only slightly 
enlarged, roll the patient on to the right side and 
examine as before. 
Lymphadenopathy
History
 Speed of onset, rate of enlargement
 Painful or painless
 Associated symptoms: weight loss, night  
sweats, itch
Examination
 Sites: localised, generalised
 Size (cm)
 Character: hard, soft, rubbery
 Fixed, mobile
 Search area that node drains for  
abnormalities (e.g. dental abscess)
 Other general examination (e.g. joints,  
rashes, nger clubbing) 
Characteristics of the spleen
 Notch
 Supercial
 Dull to percussion
 Cannot get examining hand between ribs and 
spleen
 Moves well with respiration 
Anaemia
Non-specic symptoms
 Tiredness
 Lightheadedness
 Breathlessness
 Development/worsening of ischaemic symptoms, 
e.g. angina or claudication
Non-specic signs
 Mucous membrane pallor
 Tachypnoea
 Raised jugular venous pressure
 Tachycardia
 Flow murmurs
 Ankle oedema
 Postural hypotension 
Bleeding
History
 Site of bleed
 Duration of bleed
 Precipitating causes, including previous surgery 
or trauma
 Family history
 Drug history
 Age at presentation
 Other medical conditions, e.g. liver disease
Examination
There are two main patterns of bleeding:
1. Mucosal bleeding
Reduced number or function of platelets (e.g. 
bone marrow failure or aspirin) or von Willebrand 
factor (e.g. von Willebrand disease)
Skin: petechiae, bruises
Gum and mucous membrane bleeding
Fundal haemorrhage
Post-surgical bleeding
2. Coagulation factor deciency (e.g. haemophilia or 
warfarin/anticoagulant)
Bleeding into joints (haemarthrosis)  
or muscles
Bleeding into soft tissues
Retroperitoneal haemorrhage
Intracranial haemorrhage
Post-surgical bleeding 
Bleeding
Bleeding can be due to congenital or acquired 
abnormalities in the coagulation system. 
History and examination help to clarify the 
severity and the underlying cause of the bleed-
ing problem.
6
8

[[p982]]
924    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Disorders of the blood cover a wide spectrum of illnesses, ranging from 
some of the most common disorders affecting humans (anaemias) to 
relatively rare conditions such as leukaemias and congenital coagulation 
disorders. Although the latter are uncommon, advances in cellular and 
molecular biology have had major impacts on their diagnosis, treatment 
and prognosis. Haematological changes occur as a consequence of dis-
eases affecting any system and give important information in the diagno-
sis and monitoring of many conditions.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Blood ows throughout the body in the vascular system, and consists of:
 red cells, which transport oxygen from the lungs to the tissues
 white cells, which defend against infection
 platelets, which interact with blood vessels and clotting factors to 
maintain vascular integrity and prevent bleeding
 plasma, which contains proteins with many functions, including 
antibodies and coagulation factors.
Haematopoiesis
Haematopoiesis describes the formation of blood cells, an active process 
that must maintain normal numbers of circulating cells and be able to 
respond rapidly to increased demands such as bleeding or infection. 
During development, haematopoiesis occurs in the yolk sac, liver and 
spleen, and subsequently in red bone marrow in the medullary cavity of 
all bones. In childhood, red marrow is progressively replaced by fat (yel-
low marrow) so that, in adults, normal haematopoiesis is restricted to the 
vertebrae, pelvis, sternum, ribs, clavicles, skull, upper humeri and proxi-
mal femora. However, red marrow can expand in response to increased 
demands for blood cells.
Bone marrow contains a range of immature haematopoietic precursor 
cells and a storage pool of mature cells for release at times of increased 
demand. Haematopoietic cells interact closely with surrounding connec-
tive tissue stroma, made up of reticular cells, macrophages, fat cells, 
blood vessels and nerve bres (Fig. 25.1). In normal marrow, nests of 
red cell precursors cluster around a central macrophage, which provides 
iron and also phagocytoses nuclei from red cells prior to their release 
into the circulation. Megakaryocytes are large cells that produce and 
release platelets into vascular sinuses. White cell precursors are clus-
tered next to the bone trabeculae; maturing cells migrate into the marrow 
Megakaryocyte
Bony trabecula
Neutrophil
Erythroid 'nest'
Vascular sinusoid
Fat cell
Myelocyte
Blast cells and
progenitor cells
Lymphocyte
Fig. 25.1 Structural organisation of normal bone marrow.
spaces towards the vascular sinuses. Plasma cells are antibody-secreting 
mature B cells that normally represent less than 5% of the marrow popu-
lation and are scattered throughout the intertrabecular spaces.
Stem cells
All blood cells are derived from pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells. 
These comprise only 0.01% of the total marrow cells, but they can 
self-renew (i.e. make more stem cells) or differentiate to produce a 
hierarchy of lineage-committed progenitor cells. The resulting primitive 
progenitor cells cannot be identied morphologically, so they are named 
according to the types of cell (or colony) they form during cell culture 
experiments. CFU–GM (colony-forming unit – granulocyte, monocyte) is 
a progenitor cell that produces granulocytic and monocytic lines, CFU–E 
produce erythroid cells, and CFU–Meg produce megakaryocytes and 
ultimately platelets (Fig. 25.2).
Growth factors, produced in bone marrow stromal cells and else-
where, control the survival, proliferation, differentiation and function of 
stem cells and their progeny. Some, such as interleukin-3 (IL-3), stem 
cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte, macrophage–colony-stimulating factor 
(GM–CSF), act on a wide number of cell types at various stages of differ-
entiation. Others, such as erythropoietin, granulocyte–colony-stimulating 
factor (G–CSF) and thrombopoietin (Tpo), are lineage-specic. Many of 
these growth factors are now synthesised by recombinant DNA technol-
ogy and used as treatments: for example, erythropoietin to correct renal 
anaemia and G–CSF to hasten neutrophil recovery after chemotherapy.
The bone marrow also contains stem cells that can differentiate into 
non-haematological cells. Mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into 
skeletal muscle, cartilage, cardiac muscle and fat cells while others dif-
ferentiate into nerves, liver and blood vessel endothelium. This is termed 
stem cell plasticity and may have exciting clinical applications in the 
future (Ch. 3).
Blood cells and their functions
Red cells
Red cell precursors formed in the bone marrow from the erythroid (CFU–E) 
progenitor cells are called erythroblasts or normoblasts (Fig. 25.3). These 
divide and acquire haemoglobin, which turns the cytoplasm pink; the 
nucleus condenses and is extruded from the cell. The rst non-nucleated 
red cell is a reticulocyte, which still contains ribosomal material in the 
cytoplasm, giving these large cells a faint blue tinge (‘polychromasia’). 

[[p983]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    925
Reticulocytes lose their ribosomal material and mature over 3 days, dur-
ing which time they are released into the circulation. Increased numbers 
of circulating reticulocytes (reticulocytosis) reect increased erythropoi-
esis. Proliferation and differentiation of red cell precursors is stimulated 
by erythropoietin, a polypeptide hormone produced by renal interstitial 
peritubular cells in response to hypoxia. Failure of erythropoietin produc-
tion in patients with renal failure causes anaemia, which can be treated 
GM – CSF, M – CSF
Pluripotent
stem cell
IL-3, GM – CSF,
SCF, IL-12
SCF
IL-6
IL-11
Myeloid
progenitor
cell
Lymphoid
progenitor
cell
SCF
IL-3
SCF
IL-7
T cells
B cells
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Neutrophils
Platelets
Red cells
IL-3
IL-3, GM – CSF, IL-6
IL-3, GM – CSF
IL-3
Thymus
Thymocyte
Pre-B
stem cell
CFU – GM
CFU – Meg
BFU – E
Epo
Tpo
CFU – E
Megakaryo-
blast
G – CSF
IL-3, SCF
GM – CSF, IL-5
IL-4, IL-7
IL-2, IL-4, IL-7
Fig. 25.2 Stem cells and growth factors in haematopoietic cell development. (BFU–E = burst-forming unit – erythroid; CFU–E = colony-forming unit – erythroid; 
CFU–GM = colony-forming unit – granulocyte, monocyte; CFU–Meg = colony-forming unit – megakaryocyte; Epo = erythropoietin; G–CSF = granulocyte–colony-stimulating 
factor; GM–CSF = granulocyte, macrophage – colony-stimulating factor; IL = interleukin; M–CSF = macrophage–colony-stimulating factor; SCF = stem cell factor; 
Tpo = thrombopoietin)
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Myelocyte
Metamyelocyte
Neutrophil
Pronormoblast
Early normoblast
Late normoblast
Megakaryoblast
Megakaryocyte
Platelet
Reticulocyte
Red blood
cell
Fig. 25.3 Maturation pathway of red cells, granulocytes and platelets. The image on the right is a normal blood lm.
with exogenous recombinant erythropoietin or similar pharmacological 
agents called erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, e.g. darbepoetin.
Normal mature red cells circulate for about 120 days. They are 8 µm 
biconcave discs lacking a nucleus, but lled with haemoglobin, which 
delivers oxygen to the tissues. In order to pass through the smallest 
capillaries, the red cell membrane is deformable, with a lipid bilayer to 
which a ‘skeleton’ of lamentous proteins is attached via special linkage 

[[p984]]
926    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
proteins (Fig. 25.4). Inherited abnormalities of any of these proteins result 
in loss of membrane as cells pass through the spleen, and the formation 
of abnormally shaped red cells called spherocytes or elliptocytes (see 
Fig. 25.8D). Red cells are exposed to osmotic stress in the pulmonary 
and renal circulation; in order to maintain homeostasis, the membrane 
contains ion pumps, which control intracellular levels of sodium, potas-
sium, chloride and bicarbonate. In the absence of mitochondria, the 
energy for these functions is provided by anaerobic glycolysis and the 
pentose phosphate pathway in the cytosol. Membrane glycoproteins 
inserted into the lipid bilayer also form the antigens recognised by blood 
grouping (see Fig. 25.4). The ABO and Rhesus systems are the most 
commonly recognised, but over 400 blood group antigens have been 
described.
Haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is a protein specially adapted for oxygen transport. It is 
composed of four globin chains, each surrounding an iron-containing 
porphyrin pigment molecule termed haem. Globin chains are a combi-
nation of two alpha and two non-alpha chains; haemoglobin A (αα/ββ) 
represents over 90% of adult haemoglobin, whereas haemoglobin F (αα/γγ) 
is the predominant type in the fetus. Each haem molecule contains a 
ferrous ion (Fe2+), to which oxygen reversibly binds; the afnity for oxygen 
increases as successive oxygen molecules bind. When oxygen is bound, 
the beta chains ‘swing’ closer together; they move apart as oxygen is 
lost. In the ‘open’ deoxygenated state, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate 
(2,3-BPG), a product of red cell metabolism, binds to the haemoglo-
bin molecule and lowers its oxygen afnity. These complex interactions 
produce the sigmoid shape of the oxygen dissociation curve (Fig. 25.5). 
The position of this curve depends on the concentrations of 2,3-BPG, 
H+ ions and CO2; increased levels shift the curve to the right and cause 
oxygen to be released more readily, e.g. when red cells reach hypoxic 
tissues. Haemoglobin F is unable to bind 2,3-BPG and has a left-shifted 
oxygen dissociation curve, which, together with the low pH of fetal 
blood, ensures fetal oxygenation. Strong oxidising agents, such as dap-
sone, can convert the ferrous iron in haemoglobin to its ferric state (Fe3+). 
The resultant methaemoglobin also has a left-shifted oxygen dissociation 
curve, which can result in tissue hypoxia (see Fig. 10.1).
Genetic mutations affecting the haem-binding pockets of glo-
bin chains or the ‘hinge’ interactions between globin chains result in 
haemoglobinopathies or unstable haemoglobins. Alpha globin chains are 
produced by two genes on chromosome 16, and beta globin chains by 
a single gene on chromosome 11; imbalance in the production of globin 
chains results in the thalassaemias (p. 962). Defects in haem synthesis 
cause the porphyrias (Ch. 19).
Destruction
Red cells at the end of their lifespan of approximately 120 days are 
phagocytosed by the reticulo-endothelial system. Amino acids from 
globin chains are recycled and iron is removed from haem for reuse in 
haemoglobin synthesis. The remnant haem structure is degraded to 
bilirubin and conjugated with glucuronic acid before being excreted in 
bile. In the small bowel, bilirubin is converted to stercobilin; most of this is 
excreted, but a small amount is reabsorbed and excreted by the kidney 
RhD antigen
Blood group
O antigen
Blood group
A antigen
Blood group
B antigen
Alpha spectrin
Beta spectrin
Ankyrin
Band 3
Protein 4.1
Adducin
Glycophorin C
Membrane
 40% lipid
 50% protein
 10% carbohydrate
Cytoskeleton
Fig. 25.4 Normal structure of red cell membrane. Red cell membrane exibility is conferred by attachment of cytoskeletal proteins. Important transmembrane proteins include 
band 3 (an ion transport channel) and glycophorin C (involved in cytoskeletal attachment and gas exchange, and a receptor for Plasmodium falciparum in malaria). Antigens on 
the red blood cell determine an individual's blood group. There are currently 39 blood group systems (groups of carbohydrate or protein antigens controlled by a single gene or 
by multiple closely linked loci); the most important clinically are the ABO and Rhesus (Rh) systems (p. 940). The ABO genetic locus has three main allelic forms: A, B and O. The A 
and B alleles encode glycosyltransferases that introduce N-acetylgalactosamine (open circle) and D-galactose (blue circle), respectively, on to antigenic carbohydrate molecules on 
the membrane surface. People with the O allele produce an O antigen, which lacks either of these added sugar groups. Rh antigens are transmembrane proteins.
PO2 (kPa or mmHg)
Haemoglobin saturation (SO2) %
kPa
mmHg
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14
0
25
50
75
100
25
50
75
100
Normal
arterial PO2
Normal
venous PO2
2,3-BPG
H+
CO2
Temperature
Shift to left
2,3-BPG
H+
CO2
Temperature
Shift to right
Fig. 25.5 The haemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve. Factors are listed that 
shift the curve to the right (more oxygen released from blood) and to the left (less 
oxygen released) at given PO2. To convert kPa to mmHg, multiply by 7.5. (2,3-BPG = 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate).

[[p985]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    927
as urobilinogen. Increased red cell destruction due to haemolysis or 
ineffective haematopoiesis results in jaundice and increased urinary uro-
bilinogen. Free intravascular haemoglobin is toxic and is normally bound 
by haptoglobins, which are plasma proteins produced by the liver.
White cells
White cells or leucocytes in the blood consist of granulocytes (neutro-
phils, eosinophils and basophils), monocytes and lymphocytes (see 
Fig. 25.12). Granulocytes and monocytes are formed from bone marrow 
CFU–GM progenitor cells during myelopoiesis. The rst recognisable 
granulocyte in the marrow is the myeloblast, a large cell with a small 
amount of basophilic cytoplasm and a primitive nucleus with open chro-
matin and nucleoli. As the cells divide and mature, the nucleus segments 
and the cytoplasm acquires specic neutrophilic, eosinophilic or baso-
philic granules (see Fig. 25.3). This takes about 14 days. The cytokines 
G–CSF, GM–CSF and M–CSF are involved in the production of myeloid 
cells, and recombinant G–CSF can be used clinically to hasten recovery 
of blood neutrophil counts after chemotherapy.
Myelocytes or metamyelocytes are normally found only in the marrow, 
but may appear in the circulation in response to infection or toxic states. 
The appearance of more primitive myeloid precursors in the blood is 
often associated with the presence of nucleated red cells and is termed 
a ‘leucoerythroblastic’ picture; this indicates a serious disturbance of 
marrow function.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils, the most common white blood cells in the blood of adults, 
are 10–14 µm in diameter, with a multilobular nucleus containing 2–5 
segments and granules in their cytoplasm. Their main function is to rec-
ognise, ingest and destroy foreign particles and microorganisms see 
Ch. 4). A large storage pool of mature neutrophils exists in the bone 
marrow. Every day, some 1011 neutrophils enter the circulation, where 
cells may be circulating freely or attached to endothelium in the margin-
ating pool. These two pools are equal in size; factors such as exercise 
or catecholamines increase the number of cells owing in the blood. 
Neutrophils spend 6–10 hours in the circulation before being removed, 
principally by the spleen. Alternatively, they pass into the tissues and 
either are consumed in the inammatory process or undergo apoptotic 
cell death and phagocytosis by macrophages.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils represent 1%–6% of the circulating white cells. They are a 
similar size to neutrophils, but have a bilobed nucleus and prominent 
orange granules on Romanowsky staining. Eosinophils are phagocytic 
and their granules contain a peroxidase capable of generating reactive 
oxygen species and proteins involved in the intracellular killing of proto-
zoa and helminths (Ch. 13). They are also involved in allergic reactions 
(e.g. atopic asthma, Ch. 17; see also Ch. 4).
Basophils
These cells are less common than eosinophils, representing less than 
1% of circulating white cells. They contain dense black granules that 
obscure the nucleus. Mast cells resemble basophils, but are found only in 
the tissues. These cells are involved in hypersensitivity reactions (Ch. 4).
Monocytes
Monocytes are the largest of the white cells, with a diameter of 12–20 µm 
and an irregular nucleus in abundant pale blue cytoplasm containing 
occasional cytoplasmic vacuoles. These cells circulate for a few hours 
and then migrate into tissue, where they become macrophages, Kupffer 
cells or antigen-presenting dendritic cells. The former phagocytose 
debris, apoptotic cells and microorganisms (see Box 4.1).
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes are derived from pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells 
in the bone marrow. There are two main types: T cells (which mediate 
cellular immunity) and B cells (which mediate humoral immunity) (Ch. 4). 
Lymphoid cells that migrate to the thymus develop into T cells, whereas 
B cells develop in the bone marrow.
The majority (about 80%) of lymphocytes in the circulation are T cells. 
Lymphocytes are heterogeneous, the smallest being the size of red cells 
and the largest the size of neutrophils. Small lymphocytes are circular 
with scanty cytoplasm but the larger cells are more irregular with abund-
ant blue cytoplasm. Lymphocyte subpopulations have specic func tions 
and lifespan can vary from a few days to many years. Cell surface anti-
gens (‘cluster of differentiation’ (CD) antigens), which appear at different 
points of lymphocyte maturation and indicate the lineage and maturity of 
the cell, are used to classify lymphomas and lymphoid leukaemias.
Haemostasis
Blood must be maintained in a uid state in order to function as a trans-
port system, but must be able to solidify to form a clot following vas-
cular injury in order to prevent excessive bleeding, a process known as 
haemostasis. Successful haemostasis is localised to the area of tissue 
damage and is followed by removal of the clot and tissue repair. This 
is achieved by complex interactions between the vascular endothelium, 
platelets, von Willebrand factor, coagulation factors, natural anticoagu-
lants and brinolytic enzymes (Fig. 25.6 and see Fig. 25.18). Dysfunction 
of any of these components may result in haemorrhage or thrombosis.
Platelets
Platelets are formed in the bone marrow from megakaryocytes. 
Megakaryocytic progenitor cells (CFU–Meg) divide to form megakary-
oblasts, which undergo a process called ‘endomitotic reduplication’, in 
which there is division of the nucleus but not the cell. This creates mature 
megakaryocytes, large cells with several nuclei and cytoplasm contain-
ing platelet granules. Large numbers of platelets then fragment off from 
each megakaryocyte into the circulation. The formation and maturation 
of megakaryocytes is stimulated by thrombopoietin produced in the liver. 
Platelets circulate for 8–10 days before they are destroyed in the retic-
ulo-endothelial system. Some 30% of peripheral platelets are normally 
pooled in the spleen and do not circulate.
Under normal conditions, platelets are discoid, with a diameter of 2–4 µm 
(Fig. 25.7). The surface membrane invaginates to form a tubular network, 
the canalicular system, which provides a conduit for the discharge of the 
granule content following platelet activation. Drugs that inhibit platelet 
function and thrombosis include aspirin (cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor), clopi-
dogrel, prasugrel and ticagrelor (adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-mediated 
activation inhibitors), dipyridamole (phosphodiesterase inhibitor), and 
abciximab, tiroban and eptibatide (which prevent brinogen binding to 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (αiib beta3 integrin); see Fig. 25.18).
Clotting factors
The coagulation system consists of a cascade of soluble inactive zymo-
gen proteins designated by Roman numerals. When proteolytically 
cleaved and activated, each is capable of activating one or more compo-
nents of the cascade. Activated factors are designated by the sufx ‘a’. 
Some of these reactions require phospholipid and calcium. Coagulation 
occurs by two pathways: it is initiated by the extrinsic (or tissue factor) 
pathway and amplied by the ‘intrinsic pathway’ (see Fig. 25.6D).
Clotting factors are synthesised by the liver, although factor V is also 
produced by platelets and endothelial cells. Factors II, VII, IX and X 
require post-translational carboxylation to allow them to participate in 
coagulation. The carboxylase enzyme responsible for this in the liver is 
vitamin K-dependent. Vitamin K is converted to an epoxide in this reac-
tion and must be reduced to its active form by a reductase enzyme. 
This reductase is inhibited by warfarin, and this is the basis of the anti-
coagulant effect of coumarins (p. 947). Inherited (e.g. haemophilia) and 
acquired (e.g. liver failure) causes of coagulation factor deciency are 
associated with bleeding.

[[p986]]
928    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
A B
Thrombin
Vascular endothelium
Heparans
Red cell
Nitric oxide
Prostacyclin
Platelet
Activated platelet
Tissue
factor
GPIIb/IIIa binds
fibrinogen
GPIa binds collagen
GPIb binds von
Willebrand factor
Coagulation
activation by tissue
factor pathway
Subendothelial collagen
A
B
C
A B
A
B
Thrombin
Thrombin
receptor
Platelet
activation
Inhibition of
fibrinolysis
Clot
stabilisation
Cleavage of
fibrinogen
TAFI
XIII
FPs
XIIIa
TAFIa
Intrinsic pathway
Activation of
protein C pathway
Activation of tissue
factor pathway
Tissue
factor
Fig. 25.6 The stages of normal haemostasis.
Stage 1. Pre-injury conditions encourage ow. The vascular endothelium produces substances (including nitric oxide, 
Stage 
2. Early haemostatic response: platelets adhere; coagulation is activated. At the site of injury, the endothelium is breached, exposing subendothelial collagen. Small amounts 
of tissue factor (TF) are released. Platelets bind to collagen via a specic receptor, glycoprotein Ia (GPIa), causing a change in platelet shape and its adhesion to the area of 
damage by the binding of other receptors (GPIb and GPIIb/IIIa) to von Willebrand factor and brinogen, respectively. Coagulation is activated by the tissue factor (extrinsic) 
Stage 3. Fibrin clot formation: platelets become activated and aggregate; brin formation is supported by the 
platelet membrane; stable brin clot forms. The adherent platelets are activated by many pathways, including binding of adenosine diphosphate (ADP), collagen, thrombin 
and adrenaline (epinephrine) to surface receptors. The cyclo-oxygenase pathway converts arachidonic acid from the platelet membrane into thromboxane A 2, which causes 
aggregation of platelets. Activation of the platelets results in release of the platelet granule contents, enhancing coagulation further (see Fig. 25.7). Thrombin plays a key role in 
the control of coagulation: the small amount generated via the TF pathway massively amplies its own production; the ‘intrinsic’ pathway becomes activated and large amounts 
of thrombin are generated. Thrombin directly causes clot formation by cleaving brinopeptides (FPs) from brinogen to produce brin. Fibrin monomers are cross-linked by 
factor XIII, which is also activated by thrombin. Having had a key role in clot formation and stabilisation, thrombin then starts to regulate clot formation in two main ways: (a) 
activation of the protein C (PC) pathway (a natural anticoagulant), which reduces further coagulation; (b) activation of thrombin-activatable brinolysis inhibitor (TAFI), which 
Stage 4. Limiting clot formation: natural anticoagulants reverse activation of coagulation factors. Once haemostasis has been secured, 
the propagation of clot is curtailed by anticoagulants. Antithrombin is a serine protease inhibitor synthesised by the liver, which destroys activated factors such as XIa, Xa and 
thrombin (IIa). Its major activity against thrombin and Xa is enhanced by heparin and fondaparinux, explaining their anticoagulant effect. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) 
binds to and inactivates VIIa and Xa. Activation of PC occurs following binding of thrombin to membrane-bound thrombomodulin; activated protein C (aPC) binds to its co-factor, 
Stage 5. Fibrinolysis: plasmin 
degrades brin to allow vessel recanalisation and tissue repair. The insoluble clot needs to be broken down for vessel recanalisation. Plasmin, the main brinolytic enzyme, is 
produced when plasminogen is activated, e.g. by tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) or urokinase in the clot. Plasmin hydrolyses the brin clot, producing brin degradation 
products, including the D-dimer. This process is highly regulated; the plasminogen activators are controlled by an inhibitor called plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI), the activity 
of plasmin is inhibited by α2-antiplasmin and α2-macroglobulin, and brinolysis is further inhibited by the thrombin-activated TAFI.

[[p987]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    929
Tissue
factor
X
Xa
Va
VIIIa
ve
ve
ve
ve
ve
ve
Thrombin
Antithrombin
Actions of thrombin
Intrinsic pathway
Activated
protein C,
protein S
Plasmin
Inhibitors
of plasmin
Inhibitors of
plasminogen activators
Activators of
plasminogen
Plasminogen
t-PA
Urokinase
Fibrin degradation
products (FDP)
PAI-1, PAI-2
Tissue
factor pathway
Natural
anticoagulant
actions
Tissue factor pathway
inhibitor (TFPI)
Tissue factor
E
D
F
Tissue factor
(extrinsic) pathway
Common
pathway
Tissue
injury
Tissue
factor
VII
VIIa
X
Xa
Va
V
Prothrombin
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Amplification of coagulation by thrombin
Intrinsic
pathway
XI
XIa
IXa
IX
VIIIa
VIII
–ve
–ve
–ve
TAFI
2-antiplasmin
2-macroglobulin
Cell surface
receptors
Platelet
glycoproteins
ADP
Mitochondrion
Dense tubule
Alpha granule
Dense granule
Lysosome
Actin and myosin filaments
Glycocalyx membrane
Open canalicular system
GPIIb/IIIa
GPIb/V/IX
GPIa/IIa
GPVI
Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Thrombin
Fig. 25.7 Normal platelet structure. The platelet surface is populated by glycoproteins, which bind to key structures including brinogen, collagen and von Willebrand factor 
and cell surface receptors for thrombin, ADP and adrenaline (epinephrine). Through internal signalling pathways, platelet activation causes degranulation of alpha and dense 
granules, which ultimately results in platelet aggregation. Blockade of these pathways by drugs such as aspirin, clopidogrel, ticagrelor, tiroban and abcixamab forms the basis 
of antiplatelet therapy. (ADP = adenosine diphosphate; GP = glycoprotein)
Fig. 25.6, cont’d

[[p988]]
930    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Investigation of diseases of the blood
The full blood count
To obtain a full blood count (FBC), anticoagulated blood is processed 
through automated blood analysers that use a variety of technologies 
(particle-sizing, radiofrequency and laser instrumentation) to measure the 
haematological parameters. These include numbers of circulating cells, 
the proportion of whole blood volume occupied by red cells (the haema-
tocrit, Hct), and the red cell indices that give information about the size 
of red cells (mean cell volume, MCV) and the amount of haemoglobin 
present in the red cells (mean cell haemoglobin, MCH). Blood analysers 
can differentiate types of white blood cell and give automated counts 
of neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils. It 
is important to appreciate, however, that a number of conditions can 
lead to spurious results (Box 25.1). The reference ranges for a number 
of common haematological parameters in adults are given in Chapter 35
and the effects of age are shown in Box 25.6
Blood lm examination
Although technical advances in full blood count analysers have resulted 
in fewer blood samples requiring manual examination, scrutiny of blood 
components prepared on a microscope slide (the ‘blood lm’) can often 
yield valuable information (Box 25.2 and Fig. 25.8). Analysers cannot 
identify abnormalities of red cell shape and content (e.g. Howell–Jolly 
bodies, basophilic stippling, malaria parasites) or fully dene abnormal 
white cells such as blasts.
Bone marrow examination
In adults, bone marrow for examination is usually obtained from the pos-
terior iliac crest. After a local anaesthetic, marrow can be sucked out 
from the medullary space, stained and examined under the microscope 
(bone marrow aspirate). In addition, a core of bone may be removed (tre-
phine biopsy), xed and decalcied before sections are cut for staining 
(Fig. 25.9). A bone marrow aspirate is used to assess the composition 
and morphology of haematopoietic cells or abnormal inltrates. Further 
investigations may be performed, such as cell surface marker analysis 
(immunophenotyping), chromosome (karyotyping) and molecular stud-
ies, including next generation sequencing (NGS) to identify mutated 
genes as part of the assessment of malignant diseases and bone mar-
row failure syndromes. Marrow can be cultured for suspected tuberculo-
sis. A trephine biopsy is superior for assessing marrow cellularity, marrow 
brosis, and inltration by abnormal cells such as metastatic carcinoma.
Investigation of coagulation
Bleeding disorders
In patients with clinical evidence of a bleeding disorder (p. 923), there 
are recommended screening tests (Box 25.3). Physiological activation 
25.1 Spurious full blood count results from autoanalysers
Result
Explanation
Increased haemoglobin
Lipaemia, jaundice, very high white cell count
Reduced haemoglobin
Improper sample mixing, blood taken from 
vein into which an infusion is owing
Increased red cell volume 
(mean cell volume, MCV)
Cold agglutinins, non-ketotic hyperosmolarity
Increased white cell count
Nucleated red cells present
Reduced platelet count
Clot in sample, platelet clumping
of coagulation is predominantly by tissue factor, with amplication of the 
process by the small amounts of thrombin formed as a result. For ease 
of description, the terms extrinsic, intrinsic and common pathways are 
still used (see Fig. 25.6D).
Coagulation tests measure the time to clot formation in vitro in a 
platelet poor plasma sample after the clotting process is initiated by 
activators and calcium. The result of the test sample is compared 
with normal controls. The tissue factor (‘extrinsic’) pathway (see 
Fig. 25.6D) is assessed by the prothrombin time (PT), and the ‘intrin-
sic’ pathway by the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 
sometimes known as the partial thromboplastin time with kaolin 
(PTTK). Coagulation is delayed by deciencies of coagulation factors 
and by the presence of inhibitors of coagulation, such as heparin and 
lupus anticoagulants. The approximate reference ranges and causes 
of abnormalities are shown in Box 25.3. If both the PT and APTT 
are prolonged, this indicates either deciency or inhibition of the nal 
common pathway (which includes factors X, V, prothrombin and 
brinogen) or global coagulation factor deciency involving more than 
one factor, as occurs in disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC; 
pp. 199 and 988). Further specic tests may be performed based on 
interpretation of the clinical scenario and results of these screening 
tests. A mixing test with normal plasma allows differentiation between 
a coagulation factor deciency (the prolonged time corrects) and the 
presence of an inhibitor of coagulation (the prolonged time does not 
correct); the latter may be a chemical (heparins) or an antibody (most 
often a lupus anticoagulant, but occasionally a specic inhibitor of 
one of the coagulation factors, typically factor VIII). Von Willebrand 
disease may present with a normal APTT; further investigation of sus-
pected cases is detailed on page 984).
Platelet function has historically been assessed by the bleeding 
time, measured as the time to stop bleeding after a standardised inci-
sion. However, most centres have abandoned the use of this test. 
Platelet function can be assessed in vitro by measuring aggregation in 
response to various agonists, such as adrenaline (epinephrine), colla-
gen, thrombin, arachidonic acid and ADP, agglutination in response to 
ristocetin or by measuring the constituents of the intracellular granules, 
e.g. adenosine triphosphate, adenosine diphosphate and their ratio to 
each other (ATP/ADP).
In disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), platelets and 
coagulation factors are consumed, resulting in thrombocytopenia 
and prolonged PT and APTT. In addition, there is evidence of active 
coagulation with consumption of brinogen and generation of brin 
degradation products (D-dimers). Note, however, that brinogen is 
an acute phase protein that may also be elevated in inammatory 
disease (p. 67).
Monitoring anticoagulant therapy
The International Normalised Ratio (INR) is validated only to assess 
the therapeutic effect of coumarin anticoagulants, including warfarin. 
INR is the ratio of the patient’s PT to that of a normal control, raised 
to the power of the international sensitivity index of the thromboplas-
tin used in the test (ISI, derived by comparison with an international 
reference standard material). Concentrations of the direct oral anti-
coagulants (DOACs) cannot be accurately assessed from the PT or 
the APTT, with which they have a variable and generally poor corre-
lation, but can be measured using appropriately calibrated specific 
assays.
Monitoring of heparin therapy is, on the whole, required only with 
unfractionated heparins (UFH). Therapeutic anticoagulation prolongs the 
APTT relative to a control sample by a ratio of approximately 1.5–2.5. 
Many laboratories now prefer to measure UFH activity by an appropri-
ately calibrated anti-Xa assay. Low-molecular-weight heparins have such 
a predictable dose response that monitoring of the anticoagulant effect 
is not required, except in patients with renal impairment (glomerular ltra-
tion rate less than 30 mL/min). When monitoring is indicated, an anti-Xa 
assay is used.

[[p989]]
Investigation of diseases of the blood    931
25.2 How to interpret red cell appearances
Microcytosis (reduced average cell size, MCV < 
 Iron deciency
 Thalassaemia
Macrocytosis (increased average cell size, MCV > 
 Vitamin B12 or folate deciency
 Liver disease, alcohol
 Hypothyroidism
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
 Liver disease
 Thalassaemia
 Autoimmune haemolytic  
anaemia
 Microangiopathic haemolysis,  
e.g. haemolytic urea  
syndrome (HUS), thrombotic  
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
 Marrow inltration
 Severe haemolysis
 Hyposplenism
 Post-splenectomy
 Dyshaematopoiesis
 Sideroblastic anaemia
 Drugs (e.g. zidovudine,  
trimethoprim, phenytoin,  
methotrexate,  
hydroxycarbamide)
 Post-splenectomy
 Haemoglobin C disease
 Post-splenectomy
 Hereditary spherocytosis
Thrombotic disorders
Measurement of plasma levels of D-dimers derived from brin degrada-
tion is useful in excluding the diagnosis of active venous thrombosis in 
some patients (see Fig. 9.6).
A variety of tests exist that may help to explain an underlying propen-
sity to thrombosis, especially venous thromboembolism (thrombophilia) 
(Box 25.4). Examples of possible indications for testing are given in 
Box 25.5. In most patients, the results of these tests do not affect clinical 
management (p. 984) but they may inuence the duration of anticoagula-
tion (e.g. antiphospholipid antibodies, p. XXX), justify family screening in 
inherited thrombophilias (p. 986), or suggest additional management strat-
egies to reduce thrombosis risk (e.g. in myeloproliferative disease and par-
oxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria; p. 959). Anticoagulants can interfere 
with some of these assays. For example, warfarin reduces protein C and 
S levels and affects measurement of lupus anticoagulant. Heparin inter-
feres with antithrombin and lupus anticoagulant assays and the DOACs 
all affect the measurement of lupus anticoagulant as well as other specic 
 Disseminated intravascular  
coagulation (DIC)
 Myelobrosis
 Acute haemorrhage
 Dyshaematopoiesis
 Lead poisoning
A
B
E
Fig. 25.8 Appearance of red blood cells.
(MCV = mean cell volume)

[[p990]]
932    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
25.4 Investigation of possible thrombophilia
Full blood count
Plasma levels
 Antithrombin
 Protein C
 Protein S (free)
 Antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin  
antibody/anti-β2GP1
Thrombin/reptilase time (for dysbrinogenaemia)
Genetic testing
 Factor V Leiden
 Prothrombin G20210A
 JAK-2 V617F mutation
 CALR mutations
 MPL 515 mutation
Flow cytometry
 Screen for GPI-linked cell surface proteins (CD14, 16, 55, 59), decient in 
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
(CD = cluster of differentiation; GP1 = glycoprotein 1; GPI = glycerol phosphatidyl inositol)
25.5 Possible indications for thrombophilia testing*
 Venous thrombosis <45 years
 Recurrent venous thrombosis
 Family history of unprovoked or 
recurrent thrombosis
 Combined arterial and venous 
thrombosis
 Venous thrombosis at an unusual site:
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Hepatic vein (Budd–Chiari syndrome)
Portal vein, mesenteric vein, splenic 
vein
*Antiphospholipid antibodies should be sought where clinical criteria for antiphospholipid 
syndrome (APS) are fulfilled (p. 986). Thrombophilia testing may explain the diagnosis 
without necessarily affecting management and this limits the clinical value of such an 
approach.
C
B
D
E
F
A
Fig. 25.9 Bone marrow aspirate and trephine.
marrow particles and trails of haematopoietic cells.
25.3 Coagulation screening tests1
Investigation
Reference  
range2
Situations in which tests  
may be abnormal
Platelet count
150–400 × 109/L
Thrombocytopenia
Prothrombin 
time (PT)
9–12 secs
Deciencies of factors II, V, VII or X
Severe brinogen deciency, DIC
Activated partial 
thromboplastin 
time (APTT)
26–36 secs
Deciencies of factors II, V, VIII, IX, 
X, XI, XII
Severe brinogen deciency
Unfractionated heparin therapy
Antibodies against clotting factors
Lupus anticoagulant
Multiple factor deciency,  
e.g. DIC
Fibrinogen 
concentration
1.5–4.0 g/L
Hypobrinogenaemia, e.g. liver 
failure, DIC
1N.B. International Normalised Ratio (INR) is used only to monitor coumarin therapy and is not a 
coagulation screening test. 2Ranges are approximate and may vary between laboratories.
(DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation)
coagulation assays. Therefore these tests, when required, should be per-
formed when the patient is not taking anticoagulants or, if required, during 
temporary discontinuation to facilitate accurate measurement
Box 25.6 lists some considerations specic to all haematological 
investigations in old age.
Presenting problems in blood disease
Anaemia
Anaemia refers to a state in which the level of haemoglobin in the blood 
is below the reference range appropriate for age and sex. Other factors, 
including pregnancy and altitude, also affect haemoglobin levels and must 

[[p991]]
Presenting problems in blood disease    933
caecal carcinoma. Haemolytic anaemias can cause jaundice. Vitamin B12
deciency may be associated with neurological signs, including periph-
eral neuropathy, dementia and signs of subacute combined degenera-
tion of the cord (Box 28.82). Sickle-cell anaemia (p. 960) may result in leg 
ulcers, stroke or features of pulmonary hypertension. Anaemia may be 
multifactorial and the lack of specic symptoms and signs does not rule 
out silent pathology.
Investigations
Schemes for the investigation of anaemias are often based on the size of 
the red cells, which is most accurately indicated by the MCV in the FBC. 
Commonly, in the presence of anaemia:
 A normal MCV (normocytic anaemia) suggests either acute blood 
loss or the anaemia of chronic disease, also known as the anaemia 
of inammation (ACD/AI) (Fig. 25.10).
 A low MCV (microcytic anaemia) suggests iron deciency or thalas-
saemia or sometimes ACD/AI (Fig. 25.10).
 A high MCV (macrocytic anaemia) suggests vitamin B12 or folate 
deciency or myelodysplasia (Fig. 25.11).
Specic types of anaemia and their management are described later 
in this chapter.
High haemoglobin
Patients with a persistently raised haematocrit (Hct) (> 0.52 males, 
> 0.48 females) for more than 2 months should be investigated. ‘True’ 
polycythaemia (or absolute erythrocytosis) indicates an excess of red 
cells, while ‘relative’, ‘apparent’ or ‘low-volume’ polycythaemia is due 
to a decreased plasma volume. Causes of polycythaemia are shown 
in Box 25.8. These involve increased erythropoiesis in the bone mar-
row, either due to a primary increase in marrow activity, or in response 
to increased erythropoietin (Epo) levels in chronic hypoxaemia, or due 
to inappropriate secretion of Epo. Some athletes improperly use Epo 
to increase oxygen-carrying capacity and thus enhance their physical 
performance.
Apparent erythrocytosis with a raised Hct, normal red cell mass (RCM) 
and reduced plasma volume may be associated with hypertension, 
smoking, alcohol and diuretic use (Gaisböck syndrome).
Clinical assessment and investigations
Males and females with Hct values of over 0.60 and over 0.56, respec-
tively, can be assumed to have an absolute erythrocytosis. A clinical his-
tory and examination including measurement of oxygen saturation will 
identify most patients with polycythaemia secondary to hypoxia. The 
presence of hypertension, smoking, excess alcohol consumption and/
or diuretic use is consistent with low-volume polycythaemia (Gaisböck 
syndrome). In polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV), the acquired V617F
mutation is found in the JAK-2 gene (a kinase) in over 90% of cases; in 
the remainder, mutations in exon 12 of the same gene may be identied. 
Patients with PRV have an increased risk of arterial thromboses, particu-
larly stroke, and venous thromboembolism. They may also have aqua-
genic pruritus (itching after exposure to water), hepatosplenomegaly and 
gout (due to high red cell turnover).
If JAK-2 mutations are absent and there is no obvious secondary 
cause, a measurement of red cell mass is required to conrm an absolute 
erythrocytosis, followed by further investigations to exclude hypoxia, and 
causes of inappropriate erythropoietin secretion.
Leucopenia (low white cell count)
A reduction in the total numbers of circulating white cells is called leu-
copenia. This may be due to a reduction in all types of white cell or 
in individual cell types (usually neutrophils or lymphocytes). Leucopenia 
may occur in isolation or as part of a reduction in all three haematological 
lineages (pancytopenia; p. 939).
25.6 Haematological investigations in old age
 Blood cell counts and lm components: not altered in general by ageing 
alone, although haemoglobin concentrations fall with increasing age.
 Ratio of bone marrow cells to marrow fat: falls.
 Neutrophils: maintained throughout life, although leucocytes may be less 
readily mobilised by bacterial invasion in old age.
 Lymphocytes: functionally compromised by age due to a T-cell-related defect 
in cell-mediated immunity.
 Clotting factors: no major changes, although mild congenital deciencies may 
be rst noticed in old age.
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): raised above the reference range, but 
usually in association with chronic or subacute disease. In truly healthy older 
people, the ESR range is very similar to that in younger people (see Ch. 4).
 Clonal haematopoiesis. Myeloid gene panels are more likely to demonstrate 
clonal haematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) based on acquired gene 
mutations in the blood cells of older patients. This may occur as frequently as 
20% of people aged over 80 years despite having normal blood counts.
25.7 Causes of anaemia
Decreased or ineffective marrow production
 Lack of iron, vitamin B12 or  
folate
 Hypoplasia/myelodysplasia
 Invasion by malignant cells
 Renal failure
 Anaemia of chronic disease
Normal marrow production but increased removal of cells
 Blood loss
 Haemolysis
 Hypersplenism
be taken into account when considering whether an individual is anaemic. 
The clinical features of anaemia reect diminished oxygen supply to the tis-
sues (p. 922). A rapid onset of anaemia (e.g. due to blood loss) causes more 
profound symptoms than a gradually developing anaemia. Individuals with 
cardiorespiratory disease are more susceptible to symptoms of anaemia.
The clinical assessment and investigation of anaemia should gauge its 
severity and dene the underlying cause (Box 25.7).
Clinical assessment
 Iron deciency anaemia (p. 950) is the most common type of anae-
mia worldwide. A thorough gastrointestinal history is important, 
looking in particular for symptoms of blood loss. Menorrhagia is a 
common cause of anaemia in pre-menopausal females, so women 
should always be asked about menstrual periods.
 A dietary history should assess the intake of iron, B12 and folate, 
which may become decient in comparison to needs (e.g. in preg-
nancy or during periods of rapid growth; see also Chs 22 and 33).
 Past medical history may reveal a disease that is known to be associ-
ated with anaemia, such as rheumatoid arthritis (anaemia of inamma-
tion (AI)), or previous surgery (e.g. resection of the stomach or small 
bowel, which may lead to malabsorption of iron and/or vitamin B12).
 Family history and ethnic background may raise suspicion of 
haemolytic anaemias, such as the haemoglobinopathies, oxidative 
enzymopathies and membranopathies. Pernicious anaemia, an 
autoimmune disorder, may also run in families, but is not associated 
with a clear Mendelian pattern of inheritance.
 A drug history may reveal the ingestion of drugs that cause 
or worsen blood loss (e.g. anticoagulants, anti-platelet drugs 
and anti-inammatory drugs), haemolysis (e.g. sulphona-
mides and anti-malarial drugs) or aplasia (e.g. chloramphenicol, 
mercaptopurine).
On examination, as well as the general physical ndings of anaemia 
shown on page, there may be specic ndings related to the aetiology of 
the anaemia; for example, a right iliac fossa mass due to an underlying 

[[p992]]
934    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
MCV normal (76–100 fL)
or low (< 76 fL)
Blood film and
reticulocyte count
High reticulocyte
count
Normal or low
reticulocyte count
Hypochromia
(low MCH)
Target cells
basophilic stippling
Hb electrophoresis
Increased
HbA2
Normal
HbA2
Dimorphic
Bone marrow
Ferritin
Consider ferritin
Non-specific
If Hb <  80 g/L consider
bone marrow to
establish diagnosis
? Anaemia of
chronic disease
No obvious
cause
?Bleeding
?Haemolysis
Normal 
or high
? Sideroblastic
Low
Fe deficient
Investigate
Check family
Beta-
thalassaemia
trait
Alpha-
thalassaemia
trait
Fig. 25.10 Investigation of anaemia with normal or low mean cell volume (MCV). (Hb = haemoglobin; MCH = mean cell haemoglobin)
? Bleeding
? Haemolysis
Polychromasia/high
reticulocyte count
MCV high
(> 100 fL)
Blood film
± reticulocyte count
Clinical clues
Alcohol, liver disease, family
history of pernicious anaemia,
hypothyroidism, drugs, previous
abdominal surgery etc.
Drugs/cytotoxic
agents
Investigate
cause
Liver function
tests
Hypersegmented
neutrophils
Target cells,
stomatocytes
Dysplasia/
cytopenia
Dimorphic
Marrow
Marrow
Folate, B12
? Myelodysplasia
? Sideroblastic
anaemia
Bilirubin 
LDH 
Spherocytes
Fragments
+ve Coombs test 
Low
Fig. 25.11 Investigation of anaemia with high mean cell volume (MCV). (LDH = lactate dehydrogenase)

[[p993]]
Presenting problems in blood disease    935
Neutropenia
A reduction in neutrophil count (usually <1.5 × 109/L but dependent 
on age and race) is called neutropenia. The main causes are listed in 
Box 25.9 and Fig. 25.12. Drug-induced neutropenia is not uncommon 
(Box 25.10). Clinical manifestations range from no symptoms to over-
whelming sepsis. The risk of bacterial infection is related to the degree 
of neutropenia, with counts lower than 0.5 × 109/L considered to be 
critically low. Fever is the rst and often only manifestation of infec-
tion. A sore throat, perianal pain or skin inammation may be present. 
The lack of neutrophils allows the patient to become septicaemic and 
shocked within hours if immediate antibiotic therapy is not commenced. 
Management is discussed on page 269.
Lymphopenia
This is an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 1 × 109/L. The causes 
are shown in Box 25.9. Although minor reductions may be asympto-
matic, deciencies in cell-mediated immunity may result in infections 
(with organisms such as fungi, viruses and mycobacteria) and a propen-
sity to lymphoid and other malignancies (particularly those associated 
with viral infections such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), human papilloma-
virus (HPV) and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8)). Lymphopenia without any 
obvious cause is common with advancing age.
Leucocytosis (high white cell count)
An increase in the total numbers of circulating white cells is called leu-
cocytosis. This is usually due to an increase in a specic type of cell 
(see Box 25.9). It is important to realise that an increase in a single type 
of white cell (e.g. eosinophils or monocytes) may not increase the total 
white cell count (WCC) above the upper limit of normal and will be appar-
ent only if the ‘differential’ of the white count is examined.
Neutrophilia
An increase in the number of circulating neutrophils is called a neutro-
philia or a neutrophil leucocytosis. It can result from an increased produc-
tion of cells from the bone marrow or redistribution from the marginated 
pool. The normal neutrophil count depends on age, race and certain 
physiological parameters. During pregnancy, not only is there an increase 
in neutrophils, but also earlier forms, such as metamyelocytes, can be 
found in the blood. The causes of a neutrophilia are shown in Box 25.9
Eosinophilia
A high eosinophil count of more than 0.5 × 109/L is usually secondary 
to infection (especially parasites; Ch. 13), allergy (e.g. eczema, asthma, 
reactions to drugs; (Ch. 4), immunological disorders (e.g. polyarteritis, 
sarcoidosis) or malignancy (e.g. lymphomas) (see Box 25.9). Usually, 
such eosinophilia is short-lived.
In the rarer primary disorders, there is a persistently raised, often clonal, 
eosinophilia, e.g. in myeloproliferative disorders, subtypes of acute mye-
loid leukaemia and idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES). Specic 
mutations in receptor tyrosine kinase genes have been found in some pri-
mary eosinophilias (e.g. causing rearrangements of platelet-derived growth 
factor receptors α and β or c-kit), which allow diagnosis and, in some 
cases, specic therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib.
Eosinophil inltration can damage many organs (e.g. heart, lungs, 
gastrointestinal tract, skin, musculoskeletal system); evaluation of eosin-
ophilia therefore includes not only the identication of any underlying 
cause and its appropriate treatment, but also assessment of any related 
organ damage.
Lymphocytosis
A lymphocytosis is an increase in circulating lymphocytes above that 
expected for the patient’s age. In adults, this is greater than 3.5 × 109/L. 
Infants and children have higher counts; age-related reference ranges 
should be consulted. Causes are shown in Box 25.9; the most common 
is viral infection.
Lymphadenopathy
Enlarged lymph glands may be an important indicator of haematological 
disease, but they are not uncommon in reaction to infection or inam-
mation (Box 25.11). The sites of lymph node groups, and symptoms and 
signs that may help elucidate the underlying cause are shown on page 
921). Nodes that enlarge in response to local infection or inammation 
(‘reactive nodes’) usually expand rapidly and are painful, whereas those 
due to haematological disease are more frequently painless. Localised 
lymphadenopathy should elicit a search for a source of inammation or 
primary malignancy in the appropriate drainage area:
 the scalp, ear, mouth and throat, face, teeth or thyroid for neck nodes
 the breast for axillary nodes
 the perineum or external genitalia for inguinal nodes.
25.8 Classication and causes of erythrocytosis
Absolute erythrocytosis
Relative (low-volume) erythrocytosis
Haematocrit
High
High
Red cell mass
High
Normal
Plasma volume
Normal
Low
Causes
Primary
Myeloproliferative disorder
Polycythaemia rubra vera (primary proliferative polycythaemia)
Secondary
High erythropoietin due to tissue hypoxia:
High altitude
Cardiorespiratory disease
High-afnity haemoglobins
Inappropriately increased erythropoietin:
Renal disease (hydronephrosis, cysts, carcinoma)
Other tumours (hepatoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, uterine broids,  
phaeochromocytoma, cerebellar haemangioblastoma)
Exogenous testosterone therapy
Exogenous erythropoietin administration:
Performance-enhancing drug-taking in athletes
Diuretics
Smoking
Obesity
Alcohol excess
Gaisböck syndrome

[[p994]]
936    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
25.9  How to interpret white blood cell results
Neutrophilia
 Infection: bacterial, fungal
 Trauma: surgery, burns
 Infarction: myocardial infarct, pulmonary embolus, sickle-cell crisis
 Inammation: gout, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease
 Malignancy: solid tumours, Hodgkin lymphoma
 Myeloproliferative disease: polycythaemia, chronic myeloid leukaemia
 Physiological: exercise, pregnancy
Neutropenia
 Infection: viral, bacterial (e.g. Salmonella), protozoal (e.g. malaria)
 Drugs: see Box 25.10
 Autoimmune: connective tissue disease
 Alcohol
 Bone marrow inltration: leukaemia, myelodysplasia
 Congenital: Kostmann syndrome
 Constitutional: African Caribbean and Middle Eastern descent
Eosinophilia
 Allergy: hay fever, asthma, eczema
 Infection: parasitic
 Drug hypersensitivity: e.g. gold, sulphonamides
 Vasculitis: e.g. eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg–Strauss), 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
 Connective tissue disease: polyarteritis nodosa
 Malignancy: solid tumours, lymphomas
 Primary bone marrow disorders: myeloproliferative disorders, hypereosinophilic 
syndrome (HES), acute myeloid leukaemia
Basophilia
 Myeloproliferative disease: polycythaemia vera, chronic myeloid leukaemia
 Inammation: acute hypersensitivity, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease
Monocytosis
 Infection: bacterial (e.g. tuberculosis)
 Inammation: connective tissue disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease
 Malignancy: solid tumours, chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia
Lymphocytosis
 Infection: viral, bacterial (e.g. Bordetella pertussis)
 Lymphoproliferative disease: chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, lymphoma
 Post-splenectomy
Lymphopenia
 Inammation: connective tissue disease
 Lymphoma
 Renal failure
 Sarcoidosis
 Drugs: glucocorticoids, cytotoxics
 Congenital: severe combined immunodeciency
 Human immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection
25.10 Drugs that can induce neutropenia*
Group
Examples
Analgesics/anti-inammatory 
agents
Gold, penicillamine, naproxen
Antithyroid drugs
Carbimazole, propylthiouracil
Anti-arrhythmics
Quinidine, procainamide
Antihypertensives
Captopril, enalapril,  
nifedipine
Antidepressants/psychotropics
Amitriptyline, dosulepin,  
mianserin
Antimalarials
Pyrimethamine, dapsone, sulfadoxine, 
chloroquine
Anticonvulsants
Phenytoin, sodium valproate, 
carbamazepine
Antibiotics
Sulphonamides, penicillins, 
cephalosporins
Miscellaneous
Cimetidine, ranitidine, chlorpropamide, 
zidovudine
*Many drugs can induce cytopenias. Many chemotherapy drugs and immunosuppressant 
drugs predictably cause neutropenia. In suspected cases check drug summary of product 
characteristics.
25.11 Causes of lymphadenopathy
Infective
 Bacterial: streptococcal, tuberculosis, brucellosis
 Viral: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeciency virus (HIV)
 Protozoal: toxoplasmosis
 Fungal: histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis
Neoplastic
 Primary: lymphomas, leukaemias
 Secondary: lung, breast, thyroid, stomach, melanoma
Connective tissue disorders
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis
Drugs
 Phenytoin
Fig. 25.12 Appearance of white blood cells.
Generalised lymphadenopathy may be secondary to infection, often 
viral, connective tissue disease or extensive skin disease (dermatopathic 
lymphadenopathy), but is more likely to signify underlying haematological 
malignancy. Weight loss and drenching night sweats that may require 
a change of nightclothes are associated with haematological malignan-
cies, particularly lymphoma.

[[p995]]
Presenting problems in blood disease    937
Initial investigations in lymphadenopathy include an FBC (to detect 
evidence of infection, inammation or haematological disease such as 
leucocytosis, thrombocytosis or lymphopenia), measurement of erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and a chest X-ray (to detect mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy). If the ndings suggest malignancy, a formal cutting 
needle or excision biopsy of a representative node is indicated to obtain a 
histological diagnosis. Increasingly, such lymph node biopsies are carried 
out under image guidance using ultrasound or CT scanning, rather than 
formal surgical excision biopsy. However, the quality of such specimens 
is variable and can be difcult to interpret, especially if they are small.
Splenomegaly
The spleen may be enlarged due to involvement by lymphoproliferative 
disease, the resumption of extramedullary haematopoiesis in myelopro-
liferative disease, enhanced reticulo-endothelial activity in autoimmune 
haemolysis, expansion of the lymphoid tissue in response to infections, 
or vascular congestion as a result of portal hypertension (Box 25.12). 
25.12 Causes of splenomegaly
Congestive
Portal hypertension
 Cirrhosis
 Hepatic vein occlusion
 Portal vein thrombosis
 Stenosis or malformation of portal or 
splenic vein
Cardiac
 Chronic congestive cardiac failure
 Constrictive pericarditis
Infective
Bacterial
 Endocarditis
 Sepsis
 Tuberculosis
 Brucellosis
 Salmonella
Viral
 Hepatitis
 Epstein–Barr
 Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
 Malaria*
 Leishmaniasis (kala-azar)*
 Trypanosomiasis
Fungal
 Histoplasmosis
Inammatory/granulomatous disorders
 Felty syndrome in  
rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Sarcoidosis
Haematological
Red cell disorders
 Megaloblastic anaemia
 Haemoglobinopathies
 Hereditary spherocytosis
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias
Myeloproliferative disorders
 Chronic myeloid leukaemia*
 Myelobrosis*
 Polycythaemia rubra vera
 Essential thrombocythaemia
Neoplastic
 Leukaemias, including chronic 
myeloid leukaemia*
 Lymphomas
Other malignancies
 Metastatic cancer – rare
Lysosomal storage diseases
 Gaucher’s disease
 Niemann–Pick disease
Miscellaneous
 Cysts, amyloid, thyrotoxicosis, haemophagocytic syndromes and other histiocytic 
disorders
Hepatosplenomegaly is suggestive of lympho- or myeloproliferative di-
sease, liver disease or inltration (e.g. with amyloid). Associated lymph-
adenopathy is suggestive of lymphoproliferative disease. An enlarged 
spleen may cause abdominal discomfort, accompanied by back pain 
and abdominal bloating and early satiety due to stomach compression. 
Splenic infarction produces severe abdominal pain radiating to the left 
shoulder tip, associated with a splenic rub on auscultation. Rarely, spon-
taneous or traumatic rupture and bleeding may occur.
Investigation should focus on the suspected cause. Imaging of the 
spleen by ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) will detect variations 
in density in the spleen, which may be a feature of lymphoproliferative 
disease; it also allows imaging of the liver and abdominal lymph nodes. 
Biopsy of enlarged abdominal or supercial lymph nodes may provide 
the diagnosis, as might a bone marrow biopsy in splenic lymphomas. 
Achest X-ray or CT of the thorax will detect mediastinal lymphadenop-
athy. An FBC may show pancytopenia secondary to hypersplenism, 
when the enlarged spleen has become overactive, pooling and destroy-
ing blood cells prematurely. If other abnormalities are present, such as 
abnormal lymphocytes or a leucoerythroblastic blood lm, a bone mar-
row examination is indicated. Screening for infectious or liver disease 
(p. 8665) may be appropriate. If all investigations are unhelpful, splenec-
tomy may be diagnostic, but is rarely carried out in these circumstances.
Bleeding
Normal bleeding is seen following surgery and trauma. Pathological 
bleeding occurs when structurally abnormal vessels rupture or when a 
vessel is breached in the presence of a defect in haemostasis. This may 
be due to a deciency or dysfunction of platelets, the coagulation factors 
or von Willebrand factor, or occasionally to excessive brinolysis, which 
is most commonly observed following therapeutic thrombolysis (Ch. 16).
Clinical assessment
‘Screening’ blood tests (see Box 25.3) do not reliably detect all causes 
of pathological bleeding (e.g. von Willebrand disease, scurvy, certain 
anticoagulant and anti-platelet drugs and the causes of purpura listed 
in Box 25.13) and should not be used indiscriminately. A careful clinical 
evaluation is the key to diagnosis of bleeding disorders (p. 980). It is 
important to consider the following:
 Site of bleeding. Bleeding into muscle and joints, along with retro-
peritoneal and intracranial haemorrhage, indicates a likely defect in 
coagulation factors. Purpura, prolonged bleeding from supercial 
cuts, epistaxis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage or menorrhagia is more 
likely to be due to thrombocytopenia, a platelet function disorder or 
von Willebrand disease. Recurrent bleeds at a single site suggest a 
local structural abnormality rather than coagulopathic bleeding.
 Duration of history. It may be possible to assess whether the disor-
der is congenital or acquired.
 Precipitating causes. Bleeding arising spontaneously indicates a 
more severe defect than bleeding that occurs only after trauma.
 Surgery. Ask about operations. Dental extractions, tonsillectomy 
and circumcision are stressful tests of the haemostatic system. 
Immediate post-surgical bleeding suggests defective platelet plug 
formation and primary haemostasis; delayed haemorrhage is more 
suggestive of a coagulation defect. However, in post-surgical 
25.13  Causes of non-thrombocytopenic purpura
 Senile purpura
 Factitious purpura
 Henoch–Schönlein purpura (Ch. 26)
 Vasculitis (Ch. 26)
 Paraproteinaemias
 Purpura fulminans, e.g. in disseminated intravascular coagulation secondary to 
sepsis
*Causes of massive splenomegaly.

[[p996]]
938    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
patients, persistent bleeding from a single site is more likely to indi-
cate surgical bleeding than coagulopathic bleeding.
 Family history. While a positive family history may be present in 
patients with inherited disorders, the absence of affected relatives 
does not exclude a hereditary bleeding diathesis; about one-third 
of cases of haemophilia arise in individuals without a family history, 
and deciencies of factor VII, X and XIII are recessively inherited. 
Recessive disorders are more common in cultures where there is 
consanguineous marriage.
 Drugs. Use of antithrombotic, anticoagulant and brinolytic drugs 
must be elicited. Drug interactions with warfarin and drug-induced 
thrombocytopenia should be considered. Some ‘herbal’ remedies 
may result in a bleeding diathesis.
Clinical examination may reveal different patterns of skin bleeding. 
Petechial purpura is minor bleeding into the dermis that is at and 
non-blanching (Fig. 25.13). Petechiae are typically found in patients 
with thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction. Palpable purpura occurs 
in vasculitis. Ecchymosis, or bruising, is more extensive bleeding into 
deeper layers of the skin. The lesions are initially dark red or purple, but 
become yellow as haemoglobin is degraded. Retroperitoneal bleeding 
presents with a ank or peri-umbilical haematoma. Telangiectasia of lips 
and tongue points to hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (p. 970). 
Joints should be examined for evidence of haemarthroses. A full exam-
ination is important, as it may give clues to an underlying associated 
systemic illness such as a haematological or other malignancy, liver 
disease, renal failure, connective tissue disease and possible causes of 
splenomegaly.
Investigations
Screening investigations and their interpretation are described on page 
930. If the patient has a history that is strongly suggestive of a bleeding 
disorder and all the preliminary screening tests give normal results, fur-
ther investigations, such as measurement of von Willebrand factor and 
assessment of platelet function, should be performed.
Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count)
A reduced platelet count may arise by one of two mechanisms:
 decreased or abnormal production (bone marrow failure and heredi-
tary thrombocytopathies)
 increased consumption following release into the circulation 
(immune-mediated, DIC or sequestration).
Spontaneous bleeding does not usually occur until the platelet count 
falls below 20 × 109/L, unless their function is also compromised. Purpura 
and spontaneous bruising are characteristic, but there may also be oral, 
nasal, gastrointestinal or genitourinary bleeding. Severe thrombocyto-
penia (<10 × 109/L) may result in retinal haemorrhage and potentially fatal 
intracranial bleeding, but this is rare.
Investigations are directed at the possible causes listed in 
Box 25.14. A blood lm is the single most useful initial investigation. 
Examination of the bone marrow may reveal increased megakaryo-
cytes in consumptive causes of thrombocytopenia, or the underlying 
cause of bone marrow failure in leukaemia, hypoplastic anaemia or 
myelodysplasia.
Treatment (if required) depends on the underlying cause. Platelet 
transfusion is rarely required and is usually conned to patients with bone 
marrow failure and platelet counts below 10 × 109/L, or to clinical situa-
tions with actual or predicted serious haemorrhage.
Thrombocytosis (high platelet count)
The most common reason for a raised platelet count is that it is reactive 
to another process, such as infection, inammation, connective tissue 
disease, malignancy, iron deciency, acute haemolysis or gastrointestinal 
bleeding (Box 25.15). The presenting clinical features are usually those 
Fig. 25.13 Petechial purpura.
25.14 Causes of thrombocytopenia
Decreased production
Marrow hypoplasia
 Childhood bone marrow failure syndromes, e.g. Fanconi’s  
anaemia, dyskeratosis congenita, amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
 Idiopathic aplastic anaemia
 Drug-induced: cytotoxics, antimetabolites
 Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease
Marrow inltration
 Leukaemia
 Myeloma
 Carcinoma (rare)
 Myelobrosis
 Osteopetrosis
 Lysosomal storage disorders, e.g. 
Gaucher’s disease
Haematinic deciency
 Vitamin B12 and/or folate deciency
Familial (macro-)thrombocytopathies
 Myosin heavy chain abnormalities, e.g. Alport syndrome,  
Fechtner syndrome, May–Hegglin anomaly
 Bernard–Soulier syndrome
 Montreal platelet syndrome
 Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome (small platelets)
 Mediterranean macrothrombocytopathy
Increased consumption
Immune mechanisms
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura*
 Neonatal alloimmune 
thrombocytopenia
 Post-transfusion purpura
 Drug-associated, especially quinine, 
vancomycin and heparin
Coagulation activation
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) (see Box 25.70)
Mechanical pooling
 Hypersplenism
Thrombotic microangiopathies
 Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) 
and atypical HUS
 Liver disease
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
 Pre-eclampsia/HELLP
Others
 Gestational thrombocytopenia
 Type 2B von Willebrand disease
 Pseudo von Willebrand disease
*Associated conditions include collagen vascular diseases (particularly systemic lupus 
erythematosus), B-cell malignancy, HIV infection and antiphospholipid syndrome.

[[p997]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    939
Principles of management of haematological 
disease
Blood components and transfusion
Blood transfusion from an unrelated donor to a recipient inevitably car-
ries some risk, including adverse immunological interactions between 
the host and infused blood (see below), and transmission of infectious 
agents. Although there are many compelling clinical indications for blood 
component transfusion, there are also many clinical circumstances 
where transfusion is conventional, but the evidence for its effectiveness 
is limited. In these settings, allogeneic transfusion may be avoided by 
following protocols that recommend the use of low haemoglobin thresh-
olds for red cell transfusion, perioperative blood salvage and antibrino-
lytic drugs.
Blood components
Blood components are prepared from whole blood or specic blood 
constituents collected from individual donors and include red cells, plate-
lets, plasma and cryoprecipitate (Box 25.17).
Plasma derivatives are licensed pharmaceutical products produced 
on a factory scale from large volumes of human plasma obtained from 
many people and treated to reduce the risk of transmissible infection. 
Examples include:
 Coagulation factors. Concentrates of factors VIII and IX are used for 
the treatment of conditions such as haemophilia A, haemophilia B and 
von Willebrand disease. Coagulation factors made by recombinant 
DNA technology are now preferred due to perceived lack of infection 
risk but plasma-derived products are still used in many countries.
 Immunoglobulins. Intravenous immunoglobulin G (IVIgG) is admin-
istered as regular replacement therapy to reduce infective compli-
cations in patients with primary and secondary immunodeciency. 
A short, high-dose course of IVIgG may also be effective in some 
immunological disorders, including immune thrombocytopenia  
(p. 981) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (Ch. 28). IVIgG can cause 
acute reactions and must be infused strictly according to the man-
ufacturer’s product information. There is a risk of renal dysfunction 
in susceptible patients and in these circumstances immunoglobulin 
products containing low or no sucrose are preferred. Anti-zoster 
immunoglobulin has a role in the prophylaxis of varicella zoster  
(Ch. 13). Anti-Rhesus D immunoglobulin is used in pregnancy to 
prevent haemolytic disease of the newborn (see Box 25.19).
 Human albumin. This is available in two strengths. The 5% solu-
tion can be used as a colloid resuscitation uid, but it is no more 
effective and is more expensive than crystalloid solutions. Human 
albumin 20% solution may be used in the management of hypo-
proteinaemic oedema in nephrotic syndrome (Ch. 18) and refrac-
tory ascites in chronic liver disease (Ch. 24). It is hyperoncotic and 
expands plasma volume by more than the amount infused.
Blood components and their uses are summarised in Box 25.17
Blood donation
A safe supply of blood components depends on a well-organised sys-
tem with regular donation by healthy individuals who have no excess 
risk of infections transmissible in blood (Fig. 25.14). Blood donations are 
obtained by either venesection of a unit of whole blood or collection of 
a specic component, such as platelets, by apheresis. During apher-
esis, the donor’s blood is drawn via a closed system into a machine that 
separates the components by centrifugation and collects the desired 
fraction into a bag, returning the rest of the blood to the donor. Each 
donation must be tested for hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus 
(HCV), HIV and human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) nucleic acid 
25.15 Causes of a raised platelet count
Reactive thrombocytosis
 Acute and chronic inammatory 
disorders
 Infection
 Malignant disease
 Tissue damage
 Haemolytic anaemias
 Post-splenectomy
 Post-haemorrhage
Clonal thrombocytosis
 Primary thrombocythaemia
 Polycythaemia rubra vera
 Chronic myeloid leukaemia
 Myelobrosis
 Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs)
 MDS with ring sideroblasts and 
thrombocytosis
 MDS with isolated deletion of 5q
of the underlying disorder and haemostasis is rarely affected. Reactive 
thrombocytosis is distinguished from the myeloproliferative disorders by 
the presence of uniform small platelets, lack of splenomegaly and the 
presence of an associated underlying disorder. The key to diagnosis is 
the clinical history and examination, combined with observation of the 
platelet count over time (reactive thrombocytosis gets better with resolu-
tion of the underlying cause).
The platelets are a product of an abnormally expanding clone of 
cells in the myeloproliferative disorders, chronic myeloid leukaemia and 
some forms of myelodysplasia. As with PRV, patients with essential 
thrombocythaemia may present with thrombosis or, rarely, bleeding. 
Stroke, transient ischaemic attacks, amaurosis fugax, digital ischaemia 
or gangrene, aquagenic pruritus, splenomegaly and systemic upset 
are also features. Patients with myeloproliferative disorders may also 
present with features such as aquagenic pruritus, splenomegaly and 
systemic upset.
Pancytopenia
Pancytopenia refers to the combination of anaemia, leucopenia and 
thrombocytopenia. It may be due to reduced production of blood cells as 
a consequence of bone marrow suppression or inltration, or there may 
be peripheral destruction or splenic pooling of mature cells. Causes are 
shown in Box 25.16. A bone marrow aspirate and trephine are usually 
required to establish the diagnosis.
Infection
Infection is a major complication of haematological disorders. It relates 
to the immunological decit caused by the disease itself, or its treatment 
with chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy (pp. 268 and 933).
25.16 Causes of pancytopenia
Bone marrow failure
 Hypoplastic/aplastic anaemia (p. 978): inherited, idiopathic, viral, drugs
Bone marrow inltration
 Acute leukaemia
 Myeloma
 Lymphoma
 Carcinoma
 Haemophagocytic syndrome
 Myelodysplastic syndromes
Ineffective haematopoiesis
 Megaloblastic anaemia
 Acquired immunodeciency syndrome (AIDS)
Peripheral pooling/destruction
 Hypersplenism: portal hypertension, Felty syndrome, malaria, myelobrosis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus

[[p998]]
940    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
and/or antibodies. Platelet concentrates may be tested for bacterial con-
tamination. The need for other microbiological tests depends on local 
epidemiology. For example, testing for Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas’ dis-
ease; Ch. 13) is necessary in areas of South America and the United 
States where infection is prevalent. Tests for West Nile virus have been 
required in the United States and UK since this agent became more prev-
alent. Components for use in specic patient groups are prepared from 
hepatitis E virus-negative donors in the UK, and plasma donated in the 
UK is not used at present for producing pooled plasma derivatives in 
view of concerns about transmission of variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob dis-
ease (vCJD; Ch. 28).
Adverse effects of transfusion
Death attributable to transfusion is rare, at 0.99 per 100 000 transfusions; 
this includes death where a delay in timely supply of components was 
contributory. Moderate or severe febrile, allergic and hypotensive reac-
tions occur in around 12 per 100 000 transfusions and are usually seen 
in patients who have had repeated transfusions. Any symptoms or signs 
that arise during a transfusion must be taken seriously, as they may be 
the rst warnings of a serious reaction. Fig. 25.16 outlines the symptoms 
and signs, management and investigation of acute reactions to blood 
components.
Red cell incompatibility
Red blood cell membranes contain numerous cell surface molecules that 
are potentially antigenic (see Fig. 25.4). The ABO and Rhesus D antigens 
are the most important in routine transfusion and antenatal practice.
ABO blood groups
The frequency of the ABO antigens varies among different populations. 
The ABO blood group antigens are oligosaccharide chains that project 
from the red cell surface. These chains are attached to proteins and 
lipids that lie in the red cell membrane. The ABO gene encodes a glyco-
syltransferase that catalyses the nal step in the synthesis of the chain, 
which has three common alleles: A, B and O. The O allele encodes an 
inactive enzyme, leaving the ABO antigen precursor (called the H anti-
gen) unmodied. The A and B alleles encode enzymes that differ by four 
amino acids and hence attach different sugars to the end of the chain. 
Individuals are tolerant to their own ABO antigens, but do not suppress 
B-cell clones producing antibodies against ABO antigens that they do 
not carry themselves (Box 25.18). They are, therefore, capable of mount-
ing a humoral immune response to these ‘foreign’ antigens.
ABO-incompatible red cell transfusion
If red cells of an incompatible ABO group are transfused (especially if 
a group O recipient is transfused with group A, B or AB red cells), the 
25.17  Blood components and their use
Component
Major haemorrhage
Other indications
Red cell concentrate1
Most of the plasma is removed and replaced 
with a solution of glucose and adenine in  
saline to maintain viability of red cells
ABO compatibility with recipient essential
Replace acute blood loss: increase circulating  
red cell mass to relieve clinical features caused by 
insufcient oxygen delivery. Order 4–6 U initially 
to allow high red cell to FFP transfusion ratios of 
(at least) 2:1
Severe anaemia
If no cardiovascular disease, transfuse to maintain Hb at 
70 g/L
If known or likely to have cardiovascular disease, maintain 
Hb at 90 g/L
Platelet concentrate
One adult dose is made from four donations of 
whole blood, or from a single platelet  
apheresis donation
ABO compatibility with recipient preferable
Maintain platelet count >50 × 109/L, or in 
multiple or central nervous system trauma  
>100 × 109/L
If ongoing bleeding, order when platelets  
<100 × 109/L to allow for delivery time
Each adult dose has a minimum of 2.4 × 1011
platelets, which raises platelet count by  
40 × 109/L unless there is consumptive 
coagulopathy, e.g. disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Thrombocytopenia, e.g. in acute leukaemia
Maintain platelet count >10 × 109/L if not bleeding
Maintain platelet count >20 × 109/L if minor bleeding 
or at risk (sepsis, concurrent use of antibiotics, abnormal 
coagulation)
Increase platelet count >50 × 109/L for minor invasive 
procedure (e.g. lumbar puncture, gastroscopy and biopsy, 
insertion of indwelling lines, liver biopsy, laparotomy) or in 
acute, major blood loss
Increase platelet count >100 × 109/L for operations in 
critical sites such as brain or eyes
Fresh frozen plasma2
150–300 mL plasma from one donation of 
whole blood
ABO compatibility with recipient recommended
Dilutional coagulopathy with a PT prolonged 
>50% is likely after replacement of 1–1.5 blood 
volumes with red cell concentrate
Give initially in (at least) a ratio of 1 FFP:2 red 
cell concentrate; order 15–20 mL/kg and allow 
for thawing time. Further doses only if bleeding 
continues and guided by PT and APTT
Replacement of coagulation factor deciency
If no virally inactivated or recombinant product is available
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Plasma exchange (using virus-inactivated plasma if 
available) is frequently effective
Cryoprecipitate2
Fibrinogen and coagulation factor concentrated 
from plasma by controlled thawing
10–20 mL pack contains:
Fibrinogen 150–300 mg
Factor VIII 80–120 U
von Willebrand factor 80–120 U
In UK supplied as pools of 5 U
Aim to keep brinogen >1.5 g/L. Pooled units (of 
10 donations) will raise brinogen by 1 g/L
von Willebrand disease and haemophilia
If virus-inactivated or recombinant products are not 
available
1Whole blood is an alternative to red cell concentrate. ABO compatibility with recipient essential. 2Pooled plasma can be treated with solvent and detergent or single units treated with methylene blue as 
an additional viral inactivation step. Virus-inactivated plasma is indicated for large-volume exposure, as in treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
(APTT = activated partial thromboplastin time; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; Hb = haemoglobin; PT = prothrombin time)

[[p999]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    941
A
A
A
Donor
Education Recruitment Selection
Donation
Process into blood components
Filter to remove leucocytes
Test for:
HIV
HTLV
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis E
Syphilis
ABO + RhD
Other blood
groups
Red cell
antibodies
Platelet
 apheresis1
450 mL whole blood
collected into 63 mL
anticoagulant/preservative
Pooled/apheresis
platelets
Red cells
Fresh frozen plasma
Plasma2
4°C
22°C
–30°C
Storage
Fractionation
Plasma derivatives,
e.g. albumin,
immunoglobulin
Patient
35 days
5 days (agitate)
36 months
Confirm compatibility
Thaw
Fig. 25.14 Blood donation, processing and storage. 1Platelet apheresis involves circulating the donor’s blood through a cell separator to remove platelets before returning 
other blood components to the donor. 2In the UK, plasma for fractionation is imported as a precautionary measure against variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD). (HIV = 
human immunodeciency virus; HTLV = human T-cell lymphotropic virus)
recipient’s IgM anti-A, anti-B or anti-AB binds to the transfused red cells. 
This activates the full complement pathway (Ch. 4), creating pores in 
the red cell membrane and destroying the transfused red cells in the 
circulation (intravascular haemolysis). The anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a, 
released by complement activation, liberate cytokines such as tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-8, and stimulate degran-
ulation of mast cells with release of vasoactive mediators. All these 
substances may lead to inammation, increased vascular permeability 
and hypotension, which may, in turn, cause shock and renal failure. 
Inammatory mediators can also cause platelet aggregation, lung peri-
bronchial oedema and smooth muscle contraction. About 20%–30% of 
25.18 ABO blood group antigens and antibodies
ABO blood 
group
Red cell A or B 
antigens
Antibodies in 
plasma
UK frequency 
(%)
O
None
Anti-A and anti-B
46
A
A
Anti-B
42
B
B
Anti-A
9
AB
A and B
None
3

[[p1000]]
942    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
ABO-incompatible transfusions cause some degree of morbidity, and 
5%–10% cause or contribute to a patient’s death. The main reason for 
this relatively low morbidity is the lack of potency of ABO antibodies in 
group A or B subjects; even if the recipient is group O, those who are 
very young or very old usually have weaker antibodies that do not lead to 
the activation of large amounts of complement.
The Rhesus D blood group and haemolytic disease of the newborn
About 15% of populations of predominantly European descent are 
 Rhe sus-negative: that is, they lack the Rhesus D (RhD) red cell surface anti-
gen (see Fig. 25.4). In other populations (e.g. in Chinese and Bengalis), only 
1%–5% are Rhesus-negative. RhD-negative individuals do not normally pro-
duce substantial amounts of anti-RhD antibodies. However, if RhD-positive 
red cells enter the circulation of an RhD-negative individual, IgG antibodies 
are produced. This can occur during pregnancy if the mother is exposed 
to fetal cells via fetomaternal haemorrhage, or following transfusion. If a 
woman is sensitised, during a subsequent pregnancy anti-RhD antibodies 
can cross the placenta; if the fetus is RhD-positive, haemolysis with severe 
fetal anaemia and hyperbilirubinaemia can result. This can cause severe 
neurological damage or death due to haemolytic disease of the newborn 
(HDN). Therefore, an RhD-negative female who may subsequently become 
pregnant should never be transfused with RhD-positive blood.
In RhD-negative women, administration of anti-RhD immunoglobulin 
(anti-D) perinatally can block the immune response to RhD antigen on 
fetal cells and is the only effective product for preventing the develop-
ment of Rhesus antibodies (Box 25.19).
HDN can also be caused by other alloantibodies against red cell anti-
gens, usually after previous pregnancies or transfusions. These antigens 
include Rhc, RhC, RhE, Rhe, and the Kell, Kidd and Duffy antigen sys-
tems. HDN can also occur if there is fetomaternal ABO incompatibil-
ity, most commonly seen in a group O mother with a group A fetus. 
The fetus is generally less severely affected by ABO incompatibility than 
by RhD, Rhc or Kell antigen mismatch and the incompatibility is often 
picked up coincidentally after birth.
Other immunological complications of transfusion
Rare but serious complications include transfusion-associated lung 
injury (TRALI) and transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease (TA 
GVHD). The latter occurs when there is sharing of a human leucocyte 
antigen (HLA) haplotype between donor and recipient, which allows 
transfused lymphocytes to engraft, proliferate and recognise the recipi-
ent as foreign, resulting in acute GVHD (p. 945). Prevention is by gamma- 
or X-ray irradiation of blood components before their administration to 
prevent lymphocyte proliferation. Those at risk of TA GVHD who must 
receive irradiated blood components include patients with congenital 
T-cell immunodeciencies or Hodgkin lymphoma, patients with aplastic 
anaemia receiving immunosuppressive therapy with antithymocyte 
globulin (ATG), recipients of haematopoietic stem cell transplants or of 
blood from a family member, neonates who have received an intrauterine 
transfusion, and patients taking T-lymphocyte-suppressing drugs, such 
as udarabine and other purine analogues.
Transfusion-transmitted infection
Over the past 30 years, HBV, HIV-1 and HCV have been identied and effec-
tive tests introduced to detect and exclude infected donations. Where blood 
is from ‘safe’ donors and correctly tested, the current risk of a donated 
unit being infectious is very small. In the UK, the estimated chance that a 
unit of blood from a ‘safe’ donor might be infected with one of the viruses 
for which blood is tested is approximately 1 in 25 million units for HIV-1, 
less than 1 in 100 million for HCV and 1 in 1.2 million for HBV. However, 
some patients who received transfusions before these tests were available 
suffered serious consequences from infection; this serves as a reminder to 
avoid non-essential transfusion since it is impossible to exclude the emer-
gence of new or currently unrecognised transfusion-transmissible infection. 
Licensed plasma derivatives that have been virus-inactivated do not trans-
mit HIV, HTLV, HBV, HCV, cytomegalovirus or other lipid-enveloped viruses.
Variant CJD is a human prion disease linked to bovine spongiform 
encephalitis (BSE; Ch. 28). The risk of a recipient acquiring the agent of 
vCJD from a transfusion is uncertain, but of 16 recipients of blood from 
donors who later developed the disease, 3 have died with clinical vCJD 
and 1 other had postmortem immunohistological features of infection.
Bacterial contamination of a blood component – usually platelets – is 
extremely rare (there have been no proven cases in the UK in recent 
years) but can result in severe bacteraemia/sepsis in the recipient.
Safe transfusion procedures
The proposed transfusion and any alternatives should be discussed with 
the patient or, if that is not possible, with a relative. Their consent to 
proceed with transfusion should be obtained and the discussion docu-
mented. Some patients, e.g. Jehovah’s Witnesses, may refuse transfu-
sion and require specialised management to survive profound anaemia 
following blood loss.
Pre-transfusion testing
To ensure that red cells supplied for transfusion are compatible with the 
intended recipient, the transfusion laboratory will perform either a ‘group 
and screen’ procedure or a ‘cross-match’. In the group and screen proce-
dure, the red cells from the patient’s blood sample are tested to determine 
the ABO and RhD type, and the patient’s serum is also tested against an 
array of red cells expressing the most important antigens to detect any red 
cell antibodies. Any antibody detected can be identied by further testing, 
so that red cell units that lack the corresponding antigen can be selected. 
The patient’s sample can be held in the laboratory for up to a week, so that 
the hospital blood bank can quickly prepare compatible blood without the 
need for a further patient sample. Conventional cross-matching consists 
of the group and antibody screen, followed by direct conrmation of the 
compatibility of individual units of red cells with the patient’s serum. Full 
cross-matching takes about 45 minutes, if no red cell antibodies are pres-
ent, but may require hours if a patient has multiple antibodies.
Blood can be supplied by ‘electronic issue’, without the need for com-
patibility cross-matching, if the laboratory’s computer system shows that 
the patient’s ABO and RhD groups have been identied and conrmed 
on two separate occasions and their antibody screen is negative. This 
allows group-specic units to be issued quickly and safely, for elective 
and emergency transfusion.
Bedside procedures for safe transfusion
Errors leading to patients receiving the wrong blood are an important 
avoidable cause of mortality and morbidity. Most incompatible trans-
fusions result from failure to adhere to standard procedures for taking 
correctly labelled blood samples from the patient and ensuring that the 
correct pack of blood component is transfused into the intended patient. 
In the UK in 2019, the annual incidence of transfusion of an incorrect 
25.19  Rhesus D blood groups in pregnancy
 Haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN): occurs when the mother has 
anti-red cell immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies that cross the placenta and 
haemolyse fetal red cells.
 Screening for HDN in pregnancy: at the time of booking (12–16 weeks) and 
again at 28–34 weeks’ gestation, every pregnant woman should have a blood 
sample sent for determination of ABO and Rhesus D (RhD) group and testing 
for red cell alloantibodies that may be directed against paternal blood group 
antigens present on fetal red cells.
 Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis in a pregnant woman who is 
RhD-negative: antenatal anti-D prophylaxis is offered at 28–34 weeks to 
RhD-negative pregnant women who have no evidence of immune anti-D. This 
prevents the formation of antibodies that could cause HDN. Following delivery 
of an RhD-positive baby, the mother is given further anti-D within 72 hours; a 
maternal sample is checked for remaining fetal red cells and additional anti-D 
is given if indicated. Additional anti-D is also given after potential sensitising 
events antenatally (e.g. early bleeding). Doses vary according to national 
recommendations.

[[p1001]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    943
blood component is approximately 15 per 100 000 units transfused. 
Every hospital where blood is transfused should have a written transfu-
sion policy used by all staff who order, check or administer blood prod-
ucts (Fig. 25.15). Management of suspected transfusion reactions is 
shown in Fig. 25.16
Transfusion in major haemorrhage
The successful management of a patient with major haemorrhage 
requires frontline clinical staff to be trained to recognise signicant blood 
loss early and to intervene before shock is established. Hospitals should 
have local major haemorrhage protocols and all clinical staff must be 
familiar with their content. Good team working and communication are 
essential to prevent poor clinical outcome, suboptimal or inappropri-
ate transfusion practice and component wastage. Fresh frozen plasma 
(FFP) should be given as part of initial resuscitation in (at least) a 1:2 ratio 
with red cell concentrate (RCC) until coagulation results are available. 
If the patient is bleeding, a ratio of FFP to RCC of 1:1 should be given 
until laboratory results are available and use of cryoprecipitate should 
be considered. Once the bleeding is under control, further FFP trans-
fusion should be guided by laboratory results with transfusion triggers 
of PT and/or APTT above 1·5 times normal for a standard dose of FFP 
(15–20 mL/kg). Cryoprecipitate should be given if the brinogen level falls 
below 1.5 g/L. Platelets should be kept above 50 × 109/L; to allow for 
delivery time, platelets should be requested if there is ongoing bleeding 
and the platelet count has fallen below 100 × 109/L. Blood component 
use in major haemorrhage is summarised in Box 25.17 and key points in 
transfusion medicine in Box 25.20
Anti-cancer drugs
Cytotoxic chemotherapy
Many haematological malignancies are sensitive to the effects of cyto-
toxic chemotherapy drugs and, as such, they remain the mainstay 
of treatment for most haematological cancers (Box 25.21; see also 
Fig. 7.2). There is a wide range of drugs available that work by damaging 
DNA or disrupting cellular metabolism, in such a way that natural apop-
tosis mechanisms, such as TP53, are activated and the cell dies. Despite 
cancer cells being more sensitive, chemotherapy is largely non-specic 
and kills some normal cells as well as cancer cells. This leads to com-
mon side-effects of treatment, such as transient bone marrow failure, 
hair loss, mucositis and infertility. The supportive care of patients under-
going chemotherapy is critical in overcoming these side-effects. It is this 
supportive care, including blood product support, antibiotics, antifun-
gal drugs, growth factors and antiemetics, that has allowed specialist 
haematology units to achieve the best possible results from intensive 
chemotherapy: for example, when treating acute leukaemia.
The basic principles of chemotherapy include combining several 
non-cross-reacting drugs in a regimen that kills a xed proportion of can-
cer cells with a given dose. Several cycles of the combination are given 
to achieve gradual reduction of the tumour burden, to induce remission 
and, in some instances, to produce a cure (Ch. 7).
 Positively identify the patient at the bedside
 Label the sample tube and complete
the request form clearly and accurately
   after identifying the patient
 Do not write forms and labels in advance
Taking blood for pre-transfusion testing
Administering blood
 Positively identify the patient at the bedside
 Ensure that the identification of each blood pack
   matches the patient’s identification
 Check that the ABO and RhD groups of each
   pack are compatible with the patient’s
 Check each pack for evidence of damage
 If in doubt, do not use and return to the blood bank
 Complete the forms that document the transfusion of each pack
 Check the compatibility label on the pack against the patient’s wristband
 Always involve
   the patient by asking
   them to state their name
   and date of birth, where possible
Surname
Forename
Date of birth
Unique identifier/
hospital number
Pat
Blood pack
Observations
 Transfusions should only be given when the patient can be observed
 Blood pressure, pulse and temperature should be monitored before and 15 minutes after starting each pack
 In conscious patients, further observations are only needed if the patient has symptoms or signs of a reaction
 In unconscious patients, check pulse and temperature at intervals during transfusion
 Signs of abnormal bleeding during the transfusion could be due to disseminated intravascular coagulation
   resulting from an acute haemolytic reaction
Record-keeping
 Record in the patient’s notes the reason for transfusion, the product given, dose, any adverse effects
   and the clinical response
Fig. 25.15 Bedside procedures for safe blood transfusion. The patient’s safety depends on adherence to standard procedures for taking samples for compatibility testing, 
administering blood, record-keeping and observations.
25.20 Key points in transfusion medicine
 A restrictive strategy for red cell transfusion (Hb <70 g/L) is at least as effective 
as a liberal strategy (<100 g/L).
 The majority of reports in haemovigilance schemes such as SHOT relate to 
errors in the process of transfusion.
 Although transfusion-transmitted infection is a major concern for patients 
receiving transfusion, it is rare.
 In patients with trauma or burns or those who have had surgery, there is no 
evidence that resuscitation with albumin or other colloid solutions reduces the 
risk of death compared to resuscitation with crystalloid solutions.
 It is recommended that transfusion should be carried out overnight only in 
unavoidable circumstances.
(SHOT = Serious Hazards of Transfusion)

[[p1002]]
944    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Bacterial infection of unit
  Take down unit and giving set/return intact to blood
 bank with all other used/unused units
  Take blood cultures, repeat blood group/cross-match/
   FBC, coagulation screen, biochemistry, urinalysis
  Monitor urine output
  Commence broad-spectrum antibiotics if suspected
   bacterial infection (Ch. 6)
  Commence oxygen and fluid support
  Seek advice
Severe allergic reaction
  Discontinue transfusion
  Give chlorphenamine 10 mg slowly IV*
  Commence O2 and fluid support
  Give salbutamol nebuliser
  If severe hypotension or bronchospasm, give
   adrenaline (epinephrine) 0.5 mg IM*
  Send clotted blood sample to transfusion laboratory
  Take down unit and giving set, and return intact to
 blood bank with all other used/unused units
             Bacterial contamination?
 Blood pack discoloured or damaged
 Rapid onset of hyper- or hypotension, rigors or collapse
 Temperature  39°C or rise of  2°C
Fluid overload
 Give oxygen and furosemide 40–80 mg IV*
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
 Typically within 6–24 hrs of transfusion
 Breathlessness, non-productive cough
 Chest X-ray bilateral nodular infiltration
 Discontinue transfusion
 Give 100% oxygen
 Treat as ARDS – ventilate if severely hypoxaemic
          If acute dyspnoea/hypotension
  Monitor blood gases
  Perform chest X-ray
  Measure central venous/pulmonary
   capillary pressure
No
Raised
CVP
Yes
Normal
CVP
Severe allergic reaction?
 Bronchospasm, angioedema,
  abdominal pain, hypotension
Yes
No
 Suspected ABO incompatibility?
 Wrong blood pack infused
 Haemoglobinuria
Yes
ABO incompatibility
  Take down unit and giving set; return
 intact to blood bank
  Commence IV saline infusion
  Monitor urine output/catheterise
 Maintain urine output at > 100 mL/hr
 Give furosemide if urine output falls*
  Treat DIC with appropriate blood
   components
  Inform hospital transfusion department
   immediately
No
Reaction involves mild fever
or urticarial rash only?
Fever
No
Febrile non-haemolytic transfusion reaction
If isolated temperature  38°C, or rise of 1–2°C,
observations are stable and patient is otherwise well
  Give paracetamol*
 Restart infusion at a slower rate and observe more
   frequently
Urticaria
Mild pruritus/rash
 Give chlorphenamine 10 mg slowly IV*
 Restart the transfusion at a slower rate and observe
   more frequently
                                       Stop the transfusion
 Undertake rapid clinical assessment, including temperature, pulse, BP,
   respiratory rate and O2 saturation
 Check the identity of recipient details on the unit and compatibility form
                    Symptoms/signs of possible acute transfusion reaction
 Fever, chills, tachycardia, hyper- or hypotension, collapse, rigors, flushing,
  urticaria, bone, muscle, chest and/or abdominal pain, shortness of breath,
  nausea, generally feeling unwell, respiratory distress
Fig. 25.16 Investigation and management of acute transfusion reactions. *Use size-appropriate dose in children. (ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; 
BP = blood pressure; CVP = central venous pressure; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; FBC = full blood count; IV = intravenous)

[[p1003]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    945
Monocolonal antibodies
In recent years, chemotherapy has been improved by the addition of 
treatments that are more targeted to the cancer cell, particularly mono-
clonal antibodies; for example, rituximab (anti-CD20) has been added 
to CHOP (cyclophosphamide doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone) and 
other regimens. This has signicantly improved the outcome in a range 
of CD20-positive B-cell lymphomas, including diffuse large B-cell lym-
phoma, follicular lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma. As well as ‘naked’ 
monoclonal antibodies that kill malignant cells by engaging antibody-
dependent cytotoxic T cells or complement, chemotherapy drugs can 
also be linked to a monoclonal antibody to allow targeting of the chemo-
therapy drug to the specic cancer cell. Examples of such antibody–drug 
conjugates (ADCs) or ‘payload’ antibodies include the linking of the inter-
calating antibiotic calicheamicin to anti-CD33 (gemtuzumab ozogamicin) 
in the treatment of acute myeloid leukaemia (see Fig. 25.27) and to 
anti-CD22 (inotuzumab ozogamicin) in the treatment of acute lympho-
blastic leukaemia (see Fig. 25.28).
Small molecule targeted therapies
Small molecules targeted at the mechanisms causing cancer are replac-
ing cytotoxic chemotherapy in some disease situations. The most suc-
cessful of these to date are tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting BCR-ABL 
in chronic myeloid leukaemia, which have transformed the treatment 
of this disease over the last 20 years (see Fig. 25.29). This is a rapidly 
growing area of medicine and now includes inhibitors of B-cell signal-
ling in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and lymphomas (see Fig. 25.30) 
and drugs that target mutated gene products, such as FMS-like tyrosine 
kinase 3-internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) in acute myeloid leukae-
mia. More details of specic therapies are given later in the chapter.
Immunotherapy
This includes cellular immunotherapy (see below) and non-cellular immu-
notherapy such as antibody and antibody-conjugate mediated cytotox-
icity as outlined above and checkpoint inhibitor therapy as described in 
Chapter 7. Checkpoint inhibitor therapy has, to date, proved less use-
ful in haematological malignancies than in solid tumours. This might be 
because haematological malignancies tend to have less acquired muta-
tions to stimulate T-cell attack than do solid tumours.
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Transplantation of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCT) has offered the only 
hope of ‘cure’ in a variety of haematological and non-haematological 
disorders (Box 25.22). As standard treatment improves, the indications 
for HSCT are being rened and extended, although its use remains most 
common in haematological malignancies. The type of HSCT is dened 
according to the donor and source of stem cells:
 In allogeneic HSCT, the stem cells come from a donor – either a 
related donor (usually an HLA-identical sibling) or a closely HLA-
matched volunteer unrelated donor (VUD).
 In an autologous transplant, the stem cells are harvested from 
the patient and stored in the vapour phase of liquid nitrogen until 
required. Stem cells can be harvested from the bone marrow or, 
most commonly nowadays, from the blood.
Allogeneic HSCT
Healthy bone marrow or blood stem cells from a donor are infused intra-
venously into the recipient, who has been suitably ‘conditioned’. The 
conditioning treatment (chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy) is 
‘myeloablative’ or, increasingly, ‘non-myeloablative’. Myeloablative condi-
tioning destroys malignant cells and immunosuppresses the recipient, as 
well as ablating the recipient’s haematopoietic tissues. Reduced intensity 
conditioning (non-myeloablative) relies on intense immunosuppression to 
provide ‘immunological space’ for transplanted stem cells. The infused 
donor cells ‘home’ to the marrow, engraft and produce enough erythro-
cytes, granulocytes and platelets for the patient’s needs after about 2–4 
weeks. During this period of aplasia, patients are at risk of infection and 
bleeding, and require intensive supportive care as described on page 
966. It may take several years to regain normal immunological function 
and patients remain at risk from opportunistic infections, particularly in 
the rst year.
An advantage of receiving allogeneic donor stem cells is that the 
donor’s immune system can recognise residual recipient malignant cells 
and destroy them. This immunological ‘graft-versus-disease’ effect is a 
powerful tool against many haematological tumours and can be boosted 
post-transplantation by the infusion of T cells taken from the donor: 
so-called donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI).
Considerable morbidity and mortality are associated with HSCT. The 
best results are obtained in younger patients (<40 years) with minimal 
residual disease, who have an HLA-identical sibling donor. However, 
reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) has enabled treatment of older or less 
t patients, in whom the majority of haematological malignancies occur. In 
this form of transplantation, rather than using very intensive myeloablative 
conditioning, which causes morbidity from organ damage, relatively low 
doses of chemotherapy drugs, such as udarabine and cyclophospha-
mide or busulfan, are used in combination with antibodies such as alemtu-
zumab (which targets CD52 on mature lymphoid cells) or anti-thymocyte 
globulin (ATG) to immunosuppress the recipient and allow donor stem cells 
to engraft. The emerging donor immune system then eliminates malignant 
cells via the ‘graft-versus-disease’ effect, which may be boosted by the 
elective use of donor T-cell infusions post-transplant. Such transplants 
have produced long-term remissions in some patients with acute leukae-
mia and myelodysplastic syndromes aged 40–70 years, who would not 
previously have been considered for a myeloablative allograft.
Complications
These are outlined in Boxes 25.23 and 25.24. The risks and outcomes 
of transplantation depend upon several patient- and disease-related fac-
tors. In general, 25% die from procedure-related complications, such as 
infection and GVHD, and there remains a signicant risk of the haemato-
logical malignancy relapsing. The long-term survival for patients under-
going allogeneic HSCT in acute leukaemia is around 50%.
Graft-versus-host disease
GVHD is caused by the cytotoxic activity of donor T lymphocytes that 
become sensitised to their new host, regarding it as foreign. This may 
cause either an acute or a chronic form of GVHD.
Acute GVHD occurs in the rst 100 days after transplant in about one-
third of patients. It can affect the skin, causing rashes, the liver, caus-
ing jaundice, and the gut, causing diarrhoea, and may vary from mild to 
lethal. Prevention includes HLA-matching of the donor, immunosuppres-
sant drugs, including methotrexate, ciclosporin, alemtuzumab or ATG. 
Severe presentations are very difcult to control and, despite high-dose 
glucocorticoids, may result in death.
Chronic GVHD may follow acute GVHD or arise independently; it occurs 
later than acute GVHD. It often resembles a connective tissue disorder, 
although in mild cases a rash may be the only manifestation. Chronic GVHD 
is usually treated with glucocorticoids and prolonged immunosuppression 
with, for example, ciclosporin. Chronic GVHD results in an increased infec-
tion risk. However, associated with chronic GVHD is the ‘graft-versus-dis-
ease’ effect and a lower relapse rate of the underlying malignancy.
Autologous HSCT
This procedure can also be used in haematological malignancies. The 
patient’s stem cells from blood or marrow are rst harvested and fro-
zen when their disease is in remission. After conditioning myeloablative 
therapy, the autologous stem cells are reinfused into the blood stream 
in order to rescue the patient from the marrow damage and aplasia 
caused by chemotherapy. This is an effective way of safely deliver-
ing high-dose chemotherapy to chemosensitive cancers. Autologous 

[[p1004]]
946    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
25.21 Examples of commonly used cytotoxic chemotherapy 
drugs in haematology*
Alkylating agents (cross-link double-stranded DNA by adding an alkyl group)
 Cyclophosphamide
 Melphalan
 Chlorambucil
Anthracyclines (intercalate between base pairs in the DNA molecule)
 Daunorubicin
 Doxorubicin
 Idarubicin
Antimetabolites (inhibit DNA and RNA synthesis)
 Cytosine arabinoside
 Fludarabine
 Methotrexate
Vinca alkaloids (cause disruption of tubulin)
 Vincristine
 Vinblastine
Topoisomerase II inhibitors (prevent DNA repair)
 Etoposide
 Daunorubicin
 Mitoxantrone
Monoclonal antibodies
Naked antibodies engaging antibody-dependent cytotoxic T cell or 
complement
Anti-CD20
 Rituximab,
 Obinotuzumab
Anti-CD19
 Blinatumumab – bi-specic T-cell engager (BITE)
Antibody-delivered cytotoxicity (ADC or ‘payload antibodies’)
Anti-CD33 linked to calicheamicin
 Gemtuzumab ozogomicin
Anti-CD22 linked to calicheamicin
 Inotuzumab ozogamicin
Anti-CD30 linked to monomethyl auristatin E
 Brentuximab vedotin
Targeted small molecules
Inhibitors of tyrosine kinases (TKIs)
 Imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, ponatinib and bosutinib in CML
 Midostaurin and gilteritinib in FLT-3-positive AML
Inhibitors of B-cell signalling in lymphoid malignancies
 Inhibitors of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase in CLL, ibrutinib and acalabrutinib
 Inhibitors of PI3 kinase in CLL and follicular lymphoma, idelalisib
that the patient’s immune system is ‘reset’ to not attack host tissues. 
Early success in multiple sclerosis has led to current randomised con-
trolled trials in this area.
Alternative cellular therapies
While HSCT remains a major cellular therapy for a range of malignant and 
some non-malignant haematological conditions, newer cell-based treat-
ments have been recently introduced into practice. These include donor 
T cells primed to respond to specic viruses, including cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) and Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV). Immunocompromised patients, such 
as those post solid organ or haematopoietic transplantation, can suffer 
from reactivation of latent CMV or EBV infection and develop life-threaten-
ing complications, e.g. pneumonitis (CMV) and post-transplant lymphop-
roliferative disease (EBV). Primed donor T cells can be used to treat these 
25.22 Indications for allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation
 Neoplastic disorders affecting stem cell compartments (e.g. leukaemias, MDSs)
 Failure of haematopoiesis (e.g. aplastic anaemia)
 Major inherited defects in blood cell production (e.g. thalassaemia, 
immunodeciency diseases)
 Inborn errors of metabolism with missing enzymes or cell lines
(MDSs = myelodysplastic syndromes)
25.23 Complications of allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation
Early
 Anaemia
 Infections
 Bleeding
 Acute GVHD
 Mucositis – pain, nausea, diarrhoea
 Liver veno-occlusive disease
Late
 Chronic GVHD 
 Cataracts
 Infertility 
 Second malignancy
(GVHD = graft-versus-host disease)
25.24 Infections during recovery from haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT)
Infection (see Ch. 13)
Time after HSCT
Management
Herpes simplex
0–4 weeks (aplastic 
phase)
Aciclovir prophylaxis and 
therapy
Bacterial, fungal
0–4 weeks (aplastic 
phase)
As for acute leukaemia –  
antibiotic and antifungal 
prophylaxis and therapy
Cytomegalovirus
5–21 weeks (cell-
mediated immune 
deciency)
Antigen screening in blood 
(PCR) and pre-emptive 
therapy (e.g. ganciclovir)
Varicella zoster
After 13 weeks
Aciclovir prophylaxis and 
therapy
Pneumocystis jirovecii
8–26 weeks
Co-trimoxazole
Encapsulated 
bacteria
8 weeks to years 
(immunoglobulin 
deciency, 
prolonged with 
GVHD)
Prophylaxis and 
revaccination
(GVHD = graft-versus-host disease; PCR = polymerase chain reaction)
HSCT may be used as consolidation chemotherapy for disorders that 
do not primarily involve the haematopoietic tissues, or for patients 
in whom very good remissions have been achieved. The most com-
mon indications are lymphomas and myeloma. The preferred source 
of stem cells for autologous transplants is peripheral blood (PBSCT). 
These stem cells engraft more quickly, marrow recovery occurring 
within 2–3 weeks. There is no risk of GVHD and no immunosuppres-
sion is required. Thus autologous HSCT carries a lower procedure-re-
lated mortality rate than allogeneic HSCT at aroun 1%–5%, but 
there is a higher rate of recurrence of malignancy because the anti-
malignancy effect is solely dependent on the conditioning chemotherapy 
with no ‘graft-versus-disease’ effect. There is ongoing interest in using 
autologous HSCT to treat severe autoimmune diseases. The theory is 
*For sites of action of these agents in the cell cycle, see Fig. 7.2.
(AML = acute myeloid leukaemia; CD = cluster of differentiation; CLL = chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia; CML = chronic myeloid leukaemia; FLT-3 = FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3;  
PI3 = phosphatidylinositol-3)

[[p1005]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    947
conditions, especially when alternative approaches such as reduction in 
immunosuppression or anti-viral drugs have failed.
Another exciting new cellular therapy, called chimeric antigen receptor 
T-cell (CAR-T) therapy, has been developed for patients with some B-cell 
malignancies where alternative treatments have failed. This technology is 
based on genetic engineering where a patient’s own T cells are harvested 
and have a new chimeric receptor gene introduced into the cell. This pro-
duces a cell surface receptor that uses the antigen binding domain of an 
antibody molecule to recognise a target on the malignant B cell (CD19) 
coupled to a T-cell receptor-activating domain (Fig. 25.17). This chimeric 
B/T receptor can effectively bind to the malignant B cell and activate the 
T cell to kill it. This treatment is licensed and available for children and 
young adults with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and patients 
with multiply relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. This novel therapy 
has cured some patients who were in a desparate situation, with some 
data suggesting 60%–70% alive after one year.
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic therapy
There are numerous indications for anticoagulant and antithrombotic 
medications (Box 25.25). The guiding principles are outlined here, but 
management in specic indications is discussed elsewhere in the book. 
Broadly speaking, antiplatelet medications are of greater efcacy in the 
Monoclonal antibody
VL






VH
VL
VH
Apheresis
T-cell
activation
T-cell
infusion
Expansion
CAR
transduction



TM
Costim.
Costim.
T-cell receptor
Chimeric antigen receptor
A
B
Fig. 25.17 The manufacturing process for CAR-T cells.
binding domain from a monoclonal antibody (VH and VL are the heavy and light chain variable regions) with the intracellular activation domain from a T-cell receptor (ζ) and a 
costimulatory subunit (Costim.); they are linked by a transmembrane (TM) component. During the process the extracellular domain of the T-cell receptor is cleaved and removed 
(∝−e). The new CAR uses the monoclonal antibody binding domain, e.g. anti-CD19, to bind to the target CD19 on the lymphoma cell surface and this can now activate the 
gene for CAR into the patient’s T cells. T cells are harvested from the patient by apheresis and then genetically altered in a laboratory process that takes about 4 weeks. The 
manufactured CAR-T cells are expanded in numbers during this time in tissue culture before being reinfused into the patient. (Modied from Fesnak A O’Doherty U. Clinical 
development and manufacture of chimeric antigen receptor T cells and the role of leukapheresis. Eur Oncol Haematol 2017; 13(1):28–34 and Majzner RG, Mackall CL. Clinical 
lessons learned from the rst leg of the CAR T cell journey. Nat Med 2019; 25:1341–1355 with permission.)
prevention of arterial thrombosis and of less value in the prevention of 
venous thromboembolism (VTE). Thus, antiplatelet agents, such as 
aspirin, clopidogrel and, increasingly, ticagrelor, are the drugs of choice 
in acute coronary events (Ch. 16) and in ischaemic cerebrovascular 
disease, while warfarin and other anticoagulants are favoured in VTE 
(p. 985) and management of atrial brillation (Ch. 16). In some extremely 
prothrombotic situations, such as coronary artery stenting, a combina-
tion of anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs is used.
A wide range of anticoagulant and antithrombotic drugs is used in 
clinical practice. These drugs and their modes of action are given in 
Box 25.26 and Fig. 25.18. Newer agents allow predictable anticoagula-
tion without the need for frequent monitoring and dose titration. Although 
warfarin remains an option for oral anticoagulation, newer oral anticoag-
ulants (dabigatran, rivaroxaban, edoxaban and apixaban), which can be 
given at xed doses with predictable effects and no need for monitoring, 
have now been approved for the prevention of perioperative VTE, the 
treatment of established VTE and the prevention of cardioembolic stroke 
in patients with atrial brillation.
Heparins
Unfractionated heparin (UFH) and low-molecular-weight heparins 
(LMWHs) act as anticoagulants by binding a specic pentasaccharide 

[[p1006]]
948    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
sequence to antithrombin. This enhances the avidity of anti-thrombin for its 
substrates, which are the activated proteases of the coagulation pathway 
such as Xa and thrombin (see Fig. 25.6E and Fig. 25.18). Fondaparinux 
is a synthetic pentasaccharide, which also binds antithrombin and has 
similar properties to LMWH. LMWHs preferentially augment antithrombin 
activity against factor Xa. For the licensed indications, LMWHs are at least 
as efcacious as UFH, but have several advantages:
 LMWHs are nearly 100% bioavailable and so produce reliable 
dose-dependent anticoagulation.
 LMWHs do not require monitoring of their anticoagulant effect 
(except possibly in patients with very low body weight and with a 
glomerular ltration rate below 30 mL/min).
 LMWHs have a half-life of around 4 hours when given subcutane-
ously, compared with 1 hour for UFH. This permits once-daily dosing 
by the subcutaneous route, rather than the therapeutic continuous 
intravenous infusion or twice-daily subcutaneous administration 
required for UFH.
 While rates of bleeding are similar between products, the risk of 
osteoporosis and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is much  
lower for LMWH.
UFH is, however, more completely reversed by protamine sulphate 
in the event of bleeding and at the end of cardiopulmonary bypass, for 
which UFH remains the drug of choice (Box 25.27).
LMWHs are widely used for the prevention and treatment of VTE, the 
management of acute coronary syndromes and for most other scenarios 
listed in Box 25.25. In some situations, UFH is still favoured by some 
clinicians, though there is little evidence that it is advantageous, except 
when rapid reversibility is required. UFH is useful in patients with a high 
risk of bleeding, e.g. those who have peptic ulceration or who may 
require urgent surgery. It is also favoured in the treatment of life-threat-
ening thromboembolism, e.g. major pulmonary embolism with signicant 
hypoxaemia, hypotension and right-sided heart strain. In this situation, 
UFH is started with a loading intravenous dose of 80 U/kg, followed by 
a continuous infusion of 18 U/kg/hr initially. The level of anticoagulation 
should be assessed by the APTT after 6 hours and, if satisfactory, twice 
daily thereafter. It is usual to aim for a patient APTT that is 1.5–2.5 times 
the control time of the test. Monitoring of UFH treatment by APTT is not 
without difculties and other assays, such as the specic anti-Xa assay 
calibrated for measurement of UFH, provides more accurate guidance.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a rare complication of hepa-
rin therapy, caused by induction of anti-heparin/PF4 antibodies that bind 
to and activate platelets via an Fc receptor. This results in platelet acti-
vation and a prothrombotic state, with a paradoxical thrombocytopenia. 
HIT is more common in surgical than medical patients (especially cardiac 
and orthopaedic patients), with use of UFH rather than LMWH, and with 
higher doses of heparin. Some adenovirus vector-based SARS-CoV-2 
RNA vaccines have been associated with a similar condition char-
acterised by venous thrombosis (often cerebral) and paradoxical 
thrombocytopenia.
Clinical features
Patients present, typically 5–14 days after starting heparin treatment, 
with a fall in platelet count of more than 30% from baseline. The count 
may still be in the reference range. The patient may be asymptomatic, or 
develop venous or arterial thrombosis and skin lesions, including overt skin 
25.25 Indications for anticoagulation
Heparin/LMWH/fondaparinux
 Prevention and treatment of VTE
 Percutaneous coronary intervention
 Post-thrombolysis for MI
 Unstable angina pectoris
 Non-Q wave MI
 Acute peripheral arterial occlusion
 Cardiopulmonary bypass
 Haemodialysis and haemoltration
Coumarins (warfarin etc.)
 Prevention and treatment of VTE
 Arterial embolism
 Atrial brillation with specic risk 
factors for stroke (p. 414)
 Mobile mural thrombus post-MI
 Extensive anterior MI
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
 Cardioversion
 Ischaemic stroke in antiphospholipid 
syndrome
 Mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation 
with atrial brillation
Therapeutic INR 2.5
 Recurrent venous thrombosis while on 
warfarin
 Mechanical prosthetic cardiac valves}
INR 3.5
Rivaroxaban
 Prevention and treatment of VTE
 Atrial brillation with risk factors for stroke
 Post acute coronary syndrome
 Symptomatic coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease
Dabigatran etexilate
 Prevention and treatment of VTE
 Atrial brillation with risk factors for stroke
Apixaban
 Prevention and treatment of VTE
 Atrial brillation with risk factors for stroke
Edoxaban
 Treatment of VTE
 Atrial brillation with risk factors for stroke
(INR = international normalised ratio; LMWH = low-molecular-weight heparin; MI = myocardial 
infarction; VTE = venous thromboembolism)
25.26 Modes of action of anticoagulant and antithrombotic 
drugs
Mode of action
Drug
Antiplatelet drugs
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibition
Aspirin
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor inhibition
Clopidogrel
Prasugrel
Ticagrelor
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibition
Abciximab
Tiroban
Eptibatide
Phosphodiesterase inhibition
Dipyridamole
Oral anticoagulants
Vitamin K antagonism
Warfarin/coumarins
Direct thrombin inhibition
Dabigatran
Direct Xa inhibition
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
Injectable anticoagulants
Antithrombin-dependent inhibition of  
thrombin and Xa
Heparin
LMWH
Antithrombin-dependent inhibition of Xa
Fondaparinux
Danaparoid
Direct thrombin inhibition
Argatroban
Bivalirudin

[[p1007]]
Principles of management of haematological disease    949
Heparin
LMWH
Antithrombin
Edoxaban
Apixaban
Rivaroxaban
Dabigatran
Argatroban
Bivalirudin
Aspirin
Abciximab
Tirofiban
Clopidogrel
Ticagrelor
GPIIb/GPIIIa
Platelet
Thrombin
Fondaparinux
Prothrombin
Xa
X
Contact activation
Tissue factor pathway
Fibrin clot
Fibrinogen
Lysis
t-PA
Streptokinase
ADP receptor
(P2Y12)
COX
Fig. 25.18 Sites of action of antithrombotic and brinolytic medicines. Heparin and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) enhance the avidity of antithrombin for Factor 
Xa and thrombin (Factor IIa). Fondaparinux also binds antithrombin, but only inhibits Factor Xa. The direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban and 
dabigatran directly inhibit specic proteases in the common pathway. Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa is a receptor for brinogen and von Willebrand factor and aids platelet activation 
and aggregation. P2Y12 is the receptor for adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and its activation also triggers platelet aggregation. Aspirin is an inhibitor of cyclo-oxygenase (COX) in 
platelets. (t-PA = tissue plasminogen activator)
25.27  Treatments for emergencies in haematological practice
 Reversal of life- and limb-threatening haemorrhage in anticoagulated patients:
Warfarin: prothrombin complex concentrate and IV vitamin K1
Unfractionated heparin: protamine sulphate
Dabigatran: idarucizumab
Rivaroxaban and apixaban: andexanet alfa
 Recognition of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and treatment with plasma 
exchange
 Recognition of coagulopathy associated with acute promyelocytic leukaemia and 
treatment with all-trans-retinoic acid and brinogen replacement
 Recognition of chest syndrome and stroke in patients with sickle-cell anaemia 
and red cell transfusion or exchange transfusion
 Recognition of neutropenic sepsis in patients receiving chemotherapy and early 
treatment with empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics
(IV = intravenous)
necrosis. Affected patients may complain of pain or itch at injection sites 
and of systemic symptoms, such as shivering, following heparin injections. 
Patients who have received heparin in the preceding 100 days and who 
have preformed antibodies may develop acute systemic symptoms and 
an abrupt fall in platelet count in the rst 24 hours after re-exposure.
Investigations
The pre-test probability of the diagnosis is assessed using the 4Ts 
scoring system. This assigns a score based on:
 the Thrombocytopenia
 the Timing of the fall in platelet count
 the presence of new Thrombosis
 the likelihood of anoTher cause for the thrombocytopenia.
Individuals at low risk need no further test. Those with intermedi-
ate and high likelihood scores should have the diagnosis conrmed or 
refuted using an anti-PF4 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Management
Heparin should be discontinued as soon as HIT is diagnosed and an alter-
native anticoagulant that does not cross-react with the antibody should 
be substituted. Argatroban (a direct thrombin inhibitor) and danaparoid 
(a heparin analogue) are licensed for use in the UK. Fonaparinux is 
not licensed for this indication but can also be used. In asymptomatic 
patients with HIT who do not receive an alternative anticoagulant, around 
50% will sustain a thrombosis in the subsequent 30 days. Patients with 
established thrombosis have a poorer prognosis.
Coumarins
Although several coumarin anticoagulants are used around the world, 
warfarin is the most common.
Coumarins inhibit the vitamin K-dependent post-translational carbox-
ylation of factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX and X in the liver (see Fig. 25.6D). 
This results in anticoagulation due to an effective deciency of these fac-
tors. This is monitored by the INR, a standardised test based on meas-
urement of the prothrombin time (see Box 25.3). Recommended target 
INR values for specic indications are given in Box 25.25.
Warfarin anticoagulation typically takes more than 3–5 days to become 
established, even using loading doses. Patients who require rapid initi-
ation of therapy may receive higher initiation doses of warfarin. A typical 
regimen in this situation is to give 10 mg warfarin on the rst and second 
days, with 5 mg on the third day; subsequent doses are titrated against 
the INR. Patients without an urgent need for anticoagulation (e.g. atrial 
brillation) can have warfarin introduced slowly using lower doses. Low-
dose regimens are associated with a lower risk of the patient developing 
a supratherapeutic INR, and hence a lower bleeding risk. The duration of 
warfarin therapy depends on the clinical indication and while treatment of 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or preparation for cardioversion may require 
a nite duration, anticoagulation to prevent cardioembolic stroke in atrial 
brillation or from heart valve disease is long-term.
The major problems with warfarin are:
 a narrow therapeutic window
 metabolism that is affected by many factors
 numerous drug interactions.
Drug interactions are common through protein binding and metabo-
lism by the cytochrome P450 system. Inter-individual differences in war-
farin doses required to achieve a therapeutic INR are mostly accounted 
for by naturally occurring polymorphisms in the CYP2C9 and the 
VKORC1 genes (which predict the metabolism and function of warfarin, 
respectively) and dietary intake of vitamin K.

[[p1008]]
950    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Major bleeding is the most common serious side-effect of warfarin 
and occurs in 1%–2% of patients each year. Fatal haemorrhage, which 
is most commonly intracranial, occurs in about 0.25% per annum. There 
are scoring systems that predict the annual bleeding risk and these can 
be used to help compare the risks and benets of warfarin for an individ-
ual patient (Box 25.28). There are also some specic contraindications to 
anticoagulation (Box 25.28). Management of warfarin includes strategies 
for over-anticoagulation and for bleeding:
 If the INR is above the therapeutic level, warfarin should be withheld 
or the dose reduced. If the patient is not bleeding, it may be appro-
priate to give a small dose of vitamin K either orally or intravenously 
(1–2.5 mg), especially if the INR is greater than 8.
 In the event of bleeding, withhold further warfarin. Minor bleeding 
can be treated with 1–2.5 mg of vitamin K intravenously (IV). Major 
haemorrhage should be treated as an emergency with vitamin K 
5–10 mg slowly IV, combined with coagulation factor replacement 
(see Box 25.27). This should optimally be a prothrombin complex 
concentrate (30–50 U/kg) that contains factors II, VII, IX and X; if that 
is not available, fresh frozen plasma (15–30 mL/kg) should be given.
Direct oral anticoagulants
The direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are specic inhibitors of key pro-
teases in the common pathway and offer an alternative to coumarins 
in the management of VTE and the prevention of stroke and systemic 
embolism in patients with atrial brillation. Dabigatran inhibits thrombin 
while rivaroxaban, apixaban and edoxaban inhibit Xa (see Fig. 25.18). 
The key features of these drugs include the fact that they are efcacious 
in xed oral doses, have a short half-life of around 10 hours, achieve peak 
plasma levels 2–4 hours after oral intake, have very few drug interactions 
and are all moderately dependent on renal function for their excretion. 
An initial perceived drawback was the lack of specic reversal agents for 
these drugs, but the monoclonal antibody idarucizumab is now available 
for the reversal of dabigatran and andexanet alfa, a site-inactivated Xa 
molecule, has recently been licensed for the reversal of apixaban and 
rivaroxaban (see Box 25.27).
DOACs are now licensed for the prevention of VTE following high-risk 
orthopaedic surgery (except edoxaban), the acute management and pre-
vention of recurrence of VTE and the prevention of stroke and systemic 
embolism in patients with atrial brillation with risk factors. Dosing is stand-
ard across a range of conditions, but is affected by extremes (low and 
high) of body weight and impaired renal function. The general perception 
is that in these indications they are at least as efcacious as dose-adjusted 
coumarin and probably associated with less clinically signicant bleeding.
Anaemias
Around 30% of the total world population is anaemic and half of these, 
some 600 million people, have iron deciency. The classication of anae-
mia by the size of the red cells (MCV) indicates the likely cause (see 
Figs. 25.10 and 25.11).
Red cells in the bone marrow must acquire a minimum level of hae-
moglobin before being released into the blood stream (Fig. 25.19). 
While in the marrow compartment, red cell precursors undergo cell 
division driven by erythropoietin. If red cells cannot acquire haemo-
globin at a normal rate, they will undergo more divisions than normal 
and will have a low MCV when released into the blood. The MCV is 
low because component parts of the haemoglobin molecule are not 
fully available: that is, iron in iron deciency, globin chains in thalas-
saemia, haem ring in congenital sideroblastic anaemia and, occasion-
ally, poor iron utilisation in the anaemia of chronic disease/anaemia of 
inammation.
In megaloblastic anaemia, the biochemical consequence of vitamin 
B12 or folate deciency is an inability to synthesise new bases to make 
DNA. A similar defect of cell division is seen in the presence of cytotoxic 
drugs or haematological disease in the marrow, such as myelodysplasia. 
In these states, cells haemoglobinise normally, but undergo fewer cell 
divisions, resulting in circulating red cells with a raised MCV. The red cell 
membrane is composed of a lipid bilayer that will freely exchange with 
the plasma pool of lipid. Conditions such as liver disease, hypothyroid-
ism, hyperlipidaemia and pregnancy are associated with raised lipids and 
may also cause a raised MCV. Reticulocytes are larger than mature red 
cells, so when the reticulocyte count is raised – e.g. in haemolysis – this 
may also increase the MCV.
Iron deciency anaemia
This occurs when iron losses or physiological requirements exceed 
absorption.
Blood loss
The most common explanation in men and post-menopausal women 
is gastrointestinal blood loss (Ch. 23). This may result from occult 
gastric or colorectal malignancy, gastritis, peptic ulceration, inamma-
tory bowel disease, diverticulitis, polyps and angiodysplastic lesions. 
Worldwide, hookworm and schistosomiasis are the most common 
causes of gut blood loss (Ch. 13). Gastrointestinal blood loss may be 
exacerbated by the chronic use of aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inam-
matory drugs (NSAIDs), which cause intestinal erosions and impair 
platelet function. In women of child-bearing age, menstrual blood loss, 
pregnancy and breastfeeding contribute to iron deciency by deplet-
ing iron stores; in developed countries, one-third of pre-menopau-
sal women have low iron stores, but only 3% display iron-decient 
haematopoiesis. Very rarely, chronic haemoptysis or haematuria may 
cause iron deciency.
Malabsorption
A dietary assessment should be made in all patients to ascertain their 
iron intake (Ch. 22). Gastric acid is required to release iron from food and 
helps to keep iron in the soluble ferrous state (Fig. 25.20). Achlorhydria 
in older people or that due to drugs such as proton pump inhibitors may 
contribute to the lack of iron availability from the diet, as may previous 
gastric surgery. Iron is absorbed actively in the upper small intestine and 
hence can be affected by coeliac disease (p. 819).
Physiological demands
At times of rapid growth, such as infancy and puberty, iron requirements 
increase and may outstrip absorption. In pregnancy, iron is diverted to 
the fetus, the placenta and the increased maternal red cell mass, and is 
lost with bleeding at parturition (Box 25.29).
25.28  How to assess risks of anticoagulation
Contraindications
 Recent surgery, especially to eye or central nervous system
 Pre-existing haemorrhagic state, e.g. advanced liver disease, haemophilia, 
thrombocytopenia
 Pre-existing structural lesions, e.g. peptic ulcer
 Recent cerebral or gastrointestinal haemorrhage
 Uncontrolled hypertension
 Cognitive impairment
 Frequent falls
Bleeding risk score
 Several bleeding risk scores exist for different indications for anticoagulation
 The validation of most bleeding risk scores has been poor
 Many risk factors for thrombosis are also risk factors for bleeding
 HAS BLED is the best validated score for patients with atrial brillation. 
Following anticoagulant-related bleeding, reassessment of bleeding and 
thrombosis risk is indicated
 In many cases, patients benet from recommencing anticoagulants after bleeding

[[p1009]]
Anaemias    951
Normal
Defective
haemoglobinisation
Defective
DNA synthesis
Normal DNA synthesis
e.g. Iron deficiency
       Thalassaemia
       Sideroblastic
       anaemia
Reticulocyte
e.g. ↓ B12
        ↓ Folate
       Cytotoxic drugs
       Myelodysplasia
Marked
reticulocytosis
Normal-sized
RBC
Elevated plasma
lipid
   Liver disease
   Hypothyroidism
   Alcohol
   Hyperlipidaemia
   Pregnancy
Normal
haemoglobinisation
Macrocytosis
(↑ MCV)
Microcytosis
(↓ MCV)
Marrow
Blood
Fig. 25.19 Factors that inuence the size of red cells in anaemia. In microcytosis, the MCV is <76 fL. In macrocytosis, the MCV is >100 fL. (MCV = mean cell volume; 
RBC = red blood cell)
< 10%
Non-haem
iron
Haem
iron
> 90%
Iron
available
for
absorption
or
Amino acids
Vitamin C
Phytates
Tannins
Phosphates
Dietary iron
7 mg/1000 kcal
< 5%
~30%
Iron binds
to transferrin
for delivery
to tissues
Maximum
iron absorption
3.5 mg/day
Tissue iron
Enzymes (2%)
Myoglobin (4%)
Ferritin (29%)
Haemoglobin
(65%)
Ferroportin
internalised
Ferroportin
available
Gut lumen
Fe
Fe Fe Fe
Fe Fe
Fe
Fe
Blood
Enterocyte
Ferroportin
Hepcidin
Inflammatory
cytokines
induce hepcidin
secretion from liver
Anaemia
Hypoxia
Low iron stores
suppress hepcidin
secretion from liver
Fig. 25.20 The regulation of iron absorption, uptake and distribution in the body. The transport of iron is regulated in a similar fashion to enterocytes in other 
iron-transporting cells such as macrophages.

[[p1010]]
952    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Investigations
Conrmation of iron deciency
Serum ferritin is a measure of iron stores in tissues and is the best single 
test to conrm iron deciency (Box 25.30). A subnormal level is most 
often due to iron deciency or, very rarely, hypothyroidism or vitamin C 
deciency. Ferritin levels can be raised in liver disease and in the acute 
phase response; in these conditions, a ferritin level of up to 100 µg/L may 
still be compatible with low bone marrow iron stores.
Plasma iron and total iron binding capacity (TIBC) are measures of 
iron availability; hence they are affected by many factors besides iron 
stores. Plasma iron has a marked diurnal and day-to-day variation and 
becomes very low during an acute phase response, but is raised in liver 
disease and haemolysis. Levels of transferrin, the binding protein for iron, 
are lowered by malnutrition, liver disease, the acute phase response and 
nephrotic syndrome, but raised by pregnancy and the oral contracep-
tive pill. A transferrin saturation (i.e. iron/TIBC×100) of less than 16% 
is consistent with iron deciency, but is less specic than a low ferritin 
measurement.
All proliferating cells express membrane transferrin receptors to 
acquire iron; a small amount of this receptor is shed into blood, where 
it can be detected in a free soluble form. When iron stores are low, cells 
up-regulate transferrin receptor expression and the levels of soluble 
plasma transferrin receptor increase. This can be measured by immuno-
assay and used to distinguish storage iron depletion in the presence of 
an acute phase response or liver disease, when a raised level indicates 
iron deciency. In difcult cases, it may still be necessary to examine a 
bone marrow aspirate for iron stores.
Investigation of the cause
This will depend on the age and sex of the patient, as well as the his-
tory and clinical ndings. In men and in post-menopausal women with a 
normal diet, the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract should be investi-
gated by endoscopy or radiological studies. Current guidelines suggest 
exclusion of coeliac disease by antibody testing at an early stage of 
investigation of iron deciency. In the tropics, stool and urine should be 
examined for parasites (Box 13.19).
Management
Unless the patient has angina, heart failure or evidence of cerebral 
hypoxia, transfusion is not indicated and oral iron replacement is appro-
priate. Ferrous sulphate 200 mg 3 times daily (195 mg of elemental iron 
per day) is adequate and should be continued for 3–6 months to replete 
iron stores. Many patients suffer gastrointestinal side-effects with fer-
rous sulphate, including dyspepsia and altered bowel habit. When this 
occurs, reduction in dose or another alternative oral preparation should 
be tried. Delayed-release preparations are not useful, since they release 
iron beyond the upper small intestine, where it cannot be absorbed.
The haemoglobin should rise by around 10 g/L every 7–10 days 
and a reticulocyte response will be evident within a week. A failure to 
respond adequately may be due to non-adherence, continued blood 
loss, malabsorption or an incorrect diagnosis. Patients with malabsorp-
tion, chronic gut disease or inability to tolerate any oral preparation may 
need parenteral iron therapy. Previously, iron dextran or iron sucrose 
was used, but new preparations of ferric isomaltose and ferric carboxy-
maltose have fewer allergic effects and are preferred. Doses required 
can be calculated based on the patient’s starting haemoglobin and 
body weight. Observation for anaphylaxis following an initial test dose 
is recommended.
Anaemia of chronic disease
Anaemia of chronic disease (ACD), also known as anaemia of inamma-
tion (AI), is a common type of anaemia, particularly in hospital popula-
tions. It occurs in the setting of chronic infection, chronic inammation or 
neoplasia. The anaemia is not related to bleeding, haemolysis or marrow 
inltration, is mild, with haemoglobin in the range of 85–115 g/L, and 
is usually associated with a normal MCV (normocytic, normochromic), 
though this may be reduced in long-standing inammation. The serum 
iron is low, but iron stores are normal or increased, as indicated by the 
ferritin or stainable marrow iron.
Pathogenesis
It has become clear that the key regulatory protein that accounts for 
the ndings characteristic of ACD/AI is hepcidin, which is produced by 
the liver (see Fig. 25.20). Hepcidin production is induced by pro-inam-
matory cytokines, especially IL-6. Hepcidin binds to ferroportin on the 
membrane of iron-exporting cells, such as small intestinal enterocytes 
and macrophages, internalising the ferroportin and thereby inhibiting 
the export of iron from these cells into the blood. The iron remains 
trapped inside the cells in the form of ferritin, levels of which are there-
fore normal or high in the face of signicant anaemia. Inhibition or 
blockade of hepcidin is a potential target for treatment of this form of 
anaemia.
Diagnosis and management
It is often difcult to distinguish ACD associated with a low MCV from 
iron deciency. Box 25.30 summarises the investigations and results. 
Examination of the marrow may ultimately be required to assess iron 
stores directly. A trial of oral iron can be given in difcult situations. A pos-
itive response occurs in true iron deciency, but not in ACD. Measures 
that reduce the severity of the underlying disorder generally help to 
improve the ACD. Trials of higher-dose intravenous iron are under way to 
try to bypass the hepcidin-induced blockade.
Megaloblastic anaemia
This results from a deciency of vitamin B12 or folic acid, or from distur-
bances in folic acid metabolism. Folate is an important substrate of, and 
vitamin B12 a co-factor for, the generation of the essential amino acid 
methionine from homocysteine. This reaction produces tetrahydrofolate, 
which is converted to thymidine monophosphate for incorporation into 
DNA. Deciency of either vitamin B12 or folate will therefore produce high 
plasma levels of homocysteine and impaired DNA synthesis.
The end result is cells with arrested nuclear maturation, but normal 
cytoplasmic development: so-called nucleocytoplasmic asynchrony. 
All proliferating cells will exhibit megaloblastosis; hence changes are 
evident in the buccal mucosa, tongue, small intestine, cervix, vagina 
and uterus. The high proliferation rate of bone marrow results in strik-
ing changes in the haematopoietic system in megaloblastic anaemia. 
Cells become arrested in development and die within the marrow; this 
ineffective erythropoiesis results in an expanded hypercellular marrow. 
The megaloblastic changes are most evident in the early-nucleated red 
cell precursors and haemolysis within the marrow results in a raised bil-
irubin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), but without the reticulocytosis 
25.29 Haematological physiology in pregnancy
 Full blood count: increased plasma volume (40%) lowers normal haemoglobin 
(reference range reduced to > 105 g/L at 28 weeks). The mean cell volume 
(MCV) may increase by 5 fL. A progressive neutrophilia occurs. Gestational 
thrombocytopenia (rarely <60 × 109/L) is a benign phenomenon.
 Depletion of iron stores: iron deciency is a common cause of anaemia in 
pregnancy and, if present, should be treated with oral iron supplement.
 Vitamin B12: serum levels are physiologically low in pregnancy but deciency is 
uncommon.
 Folate: tissue stores may become depleted, and folate supplementation is 
recommended in all pregnancies (see Box 22.29).
 Coagulation factors: from the second trimester, procoagulant factors increase 
approximately threefold, particularly brinogen, von Willebrand factor and factor 
VIII. This causes activated protein C resistance and a shortened activated partial 
thromboplastin time (APTT), and contributes to a prothrombotic state.
 Anticoagulants: levels of protein C increase from the second trimester, while 
levels of free protein S fall as C4b binding protein increases.

[[p1011]]
Anaemias    953
characteristic of other forms of haemolysis (see Box 25.31). Iron stores 
are usually raised. The mature red cells are large and oval, and some-
times contain nuclear remnants. Nuclear changes are seen in the 
immature granulocyte precursors and a characteristic appearance is 
that of ‘giant’ metamyelocytes with a large ‘sausage-shaped’ nucleus. 
The mature neutrophils show hypersegmentation of their nuclei, with 
cells having six or more nuclear lobes. If severe, a pancytopenia may 
be present in the peripheral blood.
Vitamin B12 deciency, but not folate deciency, is associated with neu-
rological disease in up to 40% of cases, although advanced neurological 
disease due to B12 deciency is now uncommon in the developed world. 
The main pathological nding is focal demyelination affecting the spinal 
cord, peripheral nerves, optic nerves and cerebrum. The most common 
manifestations are sensory, with peripheral paraesthesiae and ataxia of 
gait. The clinical and diagnostic features of megaloblastic anaemia are 
summarised in Boxes 25.31 and 25.32, and the neurological features of 
B12 deciency in Box 25.33
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12 absorption
The average daily diet contains 5–30 µg of vitamin B12, mainly in meat, 
sh, eggs and milk – well in excess of the 1 µg daily requirement. In the 
stomach, gastric enzymes release vitamin B12 from food and at gastric 
pH it binds to a carrier protein termed R protein. The gastric parietal cells 
produce intrinsic factor, a vitamin B12-binding protein that optimally binds 
vitamin B12 at pH 8. As gastric emptying occurs, pancreatic secretion 
raises the pH and vitamin B12 released from the diet switches from the R 
protein to intrinsic factor. Bile also contains vitamin B12 that is available 
for reabsorption in the intestine. The vitamin B12–intrinsic factor com-
plex binds to specic receptors in the terminal ileum, and vitamin B12
is actively transported by the enterocytes to plasma, where it binds to 
transcobalamin II, a transport protein produced by the liver, which car-
ries it to the tissues for utilisation. The liver stores enough vitamin B12 to 
last for approximately 3 years and this, together with the enterohepatic 
circulation, means that vitamin B12 deciency takes years to become 
manifest, even if all dietary intake is stopped or severe B12 malabsorption 
supervenes.
Blood levels of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) provide a reasonable indication 
of tissue stores, are usually diagnostic of deciency and remain the rst-
line tests for most laboratories. Additional tests have been evaluated, 
including measurement of methylmalonic acid, holotranscobalamin and 
plasma homocysteine levels, but do not add much in most clinical situ-
ations. Levels of cobalamins fall in normal pregnancy. Reference ranges 
vary between laboratories, but levels below 150 ng/L are common and, 
in the last trimester, 5%–10% of women have levels below 100 ng/L. 
Spuriously low B12 values occur in women using the oral contraceptive 
pill and in patients with myeloma, in whom paraproteins can interfere with 
vitamin B12 assays.
Causes of vitamin B12 deciency
Dietary deciency
This occurs only in strict vegans, but the onset of clinical features can 
occur at any age between 10 and 80 years. Less strict vegetarians often 
have slightly low vitamin B12 levels, but are not tissue vitamin B12-decient.
Gastric pathology
Release of vitamin B12 from food requires normal gastric acid and enzyme 
secretion and this is impaired by hypochlorhydria in older patients or 
25.30 Investigations to differentiate anaemia of chronic disease from iron deciency anaemia
Ferritin
Iron
TIBC
Transferrin saturation
Soluble transferrin receptor
Iron deciency anaemia
↓
↓
↑
↓
↑
Anaemia of chronic disease
↑/Normal
↓
↓
↓
↓/Normal
(TIBC = total iron binding capacity)
25.31 Clinical features of megaloblastic anaemia
Symptoms
 Malaise (90%)
 Breathlessness (50%)
 Paraesthesiae (80%)
 Sore mouth (20%)
 Weight loss
 Impotence
 Poor memory
 Depression
 Personality change
 Hallucinations
 Visual disturbance
Signs
 Smooth tongue
 Angular cheilosis
 Vitiligo
 Skin pigmentation
 Heart failure
 Pyrexia
25.32 Investigations in megaloblastic anaemia
Investigation
Result
Haemoglobin
Often reduced, may be very low
Mean cell volume
Usually raised, commonly >120 fL
Erythrocyte count
Low for degree of anaemia
Blood lm
Oval macrocytosis, poikilocytosis, red cell 
fragmentation, neutrophil hypersegmentation
Reticulocyte count
Low for degree of anaemia
Leucocyte count
Low or normal
Platelet count
Low or normal
Bone marrow
Increased cellularity, megaloblastic changes in 
erythroid series, giant metamyelocytes, dysplastic 
megakaryocytes, increased iron in stores, 
pathological non-ring sideroblasts
Serum ferritin
Elevated
Plasma lactate 
dehydrogenase
Elevated, often markedly
25.33 Neurological ndings in B12 deciency
Peripheral nerves
 Glove and stocking paraesthesiae
 Loss of ankle reexes
Spinal cord
 Subacute combined degeneration of the cord
Posterior columns – diminished vibration sensation and proprioception
Corticospinal tracts – upper motor neuron signs
Cerebrum
 Dementia
 Optic atrophy
 Autonomic neuropathy

[[p1012]]
954    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
following gastric surgery. Total gastrectomy invariably results in vitamin 
B12 deciency within 5 years, often combined with iron deciency; these 
patients need life-long 3-monthly vitamin B12 injections. After partial gas-
trectomy, vitamin B12 deciency only develops in 10%–20% of patients 
by 5 years; an annual injection of vitamin B12 should prevent deciency 
in this group. Patients may develop B12 deciency after certain types of 
bariatric surgery (see Ch. 22).
Pernicious anaemia
This is an organ-specic autoimmune disorder in which the gastric 
mucosa is atrophic, with loss of parietal cells causing intrinsic factor de-
ciency. In the absence of intrinsic factor, less than 1% of dietary vitamin 
B12 is absorbed. Pernicious anaemia has an incidence of 25/100 000 
population over the age of 40 years in developed countries, but an aver-
age age of onset of 60 years. It is more common in individuals with other 
autoimmune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, vitiligo 
or Addison’s disease; Ch. 20) or a family history of these or pernicious 
anaemia. The nding of anti-intrinsic factor antibodies in the context of 
B12 deciency is diagnostic of pernicious anaemia without further investi-
gation. Antiparietal cell antibodies are present in over 90% of cases, but 
are also present in 20% of normal females over the age of 60 years; a 
negative result makes pernicious anaemia less likely, but a positive result 
is not diagnostic. The Schilling test, involving measurement of absorption 
of radio-labelled B12 after oral administration before and after replace-
ment of intrinsic factor, has fallen out of favour with the availability of 
autoantibody tests, greater caution in the use of radioactive tracers and 
limited availability of intrinsic factor.
Small bowel pathology
One-third of patients with pancreatic exocrine insufciency fail to transfer 
dietary vitamin B12 from R protein to intrinsic factor. This usually results 
in slightly low vitamin B12 values, but no tissue evidence of vitamin B12
deciency. Inammatory disease of the terminal ileum, such as Crohn’s 
disease, may impair the absorption of vitamin B12–intrinsic factor com-
plex, as may surgery on that part of the bowel. Motility disorders or hypo-
gammaglobulinaemia can result in bacterial overgrowth and the ensuing 
competition for free vitamin B12 can lead to deciency. A small number of 
people heavily infected with the sh tapeworm (Ch. 13) develop vitamin 
B12 deciency.
Folate
Folate absorption
Folates are produced by plants and bacteria; hence dietary leafy vege-
tables (spinach, broccoli, lettuce), fruits (bananas, melons) and animal 
protein (liver, kidney) are a rich source. An average Western diet con-
tains more than the minimum daily intake of 50 µg, but excess cooking 
destroys folates. Most dietary folate is present as polyglutamates; these 
are converted to monoglutamate in the upper small bowel and actively 
transported into plasma. Plasma folate is loosely bound to plasma pro-
teins such as albumin and there is an enterohepatic circulation. Total 
body stores of folate are small and deciency can occur in a matter of 
weeks.
Folate deciency
The causes and diagnostic features of folate deciency are shown in 
Boxes 25.34 and 25.35. Edentulous older people or psychiatric patients 
are particularly susceptible to dietary deciency and this is exacerbated 
in the presence of gut disease or malignancy. Pregnancy-induced folate 
deciency is the most common cause of megaloblastosis worldwide 
and is more likely in the context of twin pregnancies, multiparity and 
hyperemesis gravidarum. Serum folate measurement is very sensitive to 
dietary intake; a single folate-rich meal can normalise it in a patient with 
true folate deciency, whereas anorexia, alcohol and anticonvulsant ther-
apy can reduce it in the absence of megaloblastosis. For this reason, red 
cell folate levels are a more accurate indicator of folate stores and tissue 
folate deciency.
25.35 Investigation of folic acid deciency
Diagnostic ndings
 Serum folate levels may be low but are difcult to interpret
 Low red cell folate levels indicate prolonged folate deciency and are probably 
the most relevant measure
Corroborative ndings
 Macrocytic dysplastic blood picture
 Megaloblastic marrow
25.34 Causes of folate deciency
Diet
 Poor intake of vegetables
Malabsorption
 e.g. Coeliac disease, small bowel surgery including some forms of bariatric 
surgery
Increased demand
 Cell proliferation, e.g. haemolysis
 Pregnancy
Drugs*
 Certain anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin)
 Contraceptive pill
 Certain cytotoxic drugs (e.g. methotrexate)
Management of megaloblastic anaemia
If a patient with a severe megaloblastic anaemia is very ill and treatment 
must be started before vitamin B12 and red cell folate results are available, 
that treatment should always include both folic acid and vitamin B12. The 
use of folic acid alone in the presence of vitamin B12 deciency may result 
in worsening of neurological features.
Rarely, if severe angina or heart failure is present, transfusion can be 
used. The cardiovascular system is adapted to the chronic anaemia 
present in megaloblastosis and the volume load imposed by transfusion 
may result in decompensation and severe cardiac failure. In such circum-
stances, exchange transfusion or slow administration of 1 U of red cells 
with diuretic cover may be given.
Vitamin B12 deciency
Vitamin B12 deciency is treated with hydroxycobalamin. In cases of 
malabsorption, 1000 µg IM for 6 doses 2 or 3 days apart, followed 
by maintenance therapy of 1000 µg every 3 months for life, is rec-
ommended. In the presence of neurological involvement, a dose of 
1000 µg on alternate days until there is no further improvement, fol-
lowed by maintenance as above, is recommended. In dietary deciency 
oral B12 replacement will sufce. The reticulocyte count will peak by the 
5th–10th day after starting replacement therapy. The haemoglobin will 
rise by 10 g/L every week until normalised. The response of the marrow 
is associated with a fall in plasma potassium levels and rapid depletion 
of iron stores. If an initial response is not maintained and the blood lm 
is dimorphic (i.e. shows a mixture of microcytic and macrocytic cells), 
the patient may need additional iron therapy. A sensory neuropathy 
may take 6–12 months to correct; long-standing neurological damage 
may not improve.
Folate deciency
Oral folic acid (5 mg daily for 3 weeks) will treat acute deficiency and 
5 mg once weekly is adequate maintenance therapy. Prophylactic 
folic acid in pregnancy prevents megaloblastosis in women at 
*Usually only a problem in patients decient in folate from another cause.

[[p1013]]
Anaemias    955
risk and reduces the risk of fetal neural tube defects (Box 22.29). 
Prophylactic supplementation is also given in chronic haematological 
disease associated with reduced red cell lifespan (e.g. haemolytic 
anaemias).
Haemolytic anaemia
Haemolysis indicates that there is shortening of the normal red cell 
lifespan of 120 days. There are many causes, as shown in Fig. 25.21. To 
compensate, the bone marrow may increase its output of red cells six- to 
eightfold by increasing the proportion of red cells produced, expanding 
the volume of active marrow, and releasing reticulocytes prematurely. 
Anaemia occurs only if the rate of destruction exceeds this increased 
production rate.
There are some general features of haemolysis and other specic fea-
tures that help to identify the reason for haemolysis. Results of investiga-
tions that establish the presence of haemolysis are shown in Box 25.36. 
Red cell destruction overloads pathways for haemoglobin breakdown in 
the liver (p. 864), causing a modest rise in unconjugated bilirubin in the 
blood and mild jaundice. Increased reabsorption of urobilinogen from the 
gut results in an increase in urinary urobilinogen (pp. 870 and 924). Red 
cell destruction releases LDH into the serum. The bone marrow com-
pensation results in a reticulocytosis and sometimes nucleated red cell 
precursors appear in the blood. Increased proliferation of the bone mar-
row can result in a thrombocytosis, neutrophilia and, if marked, immature 
A
B
Primary idiopathic
Secondary
Autoimmune, e.g. SLE, RA
Drugs, e.g. L-dopa, methyldopa, mefenamic
  acid, penicillin, quinidine, fludarabine
Lymphoid malignancy, e.g. CLL, myeloma,
  lymphoma
Other malignancy, e.g. lung, colon, kidney,
  ovary, thymoma
Others, e.g. ulcerative colitis, HIV
Primary idiopathic
Secondary
Infection, e.g.
  mycoplasma,
  EBV, syphilis
Lymphoprolifer-
  ative disorders,
  e.g. lymphoma 
Red cell antigen-
induced
Transfusion
  reaction
Haemolytic
  disease of the
  newborn  
Immune
Acquired
Inherited
Non-immune
Autoantibodies
Alloantibodies
Warm antibodies 
Cold antibodies 
Mechanical
Prosthetic valves
Microangiopathic,
  e.g. DIC, HUS, TTP
March
  haemoglobinuria 
Infection
Intracellular
  organisms, e.g.
  malaria
Toxins, e.g.
C. perfringens  
Chemical/physical
Oxidative drugs,
  e.g. dapsone,
  maloprim
Copper (Wilson's
  disease)
Burns
Drowning 
Acquired abnormal
membrane
Paroxysmal
  nocturnal
  haemoglobinuria  
Red cell membrane abnormality
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Haemoglobin
Deficiency, e.g. thalassaemias
Abnormality, e.g. sickle-cell disease 
Red cell enzyme deficiency
Glycolytic pathway, e.g. PK
Hexose monophosphate shunt,
  e.g. G6PD
Pyrimidine 5´ nucleotidase  
Fig. 25.21 Causes and classication of haemolysis.
= chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; DIC = disseminated intravascular 
coagulation; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; G6PD = glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; HUS = haemolytic uraemic syndrome; PK = pyruvate kinase; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; 
SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura)
25.36 Investigation results indicating active haemolysis
Hallmarks of haemolysis
 ↓ Haemoglobin
 ↑ Unconjugated bilirubin
 ↑ Lactate dehydrogenase
 ↑ Reticulocytes
 ↑ Urinary urobilinogen
Additional features of intravascular haemolysis
 ↓ Haptoglobin
 ↑ Methaemalbumin
 Positive urinary haemosiderin
 Haemoglobinuria

[[p1014]]
956    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
granulocytes in the blood, producing a leucoerythroblastic blood lm. 
The appearances of the red cells may give an indication of the likely 
cause of the haemolysis:
 spherocytes are small, dark red cells that suggest autoimmune 
haemolysis or hereditary spherocytosis
 sickle cells suggest sickle-cell disease
 red cell fragments indicate microangiopathic haemolysis
 bite cells (normal-sized red cells that look as if they have been  
partially eaten) suggest oxidative haemolysis.
The compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may give rise to folate de-
ciency, with megaloblastic blood features.
The differential diagnosis of haemolysis is determined by the clinical sce-
nario in combination with the results of blood lm examination and Coombs 
testing for antibodies directed against red cells (see below and Fig. 25.21).
Extravascular haemolysis
Physiological red cell destruction occurs in the reticulo-endothelial cells 
in the liver or spleen, so avoiding free haemoglobin in the plasma. In most 
haemolytic states, haemolysis is predominantly extravascular.
To conrm the haemolysis, patients’ red cells can be labelled with 
51chromium. When re-injected, they can be used to determine red cell 
survival; when combined with body surface radioactivity counting, this 
test may indicate whether the liver or the spleen is the main source of red 
cell destruction. However, this is seldom performed in clinical practice.
Intravascular haemolysis
Less commonly, red cell lysis occurs within the blood stream due to 
membrane damage by complement (ABO transfusion reactions, par-
oxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria), infections (malaria, Clostridium 
perfringens), mechanical trauma (heart valves, DIC) or oxidative dam-
age (e.g. enzymopathies such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deciency, which may be triggered by drugs such as dapsone and malo-
prim). When intravascular red cell destruction occurs, free haemoglobin 
is released into the plasma. Free haemoglobin is toxic to cells and binding 
proteins have evolved to minimise this risk. Haptoglobin is an α2-globulin 
produced by the liver which binds free haemoglobin, resulting in a fall 
in its levels during active haemolysis. Once haptoglobins are saturated, 
free haemoglobin is oxidised to form methaemoglobin, which binds to 
albumin in turn forming methaemalbumin, which can be detected spec-
trophotometrically in Schumm’s test. Methaemoglobin is degraded and 
any free haem is bound to a second binding protein called haemopexin. 
If all the protective mechanisms are saturated, free haemoglobin may 
appear in the urine (haemoglobinuria). When fulminant, this gives rise to 
black urine, as in severe falciparum malaria infection (Ch. 13). In smaller 
amounts, renal tubular cells absorb the haemoglobin, degrade it and 
store the iron as haemosiderin. When the tubular cells are subsequently 
sloughed into the urine, they give rise to haemosiderinuria, which is 
always indicative of intravascular haemolysis (see Box 25.36).
Causes of haemolytic anaemia
These can be classied as inherited or acquired (see Fig. 25.21).
 Inherited red cell abnormalities resulting in chronic haemolytic anae-
mia may arise from pathologies of the red cell membrane (hereditary 
spherocytosis or elliptocytosis), haemoglobin (haemoglobinopa-
thies), or protective enzymes that prevent cellular oxidative damage, 
such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD).
 Acquired causes include auto- and alloantibody-mediated destruction 
of red blood cells and other mechanical, toxic and infective causes.
Red cell membrane defects
The structure of the red cell membrane is shown in Fig. 25.4. The basic 
structure is a cytoskeleton ‘stapled’ on to the lipid bilayer by special pro-
tein complexes. This structure ensures great deformability and elasticity; 
the red cell diameter is 8 µm, but the narrowest capillaries in the circu-
lation are in the spleen, measuring just 2 µm in diameter. When the nor-
mal red cell structure is disturbed, usually by a quantitative or functional 
deciency of one or more proteins in the cytoskeleton, cells lose their 
elasticity. Each time such cells pass through the spleen, they lose mem-
brane relative to their cell volume. This results in an increase in mean cell 
haemoglobin concentration (MCHC), abnormal cell shape (see Box 25.2) 
and reduced red cell survival due to extravascular haemolysis.
Hereditary spherocytosis
This is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant condition, although 
25% of cases have no family history and represent new mutations. The 
incidence is approximately 1:5000 in high-income countries, but this may 
be an under-estimate since the disease may present de novo in patients 
aged over 65 years and is often discovered as a chance nding on a 
blood count. The most common abnormalities are deciencies of beta 
spectrin or ankyrin (see Fig. 25.4). The severity of spontaneous haemol-
ysis varies. Most cases are associated with an asymptomatic compen-
sated chronic haemolytic state with spherocytes present on the blood 
lm, a reticulocytosis and mild hyperbilirubinaemia. Pigment gallstones 
are present in up to 50% of patients and may cause symptomatic chol-
ecystitis. Occasional cases are associated with more severe haemoly-
sis; these may be due to coincidental polymorphisms in alpha spectrin 
or co-inheritance of a second defect involving a different protein. These 
cases tend to present earlier in life with symptomatic, sometimes trans-
fusion-dependent anaemia.
The clinical course may be complicated by crises:
 Haemolytic crisis occurs when the severity of haemolysis increases; 
this is rare, and usually associated with infection.
 Megaloblastic crisis follows the development of folate deciency; 
this may occur as a rst presentation of the disease in pregnancy.
 Aplastic crisis occurs in association with parvovirus (erythrovirus) 
infection (p. 280). Parvovirus causes a common exanthem in chil-
dren, but if individuals with chronic haemolysis become infected, the 
virus directly invades red cell precursors and temporarily switches off 
red cell production. Patients present with severe anaemia and a low 
reticulocyte count.
Investigations
The patient and other family members should be screened for features of 
compensated haemolysis (see Box 25.36). This may be all that is required 
to conrm the diagnosis. Haemoglobin levels are variable, depending 
on the degree of compensation. The blood lm will show spherocytes, 
but the direct Coombs test (Fig. 25.22) is negative, excluding immune 
haemolysis. An osmotic fragility test may show increased sensitivity to 
lysis in hypotonic saline solutions, but is limited by lack of sensitivity 
and specicity. More specic ow cytometric tests detecting binding of 
eosin-5-maleimide to red cells are recommended in borderline cases.
Management
Folic acid prophylaxis (5 mg daily) should be given for life. In severe cases, 
consideration may be given to splenectomy, which improves but does not 
normalise red cell survival. Potential indications for splenectomy include 
moderate to severe haemolysis with complications (anaemia and gall-
stones), although splenectomy should be delayed where possible until after 
6 years of age in view of the subsequent risk of sepsis. Guidelines for the 
management of patients after splenectomy are presented in Box 25.37.
Acute, severe haemolytic crises require transfusion support, but 
cross-matched blood must be transfused slowly as haemolytic transfu-
sion reactions may occur (see Fig. 25.16).
Hereditary elliptocytosis
This term refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders that produce an 
increase in elliptocytic red cells on the blood lm and a variable degree of 
haemolysis. This is due to a functional abnormality of one or more anchor 
proteins in the red cell membrane, e.g. alpha spectrin or protein 4.1 

[[p1015]]
Anaemias    957
(see Fig. 25.4). Inheritance may be autosomal dominant or recessive. 
Hereditary elliptocytosis is less common than hereditary spherocytosis in 
Western countries, with an incidence of 1/10 000, but is more common 
in equatorial Africa and parts of South-east Asia. The clinical course is 
variable and depends on the degree of membrane dysfunction caused 
by the inherited molecular defect(s); most cases present as an asymp-
tomatic blood lm abnormality, but occasional cases result in neonatal 
haemolysis or a chronic compensated haemolytic state. Management of 
the latter is the same as for hereditary spherocytosis.
A characteristic variant of hereditary elliptocytosis occurs in South-
East Asia, particularly Malaysia and Papua New Guinea, with stomato-
cytes and ovalocytes in the blood. This has a prevalence of up to 30% in 
some communities because it offers relative protection from malaria and 
thus has sustained a high gene frequency. The blood lm is often very 
abnormal and immediate differential diagnosis is broad.
Red cell enzymopathies
The mature red cell must produce energy via ATP to maintain a normal 
internal environment and cell volume while protecting itself from the oxida-
tive stress presented by oxygen carriage. ATP is generated by glycolysis, 
while the hexose monophosphate shunt produces nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and glutathione to protect against 
oxidative stress. The impact of functional or quantitative defects in the 
enzymes in these pathways depends on the importance of the steps 
affected and the presence of alternative pathways. In general, defects in 
the hexose monophosphate shunt pathway result in periodic haemolysis 
precipitated by episodic oxidative stress, while those in the glycolysis 
pathway result in shortened red cell survival and chronic haemolysis.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deciency
The enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is pivotal in 
the hexose monophosphate shunt pathway. Deciencies result in the 
most common human enzymopathy, affecting 10% of the world’s pop-
ulation, with a geographical distribution that parallels the malaria belt 
because heterozygotes are protected from malarial parasitisation. The 
enzyme is a heteromeric structure made of catalytic subunits that are 
encoded by a gene on the X chromosome. The deciency therefore 
affects males and rare homozygous females (Ch. 3), but it is carried by 
females. Carrier heterozygous females are usually only affected in the 
neonatal period or in the presence of skewed X-inactivation.
Over 400 subtypes of G6PD are described. The most common types 
associated with normal activity are the B+ enzyme present in most pop-
ulations of European descent and 70% of those of African Caribbean 
origin, and the A+ variant present in 20% of African Caribbeans. The 
two common variants associated with reduced activity are the A  variety 
in approximately 10% of African Caribbeans, and the Mediterranean or 
B  variety in those of European origin. In East and West Africa, up to 
20% of males and 4% of females (homozygotes) are affected and have 
enzyme levels of about 15% of normal. The deciency in European  and 
East Asian populations is more severe, with enzyme levels as low as 1%.
Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) (Coombs test)
Detects the presence of antibody bound to
the red cell surface, e.g.
1. Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
2. Haemolytic disease of newborn 
3. Transfusion reactions
Antibodies to
human globulin
Red cell
agglutination
Indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) (indirect Coombs test)
Detects antibodies in the plasma, e.g.
1. Antibody screen in pre-transfusion testing
2. Screening in pregnancy for antibodies that may cause
 
haemolytic disease of newborn
Red cells with
known antigen
expression
Red cell
agglutination
Patient’s
plasma
Stage 1
Red cells with
Ag – Ab complex
on cell surface
Stage 2
Antibodies to
human globulin
Key
Red blood cells
Red cell antigen
Antibody bound
to red cell antigen
A
B
Fig. 25.22 Direct and indirect antiglobulin tests.
25.37 Management of the splenectomised patient
 Vaccinate with pneumococcal, Haemophilus inuenzae type B, meningococcal 
group C and inuenza vaccines at least 2–3 weeks before elective splenectomy. 
Vaccination should be given after emergency surgery but may be less effective
 Pneumococcal re-immunisation should be given at least 5-yearly and inuenza 
annually. Vaccination status must be documented
 Life-long prophylactic penicillin V (500 mg twice daily) is recommended. In 
penicillin-allergic patients, consider a macrolide
 Patients should be educated regarding the risks of infection and methods of 
prophylaxis
 A card or bracelet should be carried to alert health professionals to the risk of 
overwhelming sepsis
 In sepsis, patients should be resuscitated and given intravenous antibiotics to 
cover pneumococcus, Haemophilus and meningococcus, according to local 
resistance patterns
 The risk of cerebral malaria is increased in the event of infection
 Animal bites should be promptly treated with local disinfection and antibiotics to 
prevent serious soft tissue infection and sepsis

[[p1016]]
958    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Clinical features and investigation ndings are shown in Box 25.38
Management aims to stop the intake of any precipitant drugs or foods 
and treat any underlying infection. Favism due to the consumption of fava 
beans is the classically described precipitant of haemolysis in patients 
with G6PD deciency. Acute transfusion support may be life-saving.
Pyruvate kinase deciency
This is the second most common red cell enzyme defect. It results in 
deciency of ATP production and a chronic haemolytic anaemia. It is 
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The extent of anaemia is varia-
ble; the blood lm shows characteristic ‘prickle cells’ that resemble holly 
leaves. Enzyme activity is only 5%–20% of normal. Transfusion support 
may be necessary during periods of haemolysis.
Pyrimidine 5′ nucleotidase deciency
The pyrimidine 5  nucleotidase enzyme catalyses the dephosphorylation 
of nucleoside monophosphates and is important during the degradation 
of RNA in reticulocytes. It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and 
is as common as pyruvate kinase deciency in Mediterranean, African and 
Jewish populations. The accumulation of excess ribonucleoprotein results 
in coarse basophilic stippling (see Box 25.2), associated with a chronic 
haemolytic state. The enzyme is very sensitive to inhibition by lead and this 
is the reason why basophilic stippling is a feature of lead poisoning.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
This results from increased red cell destruction due to red cell autoanti-
bodies. The antibodies may be IgG or IgM, or more rarely IgE or IgA. If an 
antibody avidly xes complement, it will cause intravascular haemolysis, 
but if complement activation is weak, the haemolysis will be extravas-
cular (in the reticulo-endothelial system). Antibody-coated red cells lose 
membrane to macrophages in the spleen and hence spherocytes are 
present in the blood. The optimum temperature at which the antibody is 
active (thermal specicity) is used to classify immune haemolysis:
 Warm antibodies bind best at 37°C and account for 80% of cases. 
The majority are IgG and often react against Rhesus antigens.
 Cold antibodies bind best at 4°C but can bind up to 37°C in some 
cases. They are usually IgM and bind complement. To be clinically 
relevant, they must act within the range of normal body tempera-
tures. They account for the other 20% of cases.
Warm autoimmune haemolysis
The incidence of warm autoimmune haemolysis is approximately 
1/100 000 population per annum; it occurs at all ages, but is more com-
mon in middle age and in females. No underlying cause is identied in up 
to 50% of cases. The remainder are secondary to a wide variety of other 
conditions (see Fig. 25.21B).
Investigations
There is evidence of haemolysis, spherocytes and polychromasia on 
the blood lm. The diagnosis is conrmed by the direct Coombs or 
antiglobulin test (see Fig. 25.22). The patient’s red cells are mixed with 
Coombs reagent, which contains antibodies against human IgG/IgM/
complement. If the red cells have been coated by antibody in vivo, 
the Coombs reagent will induce their agglutination and this can be 
detected visually. The relevant antibody can be eluted from the red 
cell surface and tested against a panel of typed red cells to deter-
mine against which red cell antigen it is directed. The most common 
specicity is for Rhesus antigens and most often anti-e; this is helpful 
when choosing blood to cross-match. The direct Coombs test can be 
negative in the presence of brisk haemolysis. A positive test requires 
about 200 antibody molecules to attach to each red cell; with a very 
avid complement-xing antibody, haemolysis may occur at lower levels 
of antibody-binding. The standard Coombs reagent will miss IgA or IgE 
antibodies. Around 10% of all warm autoimmune haemolytic anaemias 
are Coombs test-negative.
Management
If the haemolysis is secondary to an underlying cause, this must be 
treated and any implicated drugs stopped.
It is usual to treat patients initially with prednisolone (1 mg/kg orally). A 
response is seen in 70%–80% of cases, but may take up to 3 weeks; a 
rise in haemoglobin will be matched by a fall in bilirubin, LDH and retic-
ulocyte levels. Once the haemoglobin has normalised and the reticulo-
cytosis resolved, the glucocorticoid dose can be reduced slowly over 
several weeks. Glucocorticoids probably work by decreasing mac-
rophage destruction of antibody-coated red cells and reducing antibody 
production.
Transfusion support may be required for life-threatening prob-
lems, such as the development of heart failure or rapid unabated falls 
in haemoglobin. The least incompatible blood should be used, but 
this may still give rise to transfusion reactions or the development of 
alloantibodies.
If the haemolysis fails to respond to glucocorticoids or can only be 
stabilised by large doses, then second-line therapy with the anti-CD20 
monoclonal antibody rituximab should be considered. Failure to respond 
to rituximab can be followed by consideration of treatment with a range 
of immunomodulatory/ immunosuppressive agents or splenectomy. 
Pharmacological agents include azathioprine, ciclosporin, danazol and 
mycophenolate mofetil. Splenectomy is associated with a good response 
in 50%–60% of cases. The operation can be performed laparoscopically 
with reduced morbidity. There are concerns about all modes of third-line 
therapy as long-term immunosuppression carries a risk of malignancy, 
while splenectomy is associated with an excess of severe infection due 
to the capsulate organisms pneumococcus and meningococcus (see 
Box 25.40).
Cold agglutinin disease
This is mediated by antibodies, usually IgM, which bind to the red cells 
at low temperatures and cause them to agglutinate. It may cause intra-
vascular haemolysis if complement xation occurs. This can be chronic 
when the antibody is monoclonal, or acute or transient when the 
antibody is polyclonal.
25.38 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deciency
Clinical features
 Acute drug-induced haemolysis to (e.g.):
Analgesics: aspirin, phenacetin
Antimalarials: primaquine, quinine, chloroquine, pyrimethamine
Antibiotics: sulphonamides, nitrofurantoin, ciprooxacin
Miscellaneous: quinidine, probenecid, vitamin K, dapsone
 Chronic compensated haemolysis
 Infection or acute illness
 Neonatal jaundice: may be a feature of the B  enzyme
 Favism, i.e. acute haemolysis after ingestion of broad beans (Vicia fava)
Laboratory features
Non-spherocytic intravascular haemolysis during an attack
The blood lm will show:
 Bite cells (red cells with a ‘bite’ of membrane missing)
 Blister cells (red cells with surface blistering of the membrane)
 Irregularly shaped small cells
 Polychromasia reecting the reticulocytosis
 Denatured haemoglobin visible as Heinz bodies within the red cell cytoplasm 
with a supravital stain such as methyl violet
G6PD level
 Can be indirectly assessed by screening methods that usually depend on the 
decreased ability to reduce dyes
 Direct assessment of G6PD is made in those with low screening values
 Care must be taken close to an acute haemolytic episode because reticulocytes 
may have higher enzyme levels and give rise to a false normal result

[[p1017]]
Haemoglobinopathies    959
Chronic cold agglutinin disease
This typically affects older adult patients and may be associated with 
an underlying low-grade B-cell lymphoma. It causes a low-grade intra-
vascular haemolysis with cold, painful and often blue ngers, toes, ears 
or nose (so-called acrocyanosis). The latter is due to red cell aggluti-
nation in the small vessels in these colder, exposed areas. The blood 
lm shows red cell agglutination and the MCV may be spuriously high 
because the automated analysers detect red cell aggregates as single 
cells. Monoclonal IgM usually has anti-I or, less often, anti-i specicity. 
Treatment is primarily by transfusion support, but may also be directed at 
any underlying lymphoma. Patients must keep extremities warm, espe-
cially in winter. Some patients respond to rituximab. Fludarabine can be 
added in if a clonal abnormality is detected. For patients requiring blood 
transfusion, the cross-match sample must be placed in a transport ask 
at a temperature of 37°C and blood must be administered via a blood-
warmer. All patients should receive folic acid supplementation.
Other causes of cold agglutination
Cold agglutination can occur in association with Mycoplasma pneumo-
niae or with infectious mononucleosis. Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria 
is a very rare cause seen in children, in association with viral or bacterial 
infection. An IgG antibody binds to red cells in the peripheral circulation, 
but lysis occurs in the central circulation when complement xation takes 
place. This antibody is termed the Donath–Landsteiner antibody and has 
specicity against the P antigen on the red cells.
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia is caused by antibodies against non-
self red cells. It has two main causes, occurring after:
 unmatched blood transfusion (see Fig. 25.16)
 maternal sensitisation to paternal antigens on fetal cells (haemolytic 
disease of the newborn, see Box 25.19).
Non-immune haemolytic anaemia
Endothelial damage
Disruption of red cell membrane may occur in a number of conditions 
and is characterised by the presence of red cell fragments on the blood 
lm and markers of intravascular haemolysis:
 Mechanical heart valves. High ow through incompetent valves or 
periprosthetic leaks through the suture ring holding a valve in place 
result in shear stress damage.
 March haemoglobinuria. Vigorous exercise, such as prolonged 
marching or marathon running, can cause red cell damage in the 
capillaries in the feet.
 Thermal injury. Severe burns cause thermal damage to red cells, 
characterised by fragmentation and the presence of microsphero-
cytes in the blood.
 Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia. Fibrin deposition in capillaries 
can cause severe red cell disruption. It may occur in a wide variety 
of conditions: disseminated carcinomatosis, malignant or pregn-
ancy-induced hypertension, haemolytic uraemic syndrome (Ch. 18), 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation (p. 988).
Infection
Plasmodium falciparum malaria (p. 319) may be associated with intravas-
cular haemolysis; when severe, this is termed blackwater fever because 
of the associated haemoglobinuria. Clostridium perfringens sepsis 
(p. 271), usually in the context of ascending cholangitis or necrotis-
ing fasciitis, may cause severe intravascular haemolysis with marked 
spherocytosis due to bacterial production of a lecithinase that destroys 
the red cell membrane.
Chemicals or drugs
Dapsone and sulfasalazine cause haemolysis by oxidative denaturation 
of haemoglobin. Denatured haemoglobin forms Heinz bodies in the red 
cells, visible on supravital staining with brilliant cresyl blue. Arsenic gas, 
copper, chlorates, nitrites and nitrobenzene derivatives may all cause 
haemolysis.
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare acquired, non-ma-
lignant clonal expansion of haematopoietic stem cells decient in gly-
cosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor protein. GPI anchors several key 
molecules to cells and its absence results in clinical outcomes that reect 
this, causing intravascular haemolysis and anaemia because of increased 
sensitivity of red cells to lysis by complement. This happens because key 
defence mechanisms that protect cells from complement-mediated lysis 
(CD55 and CD59) are GPI-anchored to red cells under normal circum-
stances. Episodes of intravascular haemolysis result in haemoglobinuria, 
most noticeable in early morning urine, which has a characteristic red–
brown colour. The disease is associated with an increased risk of venous 
and arterial thrombosis in unusual sites, such as the liver or abdomen. 
PNH clones are also associated with hypoplastic bone marrow failure, 
aplastic anaemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (see later). Management 
is supportive with transfusion and folate supplements and prophylaxis or 
treatment of thrombosis. Standard care now includes the anti-comple-
ment C5 monoclonal antibodies eculizimab and ravulizumab. This has 
been shown to be effective in reducing haemolysis, transfusion require-
ments and thrombotic risk. The C5 inhibitory antibodies both carry a risk 
of infection, particularly for Neisseria meningitidis, and all treated patients 
must be vaccinated against this organism.
Haemoglobinopathies
These disorders are caused by mutations affecting the genes encoding 
the globin chains of haemoglobin. Normal haemoglobin is composed of 
two alpha and two non-alpha globin chains. Alpha globin chains are pro-
duced throughout life, including in the fetus, so severe mutations in these 
may cause intrauterine death. Production of non-alpha chains varies with 
age; fetal haemoglobin (HbF-αα/γγ) has two gamma chains, while the 
predominant adult haemoglobin (HbA-αα/ββ) has two beta chains. Thus, 
disorders affecting the beta chains do not present until after 6 months of 
age. A constant small amount of haemoglobin A2 (HbA2-αα/δδ, usually 
less than 2%) is made from birth.
The geographical distribution of the common haemoglobinopathies 
is shown in Fig. 25.23. The haemoglobinopathies can be classied into 
qualitative or quantitative abnormalities.
Qualitative abnormalities – abnormal haemoglobins
In qualitative abnormalities (called the abnormal haemoglobins) there 
is a functionally important alteration in the amino acid structure of the 
polypeptide chains of the globin chains. Several hundred such variants 
are known; they were originally designated by letters of the alphabet, 
e.g. S, C, D or E, but the more recently described ones are known by 
names that are usually taken from the town or district in which they were 
rst described. The best-known example is haemoglobin S, found in 
sickle-cell anaemia. Mutations around the haem-binding pocket cause 
the haem ring to fall out of the structure and produce an unstable hae-
moglobin. These substitutions often change the charge of the globin 
chains, producing different electrophoretic mobility, and this forms the 
basis for the diagnostic use of haemoglobin electrophoresis to identify 
haemoglobinopathies.
Quantitative abnormalities – thalassaemias
In quantitative abnormalities (the thalassaemias), there are mutations 
causing a reduced rate of production of one or other of the globin chains, 

[[p1018]]
960    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
altering the ratio of alpha to non-alpha chains. In alpha-thalassaemia 
excess beta chains are present, while in beta-thalassaemia excess alpha 
chains are present. The excess chains precipitate, causing red cell mem-
brane damage and reduced red cell survival due to haemolysis.
Sickle-cell anaemia
Sickle-cell disease results from a single glutamic acid to valine substitu-
tion at position 6 of the beta globin polypeptide chain. It is inherited as 
an autosomal recessive trait (Ch. 3). Homozygotes only produce abnor-
mal beta chains that make haemoglobin S (HbS, termed SS), and this 
results in the clinical syndrome of sickle-cell disease. Heterozygotes 
produce a mixture of normal and abnormal beta chains that make 
normal HbA and HbS (termed AS), and this results in sickle-cell trait; 
although this was previously thought of as asymptomatic, it may be 
associated with an increased risk of sudden and cardiovascular death 
in young adults.
Epidemiology
The heterozygote frequency is over 20% in tropical Africa (see 
Fig. 25.23). In African American populations, sickle-cell trait has a fre-
quency of 8%. Individuals with sickle-cell trait are relatively resistant to 
the effects of falciparum malaria in early childhood; the high prevalence 
in equatorial Africa can thus be explained by the survival advantage it 
confers in areas where falciparum malaria is endemic. However, homozy-
gous patients with sickle-cell anaemia do not have correspondingly 
greater resistance to falciparum malaria.
Pathogenesis
When haemoglobin S is deoxygenated, the molecules of haemoglobin 
polymerise to form pseudocrystalline structures known as ‘tactoids’. 
These distort the red cell membrane and produce characteristic sickle-
shaped cells (Fig. 25.24). The polymerisation is reversible when re-
oxygenation occurs. The distortion of the red cell membrane, how-
ever, may become permanent and the red cell ‘irreversibly sickled’. 
The greater the concentration of sickle-cell haemoglobin in the individ-
ual cell, the more easily tactoids are formed, but this process may be 
enhanced or retarded by the presence of other haemoglobins. Thus the 
abnormal haemoglobin C variant participates in polymerisation more 
readily than haemoglobin A, whereas haemoglobin F strongly inhibits 
polymerisation.
Clinical features
Sickling is precipitated by hypoxia, acidosis, dehydration and infection. 
Irreversibly sickled cells have a shortened survival and plug vessels in the 
microcirculation. This results in a number of acute syndromes, termed 
‘crises’, and chronic organ damage (see Fig. 25.24):
 Painful vaso-occlusive crisis. Plugging of small vessels in the bone 
produces acute severe bone pain. This affects areas of active 
marrow: the hands and feet in children (so-called dactylitis) or the 
femora, humeri, ribs, pelvis and vertebrae in adults. Patients usually 
have a systemic response with tachycardia, and fever. This is the 
most common form of crisis.
 Stroke. The single most devastating consequence of sickle-cell 
disease is stroke. Stroke or silent stroke occurs in 10%–15% of chil-
dren with sickle-cell disease. Children at risk of stroke can be identi-
ed by screening with transcranial Doppler ultrasound, with fast ow 
associated with increased stroke risk. These children may be offered 
strategies such as transfusion or treatment with hydroxycarbamide 
to reduce the risk of stroke.
 Sickle chest syndrome. This may follow a vaso-occlusive crisis and 
is the most common cause of death in adult sickle-cell disease. 
Bone marrow infarction results in fat emboli to the lungs, which 
cause further sickling and infarction, leading to ventilatory failure if 
not treated.
 Sequestration crisis. Thrombosis of the venous outow from an 
organ causes loss of function and acute painful enlargement. In chil-
dren, the spleen is the most common site. Massive splenic enlarge-
ment may result in severe anaemia, circulatory collapse and death. 
Recurrent sickling in the spleen in childhood results in infarction 
and adults may have no functional spleen. In adults, the liver may 
undergo sequestration with severe pain due to capsular stretching. 
Priapism may occur in affected individuals.
 Aplastic crisis. Infection of adult sicklers with human parvovirus B19 
(erythrovirus) may result in a severe but self-limiting red cell aplasia. 
This results in profound anaemia, which may cause heart failure. 
Unlike in all other sickle crises, the reticulocyte count is low.
 Pregnancy. Pregnancy in sickle-cell disease requires planning and 
multidisciplinary management. Women with sickle-cell disease have 
increased pregnancy-related morbidity, which includes painful crisis, 
placental failure and thrombosis (Box 25.39).
Investigations
Patients with sickle-cell disease have a compensated anaemia, usually 
around 60–80 g/L. The blood lm shows sickle cells, target cells and fea-
tures of hyposplenism from a young age. A reticulocytosis is present. The 
presence of HbS can be demonstrated by exposing red cells to a reduc-
ing agent such as sodium dithionite; HbA gives a clear solution, whereas 
HbS polymerises to produce a turbid solution. This forms the basis of 
Thalassaemia
Sickle-cell anaemia
HbC
HbD
HbE
Fig. 25.23 The geographical distribution of the haemoglobinopathies. From Hoffbrand AV, Pettit JE. Essential haematology, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Blackwell Science; 1992.

[[p1019]]
Haemoglobinopathies    961
CNS
Subarachnoid bleed
Fits
Cardiac
Sickle myocardium
Cardiomegaly
Transfusional iron overload
Vertebral collapse
Osteoporosis
Splenic infarction
Avascular necrosis
Cerebrovascular
event
Priapism
Leg
ulceration
Background retinopathy
Proliferative retinopathy
Vitreous bleeds
Ocular
Sickle chest syndrome
Infection
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary
Osteomyelitis
Cholelithiasis
Hepatic sequestration
Dactylitis
Enuresis
Haematuria
Papillary necrosis
Chronic renal failure
Renal
Arthropathy
Blood film
Electrophoresis gel
Nucleated
red cell
Sickle cell
Normal
HbC trait
HbS trait
HbC
HbS
HbA
HbF
Autosomal recessive
inheritance
Fig. 25.24 Clinical and laboratory features of sickle-cell disease.
25.39 Sickle-cell disease in pregnancy
 Pre-conceptual counselling: advice on the effect of sickle-cell disease on 
pregnancy, and vice versa, should be offered.
 Vaccination status: should be updated before conception.
 Testing of partner: testing for haemoglobinopathy status is advised.
 Folic acid: should be taken in high dose (5 mg daily) prior to and throughout 
pregnancy.
 Hydroxycarbamide: should be discontinued 3 months prior to conception.
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors: should be discontinued 
prior to conception.
 Pulmonary hypertension: should be excluded prior to conception.
 Placental failure: women with sickle-cell disease have increased rates, 
resulting in pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation.
 Aspirin 75 mg: should be given throughout pregnancy.
 Thromboprophylaxis after delivery: all women with sickle-cell disease should 
receive thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin for at least  
10 days post vaginal delivery and for 6 weeks post caesarean section. Antenatal 
thromboprophylaxis should be considered for women with additional risk factors 
for venous thromboembolism (see Box 25.67).
 Transfusion: extended cross-matched blood for Rhesus and Kell status should 
be provided. Blood should be cytomegalovirus-negative.
emergency screening tests before surgery in appropriate ethnic groups, 
but cannot distinguish between sickle-cell trait and disease. The deni-
tive diagnosis requires haemoglobin electrophoresis to demonstrate the 
absence of HbA, 2%–20% HbF and the predominance of HbS. Both 
parents of the affected individual will have sickle-cell trait.
Management
All patients with sickle-cell disease should receive prophylaxis with daily 
folic acid, and appropriate management of the hyposplenic state that 
is uniformly found in these patients from an early age (see Box 25.37). 
Seasonal vaccination against inuenza is also advised.
Vaso-occlusive crises are managed by aggressive rehydration, oxygen 
therapy, adequate analgesia (which often requires opiates) and antibiot-
ics. Transfusion should be with fully genotyped blood wherever possible. 
Simple top-up transfusion may be used in a sequestration or aplastic 
crisis. A regular transfusion programme to suppress HbS production and 
maintain the HbS level below 30% may be indicated in patients with 
recurrent severe complications, such as cerebrovascular accidents in 
children or chest syndromes in adults. Exchange transfusion, in which 
a patient is simultaneously venesected and transfused to replace HbS 
with HbA, may be used in life-threatening crises or to prepare patients 
for surgery.
A high HbF level inhibits polymerisation of HbS and reduces sickling. 
Patients with sickle-cell disease and high HbF levels have a mild clinical 
course with few crises. Some agents are able to increase synthesis of 
HbF and this has been used to reduce the frequency of severe crises. 
The oral cytotoxic agent hydroxycarbamide has been shown to have 
clinical benet with acceptable side-effects in children and adults who 
have recurrent severe crises. The P-selectin inhibitor, crizanlizumab, is 
currently under review as an agent to reduce vasoocclusive crisis.
Relatively few allogeneic stem cell transplants from HLA-matched sib-
lings have been performed, but this procedure appears to be potentially 
curative (p. 945).

[[p1020]]
962    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Prognosis
In Africa, few children with sickle-cell anaemia survive to adult life without 
medical attention. Even with standard medical care, approximately 15% 
die by the age of 20 years and 50% by the age of 40 years.
Other abnormal haemoglobins
Haemoglobin C (HbC) disease, another beta-chain haemoglobinopathy, 
is clinically silent but associated with microcytosis and target cells on 
the blood lm. Compound heterozygotes inheriting one HbS gene and 
one HbC gene from their parents have haemoglobin SC disease, which 
behaves like a mild form of sickle-cell disease. SC disease is associated 
with a reduced frequency of crises, but is not uncommonly associated 
with complications in pregnancy and retinopathy.
Thalassaemias
Thalassaemia is an inherited impairment of haemoglobin production, in 
which there is partial or complete failure to synthesise a specic type 
of globin chain. In alpha-thalassaemia, disruption of one or both alleles 
on chromosome 16 may occur, with production of some or no alpha 
globin chains. In beta-thalassaemia, defective production usually results 
from disabling point mutations causing no (β0) or reduced (β ) beta chain 
production.
Beta-thalassaemia
Failure to synthesise beta chains (beta-thalassaemia) is the most com-
mon type of thalassaemia, most prevalent in the Mediterranean area. 
Heterozygotes have thalassaemia minor, a condition in which there is 
usually mild microcytic anaemia and little or no clinical disability, which 
may be detected only when iron therapy for a mild microcytic anaemia 
fails. Homozygotes (thalassaemia major) either are unable to synthesise 
haemoglobin A or, at best, produce very little; after the rst 4–6 months 
of life, they develop profound transfusion-dependent hypochromic anae-
mia. The diagnostic features are summarised in Box 25.40. Intermediate 
grades of severity occur.
Management and prevention
See Box 25.41. Cure is now a possibility for selected children, with allo-
geneic HSCT (p. 945).
It is possible to identify a fetus with homozygous beta-thalassaemia 
by obtaining chorionic villous material for DNA analysis sufciently early 
in pregnancy to allow termination. This examination is appropriate only if 
both parents are known to be carriers (beta-thalassaemia minor) and will 
accept a termination.
Alpha-thalassaemia
Reduced or absent alpha-chain synthesis is common in South-east Asia. 
There are two alpha gene loci on chromosome 16 and therefore each 
individual carries four alpha gene alleles.
 If one is deleted, there is no clinical effect.
 If two are deleted, there may be a mild hypochromic anaemia.
 If three are deleted, the patient has haemoglobin H disease.
 If all four are deleted, the baby is stillborn (hydrops fetalis).
Haemoglobin H is a beta-chain tetramer, formed from the excess of 
beta chains, which is functionally useless, so that patients rely on their 
low levels of HbA for oxygen transport. Treatment of haemoglobin H 
disease is similar to that of beta-thalassaemia of intermediate severity, 
involving folic acid supplementation, transfusion if required and avoid-
ance of iron therapy.
Some considerations specic to anaemia in old age are listed in 
Box 25.42
Haematological malignancies
Haematological malignancies arise when the processes controlling pro-
liferation or apoptosis are corrupted in blood cells because of acquired 
mutations in key regulatory genes. If mature differentiated cells are 
involved, the cells will have a low growth fraction and produce indolent 
25.40 Diagnostic features of beta-thalassaemia
Beta-thalassaemia major (homozygotes)
 Profound hypochromic anaemia
 Evidence of severe red cell dysplasia
 Erythroblastosis
 Absence or gross reduction of the amount of haemoglobin A
 Raised levels of haemoglobin F
 Evidence that both parents have thalassaemia minor
Beta-thalassaemia minor (heterozygotes)
 Mild anaemia
 Microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes (not iron-decient)
 Some target cells
 Punctate basophilia
 Raised haemoglobin A2 fraction
25.41 Treatment of beta-thalassaemia major
Problem
Management
Erythropoietic failure
Allogeneic HSCT from  
HLA-compatible sibling
Transfusion to maintain Hb 
>100 g/L
Folic acid 5 mg daily
Iron overload
Iron therapy contraindicated
Iron chelation therapy
Splenomegaly causing mechanical 
problems, excessive transfusion 
needs
Splenectomy; see Box 25.37
(Hb = haemoglobin; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; HSCT = haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation)
25.42 Anaemia in old age
 Mean haemoglobin: falls with age in both sexes but remains well within the 
reference range. When a low haemoglobin does occur, it is generally due to 
disease.
 Anaemia can never be considered ‘normal’ in old age
 Symptoms: may be subtle and insidious. Cardiovascular features such as 
dyspnoea and oedema, and cerebral features such as dizziness and apathy, 
tend to predominate.
 Ferritin: if lower than 45 µg/L in older people, is highly predictive of iron 
deciency. Conversely, ferritin may be raised by chronic disease and so a 
normal ferritin does not exclude iron deciency.
 Serum iron and transferrin: fall with age because of the prevalence of other 
disorders, and are not reliable indicators of deciency.
 Most common cause of iron deciency: gastrointestinal blood loss.
 Most common cause of vitamin B12 deciency: pernicious anaemia, as the 
prevalence of chronic atrophic gastritis rises in old age.
 Neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with vitamin B12 deciency: 
well-established association but a causal relationship has not been clearly 
shown. Dementia associated with vitamin B12 deciency in the absence of 
haematological abnormalities is rare.
 Anaemia of chronic disease: frequent in old age because of the rising 
prevalence of diseases that inhibit iron transport.

[[p1021]]
Haematological malignancies    963
neoplasms, such as the low-grade lymphomas or chronic leukaemias, 
when patients have an expected survival of many years. In contrast, if 
more primitive stem or progenitor cells are involved, the cells can have 
the highest growth fractions of all human neoplasms, producing rapidly 
progressive, life-threatening illnesses such as the acute leukaemias or 
high-grade lymphomas. Involvement of pluripotent stem cells produces 
the most aggressive acute leukaemias. In general, haematological neo-
plasms are diseases of older patients, the exceptions being acute lymph-
oblastic leukaemia, which predominantly affects children, and Hodgkin 
lymphoma, which affects people aged 20–40 years. Management of 
young patients with haematological malignancy is particularly challeng-
ing (Box 25.43).
Leukaemias
Leukaemias are malignant disorders of the white cell compartment, 
characteristically associated with increased numbers of white cells in the 
bone marrow and/or peripheral blood. The course of leukaemia may vary 
from a few days or weeks to many years, depending on the type.
Terminology and classication
Leukaemias are traditionally classied into four main groups:
 acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
 acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
 chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)
 chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML).
In acute leukaemia, there is proliferation of mutated haematopoietic 
stem and progenitor cells, with limited accompanying differentiation, 
leading to an accumulation of blasts, predominantly in the bone marrow, 
which causes bone marrow failure. In chronic leukaemia, the malignant 
clone is able to differentiate, resulting in an accumulation of more mature 
cells. Lymphocytic and lymphoblastic cells are those derived from the 
lymphoid progenitor cells (B cells and T cells). Myeloid refers to the other 
lineages: that is, precursors of red cells, granulocytes, monocytes and 
platelets (see Fig. 25.2).
The diagnosis of leukaemia is usually suspected from an abnormal 
blood count, often including a raised white count, and is conrmed by 
examination of the bone marrow. This includes the morphology of the 
abnormal cells, analysis of cell surface markers (immunophenotyping), 
clone-specic chromosome abnormalities and molecular changes. 
These results are incorporated in the World Health Organization (WHO) 
classication of tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues; the 
subclassication of acute leukaemias is shown in Box 25.44. The fea-
tures in the bone marrow not only provide an accurate diagnosis, but 
also give valuable prognostic information, increasingly allowing therapy 
to be tailored to the patient’s disease.
25.43 Consequences of haematological malignancy in 
adolescence
 Tailored management protocols: the most effective treatment schedules 
for leukaemia and lymphoma differ between children and adults. Adolescent 
patients may be most appropriately managed in specialist centres.
 Psychosocial effects: adolescents undergoing treatment for haematological 
malignancy may suffer signicant consequences for their schooling and social 
development, and require support from a multidisciplinary team.
 ‘Late effects’: adolescents who have been treated with chemotherapy and/
or radiotherapy in childhood may be at risk of a wide range of complications, 
depending on the region irradiated, radiation dose and the drugs used. 
Particularly relevant complications in this age group include short stature, 
growth hormone deciency, delayed puberty and cognitive dysfunction affecting 
schooling (after cranial irradiation). Life-long follow-up is often undertaken to 
detect and manage these late effects and to deal with consequences such as 
infertility and second malignancy.
25.44 WHO classication of acute leukaemia
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with recurrent genetic abnormalities
 AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22.1), gene product RUNX1-RUNX1T1
 AML with inv(16)(p13.1;q22), gene product CBFB-MYHL1
 Acute promyelocytic leukaemia t(15;17), gene product PML-RARA
 AML with t(9;11)(p21.3;q23.3), gene product MLLT3-KMT2A
 AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34), gene product DEK-NUP214
 AML with inv(3)(q21.3;q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21.3;q26.2), gene products GATA2, 
MECOM
 AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13.3;q13.3), gene product RBM15-MKL1
 AML with mutated NPM1
 AML with biallelic mutations of CEBPA
Acute myeloid leukaemia with myelodysplasia-related changes
 e.g. Following a myelodysplastic syndrome
Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms
 e.g. Alkylating agent or topoisomerase II inhibitor
Myeloid sarcoma
Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
Acute myeloid leukaemia not otherwise specied
 e.g. AML with or without differentiation, acute myelomonocytic leukaemia, 
erythroleukaemia, megakaryoblastic leukaemia
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
 B-lymphoblastic leukaemia/lymphoma
 T-lymphoblastic leukaemia/lymphoma
25.45 Risk factors for leukaemia
Ionising radiation
 After atomic bombing of Japanese cities (myeloid leukaemia)
 Radiotherapy
 Diagnostic X-rays of the fetus in pregnancy
Cytotoxic drugs
 Especially alkylating agents and topoisomerase II inhibitors (therapy-related 
myeloid malignancies), usually after a latent period of several years with 
alkylating agents and a few months to 2 years with topoisomerase II inhibitors
 Industrial exposure to benzene
Retroviruses
 Adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ATLL) caused by human T-cell lymphotropic 
virus 1(HTLV-1), most prevalent in Japan, the Caribbean and some areas of 
Central and South America and Africa
Genetic
 Identical twin of patients with leukaemia
 Down syndrome and certain other genetic disorders
Immunological
 Immune deciency states (e.g. hypogammaglobulinaemia)
Epidemiology and aetiology
The incidence of leukaemia of all types in the population is approximately 
10/10 000 per annum, of which just under half are cases of acute leu-
kaemia. Males are affected more frequently than females, the ratio being 
about 3:2 in acute leukaemia, 2:1 in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and 
1.3:1 in chronic myeloid leukaemia. Geographical variation in incidence 
does occur, the most striking being the rarity of chronic lymphocytic leu-
kaemia in Chinese and related races. Acute leukaemia occurs at all ages. 
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia shows a peak of incidence in children 
aged 1–5 years. All forms of acute myeloid leukaemia have their lowest 
incidence in children and young adult life and there is a striking rise over 
the age of 50. Chronic leukaemias occur mainly in middle and old age.
The cause of the leukaemia is unknown in the majority of patients. 
Several risk factors have been identied (Box 25.45).

[[p1022]]
964    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Acute leukaemia
Mutations in haematopoietic stem cells produce leukaemic stem cells. 
Proliferation of these cells that do not mature leads to an accumulation of 
primitive cells that take up more and more marrow space at the expense 
of the normal haematopoietic cells. Eventually, this proliferation spills into 
the blood. Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is about four times more com-
mon than acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) in adults. In children, the 
proportions are reversed, the lymphoblastic variety being more common. 
The clinical features are usually those of bone marrow failure (anaemia, 
bleeding or infection; pp. 932, 937 and 939).
Investigations
Blood examination usually shows anaemia with a normal or raised MCV. 
The leucocyte count may vary from as low as 1 × 109/L to as high as 
500 × 109/L or more. In the majority of patients, the count is below 
100 × 109/L. Severe thrombocytopenia is usual but not invariable. 
Frequently, blast cells are seen in the blood lm, but sometimes the blast 
cells may be infrequent or absent. A bone marrow examination will con-
rm the diagnosis. The bone marrow is usually hypercellular, with replace-
ment of normal elements by leukaemic blast cells in varying degrees (but 
more than 20% of the cells) (Fig. 25.25). The presence of Auer rods in 
the cytoplasm of blast cells indicates a myeloblastic type of leukaemia. 
Classication and prognosis are determined by immunophenotyping and 
chromosome and molecular analysis, as shown in Fig. 25.26
Management
Ideally, whenever possible, patients with acute leukaemia should be 
treated within a clinical trial. If a decision to embark on specic therapy 
has been taken, the patient should be prepared as recommended in Box 
25.46. It is unwise to attempt aggressive management of acute leukae-
mia unless adequate supportive therapy can be provided.
The aim of treatment is to destroy the leukaemic clone of cells with-
out destroying the residual normal stem cell compartment from which 
repopulation of the haematopoietic tissues will occur. The detail of the 
schedules for treatments can be found in specialist texts. The drugs 
most commonly employed are listed in Box 25.47. Generally, if a 
patient fails to go into remission with induction treatment, alternative 
drug combinations may be tried, but the outlook is poor unless remis-
sion can be achieved. Disease that relapses during treatment or soon 
after the end of treatment, including after HSCT, carries a poor prog-
nosis and is difcult to treat. The longer after the end of treatment that 
relapse occurs, the more likely it is that further treatment will be effec-
tive. In some patients, alternative palliative chemotherapy, not designed 
to achieve remission, may be used to curb excessive leucocyte prolif-
eration. Drugs used for this purpose include hydroxycarbamide and 
mercaptopurine. The aim is to reduce the blast count without inducing 
bone marrow failure.
Specic therapy
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) AML is predominantly a disease of those 
in old age and many patients are frail. Treatment has become more com-
plex in the recent years and is increasingly tailor-made for AML sub-
groups dened by genetic abnormalities or persistence of measurable 
residual disease (MRD). The rst decision must be whether or not to 
give specic treatment to attempt to achieve remission. The most effec-
tive remission induction therapy is based around intensive combination 
chemotherapy. This is generally aggressive, has numerous side-effects 
and may not be appropriate for the very old or patients with serious 
comorbidities. In these patients, supportive treatment can effect con-
siderable improvement in well-being, but there remains considerable 
unmet need. Low-intensity chemotherapy, such as low-dose cytosine 
arabinoside or azacitidine, is frequently used in older and frailer patients, 
but this induces remission in less than 20% of patients. Recently, the 
addition of the BCL-2 inhibitor venetoclax to cytosine and azacitdine has 
shown improved overall survival, especially the combination with aza-
citidine (Fig. 25.27).
Fig. 25.25 Acute myeloid leukaemia. Bone marrow aspirate showing inltration 
with large blast cells, which display nuclear folding and prominent nucleoli.
A
100
102
CD10
103
104
101
100
102
CD19
103
101
CD19- and CD10-
positive cells
B
Fig. 25.26 Investigation of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
cytometric analysis of blasts labelled with the uorescent antibodies anti-CD19 (y
axis) and anti-CD10 (x axis). ALL blasts are positive for both CD19 and CD10 (arrow). 
6, 7, 14, 18 and 21.
There are currently three phases of specic treatment for AML:
 Remission induction. In this phase, a fraction of the tumour is killed 
by combinations of chemotherapy drugs. The standard of care 
for remission induction in AML is daunorubicin with cytosine arab-
inoside given for 7–10 days in two cycles. Patients with a good or 
standard risk karyotype, including normal karyotype, benet from the 
addition of the antibody-drug conjugate gemtuzumab ozagomicin 
which targets CD33 on the AML cell and delivers the DNA damag-
ing drug calicheamicin directly into the cell (see Fig. 25.27), while 
AML with the FLT3-ITD mutation benets from the addition of the 

[[p1023]]
Haematological malignancies    965
FLT3 inhibitor midostaurin (see Fig. 25.27). The patient goes through 
a period of severe bone marrow hypoplasia lasting 3–4 weeks and 
requires intensive support and inpatient care from a specially trained 
multidisciplinary team. The aim is to achieve remission, a state in 
which the blood counts return to normal and the marrow blast count 
is less than 5%. Quality of life is highly dependent on achieving 
remission, hence remission induction is the preferred therapy for all 
patients who are considered t enough to undergo such treatment.
 Remission consolidation. If remission has been achieved, residual 
disease is attacked by therapy during the consolidation phase. This 
consists of a number of courses of chemotherapy, most commonly 
1–2 courses of high-dose cytosine arabinoside, again resulting in 
periods of marrow hypoplasia. In poor-prognosis AML, dened by 
poor risk cytogenetic/molecular genetic abnormalities or persistent 
MRD, this may include allogeneic HSCT.
 Remission maintenance. Maintenance therapy has only recently 
become an effective tool for some patients with AML compared to 
its long-established role in ALL. Patients not undergoing allogeneic 
HSCT with FLT3 mutated AML receive one year of maintenance with 
midostaurin and other patients may benet from azacitidine.
25.46 Preparation for specic therapy in acute leukaemia
 Existing infections identied and treated (e.g. urinary tract infection, oral 
candidiasis, dental, gingival and skin infections)
 Screen for COVID-19
 Anaemia corrected by red cell concentrate transfusion
 Thrombocytopenic bleeding controlled by platelet transfusions
 If possible, central venous catheter (e.g. Hickman line) inserted to facilitate 
access to the circulation for delivery of chemotherapy, uids, blood products 
and other supportive drugs
 Tumour lysis risk assessed and prevention started: uids with allopurinol or 
rasburicase
 Therapeutic regimen carefully explained to the patient and informed consent obtained
 Consideration of entry into clinical trial
25.47 Drugs commonly used in the treatment of acute 
leukaemia
Phase
Acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Induction
Vincristine (IV)
Prednisolone (oral)
L-Asparaginase (IM)
Daunorubicin (IV)
Methotrexate (intrathecal)
Imatinib (oral)*
Daunorubicin (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Etoposide (IV and oral)
Gentuzumab ozogamicin (IV)
All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) 
(oral)
Arsenic trioxide (ATO) (IV)
Consolidation
Daunorubicin (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Etoposide (IV)
Methotrexate (IV)
Imatinib (oral)*
Cytarabine (IV)
Amsacrine (IV)
Mitoxantrone (IV)
Maintenance
Prednisolone (oral)
Vincristine (IV)
Mercaptopurine (oral)
Methotrexate (oral)
Imatinib (oral)*
Relapse
Fludarabine (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Idarubicin (IV)
Fludarabine (IV)
Cytarabine (IV)
Arsenic trioxide (ATO) (IV)
Idarubicin (IV)
*If Philadelphia chromosome-positive.
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)
Anti-apoptosis
Lysosome
Mitochondrion
FLT-3 inhibitors
Midostaurin 
 Gilteritinib 
Antibody conjugate
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin
BCL-2
inhibitor
Venetoclax
Antibody
Calicheamicin
DNA damage
Growth
signal
Mutant
FLT-3
BCL-2
CD33
Fig. 25.27 Targeted therapies for acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Small 
molecule midostaurin inhibits mutant FLT3 molecules and is used in combination with 
chemotherapy. Gilteritinib inhibits mutant FLT3 and is used on its own for relapsed 
patients. Venetoclax inhibits BCL-2 and so induces apoptosis; it is used with the drug 
azacitidine in older, frailer patients. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin is a conjugate of an 
antibody and a chemotherapy agent. The antibody binds to CD33 on the cell surface; 
antibody and CD33 are internalised and the chemotherapy agent calicheamicin 
causes DNA damage. (BCL-2 = B-cell lymphoma 2; FLT-3 = FMS-like tyrosine kinase)
Relapsed AML carries a poor prognosis. Increasingly, this is pre-
empted by monitoring MRD and intervening before haematological 
relapse occurs. However, the aim is to attempt to achieve further remis-
sion and deliver an allogeneic HSCT, if possible.
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APML) A subtype of AML, called acute 
promyelocytic leukaemia (APML), is characterised by a block in differ-
entiation of malignant promyelocytes. These cells accumulate and lead 
to bone marrow failure and a tendency to severe bleeding, including 
into the CNS, because of enhanced brinolysis and DIC induced by the 
procoagulant proteins in the malignant cells, e.g.  tPA and uPA. This 
leukaemia is caused by a translocation of genes on chromosomes 15 
(PML) and 17 (RARA) producing the PML-RARA rearrangement which 
drives the leukaemia. APML carries the best prognosis of all AML if the 
patient survives the initial bleeding risk. Furthermore, low risk cases can 
be treated with a non-chemotherapy regimen of differentiation therapy 
with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO). Higher-risk 
patients are treated with ATRA and anthracycline-based chemotherapy. 
The prognosis is excellent with 90% cure rate for patients receiving treat-
ment. However, the early death rate from bleeding remains problematic 
and intensive supportive care and immediate introduction of ATRA ther-
apy is vital to prevent this.
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) This is predominantly a disease of 
childhood with a mean age of 2–4 years. However, it also occurs in 
adulthood where it is more difcult to treat and carries a poorer prog-
nosis. Once again there are three phases of therapy with treatment 
tailor-made to risk groups based on genetic abnormaliites and levels 
of MRD:
 Remission induction – As with AML the aim is to achieve remission 
using a combination of chemotherapy drugs given over a 4-week 
period. The drugs commonly used are dexamethasone, vincristine, 
anthracyclines, methotrexate, mercaptopurine and asparaginase. 
Induction therapy in ALL is often less damaging and better tol-
erated than AML, however, the high dosage of steroids coupled 
with neutropenia carries a high risk of infections, including fungal 

[[p1024]]
966    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
infections. Adult patients are more likely to have a poor-risk genetic 
abnormality. A BCR-ABL rearrangement occurs in about 25% of 
adult patients and TKI therapy, e.g. dasatinib, is included with the 
chemotherapy (Fig. 25.28). Once again, old and frail patients toler-
ate treatment much less well and treatment is modied accordingly. 
Adolescent and young adult patients require special support and 
have been shown to do better with children’s protocols than adult 
protocols.
 Remission consolidation – The consolidation phase builds on the 
remission by further decreasing the leukaemic burden. The inten-
sity of consolidation depends on the level of MRD at the end of 
remission induction and includes blocks of chemotherapy drugs. 
Allogeneic HSCT is used as consolidation for t adults with ALL and 
a suitable donor, but rarely in children unless they relapse.
 Remission maintenance – If the patient is still in remission after the 
consolidation phase for ALL, a period of maintenance therapy is 
given, with the individual as an outpatient and treatment consisting 
of a repeating cycle of drug administration. This may extend for up 
to 3 years if relapse does not occur. In ALL prophylactic treatment 
to the central nervous system is required, as this is a sanctuary site 
where standard therapy does not penetrate. This usually consists 
of a combination of cranial irradiation, intrathecal chemotherapy 
and high-dose methotrexate, which crosses the blood–brain barrier. 
Such therapy is integrated into the induction, remission and consoli-
dation phases of therapy
Relapsed ALL is a complex area and ranges from positive MRD, iso-
lated CNS or testicular relapse to full blown haematological relapse. The 
aim is once again to achieve further remission and frequently to deliver 
allogeneic HSCT. Newer therapies for relapse include blinatumomab, a 
bi-specic antibody against CD19 and CD3 to promote T-cell killing (BITE – 
bi-specic T-cell engager), inotuzumab ozogamicin (which targets CD22 
and delivers calicheamicin directly into the cell; see Fig. 25.28), nelara-
bine in T-cell ALL and CAR-T-cell therapy (see Fig. 25.17). Some long-
term cures have been achieved with these therapies.
Supportive therapy
Aggressive and potentially curative therapy, which involves periods of 
severe bone marrow failure, would not be possible without appropriate 
supportive care. The following problems commonly arise.
Anaemia Anaemia is treated with red cell concentrate transfusions.
Bleeding Thrombocytopenic bleeding requires platelet transfusions, 
unless the bleeding is trivial. Recent trials have conrmed that in acute 
leukaemia prophylactic platelet transfusion should be given to maintain 
the platelet count above 10 × 109/L. Coagulation abnormalities occur and 
need accurate diagnosis and treatment, especially in APML (see above).
Infection So-called neutropenic sepsis is a major complication of acute 
leukaemia and its treatment. Every leukaemia centre will have a written de-
nition and management policy for this common event. UK NICE guidelines 
dene neutropenic sepsis as fever (>38°C) lasting over 1 hour in a neutro-
penic patient (neutrophils <0.5 × 109/l) or with other signs or symptoms of 
signicant sepsis (see also p. 198). Parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotic 
therapy is essential. Empirical therapy is given according to the perceived 
severity of the sepsis illness and local bacteriological resistance patterns. 
Increasingly, low-risk cases of neutropenic sepsis are treated with single 
antibiotics, e.g. piperacillin/tazobactam. Higher-risk cases are managed 
with regimens such as a combination of an aminoglycoside (e.g. gen-
tamicin) and a broad-spectrum penicillin (e.g. piperacillin/tazobactam) 
or a single-agent beta-lactam (e.g. meropenem). The organisms most 
commonly associated with severe neutropenic sepsis are Gram-positive 
bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epider-
midis, which are present on the skin and gain entry via cannulae and 
central lines. Gram-negative infections often originate from the gastro-
intestinal tract, which is affected by chemotherapy-induced mucositis; 
organisms such as Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas and Klebsiella spp. 
are likely to cause rapid clinical deterioration and must be covered with 
initially empirical antibiotic therapy. Gram-positive infection may require 
vancomycin or teicoplanin therapy. If fever has not resolved after 3–5 
days and there is evidence for a disseminated fungal infection on CT 
scans or sensitive blood tests, empirical antifungal therapy (e.g. a liposo-
mal amphotericin B preparation, voriconazole or caspofungin) is added.
Patients with ALL are susceptible to infection with Pneumocystis 
jirovecii (Ch. 14), which causes a severe pneumonia. Prophylaxis with 
co-trimoxazole is given during chemotherapy. Diagnosis may require 
either induced sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage or open lung biopsy. 
Treatment is with high-dose co-trimoxazole, initially intravenously, chang-
ing to oral treatment as soon as possible.
Oral and pharyngeal Candida infection is common. Fluconazole is 
effective for the treatment of established local infection and for prophy-
laxis against systemic candidaemia. Prophylaxis against other systemic 
fungal infections including Aspergillus, for example itraconazole or posa-
conazole, is usual practice during high-risk intensive chemotherapy. This 
is often used along with sensitive markers of early fungal infection to 
guide treatment initiation (a ‘pre-emptive approach’).
For systemic fungal infection with Candida or aspergillosis, intrave-
nous liposomal amphotericin, caspofungin or voriconazole is required 
for up to 3 weeks. In systemic Candida infection intravenous catheters 
should be removed.
Reactivation of herpes simplex infection (Ch. 13) occurs frequently 
around the lips and nose during ablative therapy for acute leukaemia, 
and is treated with aciclovir. This may also be prescribed prophylacti-
cally to patients with a history of cold sores or elevated antibody titres 
to herpes simplex. Herpes zoster manifesting as chickenpox or, after 
reactivation, as shingles (Ch. 13) should be treated in the early stage 
with high-dose aciclovir, as it can be fatal in immunocompromised 
patients.
The value of isolation facilities, such as laminar ow rooms, is debata-
ble but may contribute to staff awareness of careful reverse barrier nurs-
ing practice. The isolation can be psychologically stressful for the patient.
BCR-ABL
Lysosome
BITE
TKI
CAR-T
cell
Antibody
Calicheamicin
DNA damage
Growth
signal
CD19
Antibody conjugate
Inotuzumab ozogamicin
CD22
CD19
CD3
T cell
Fig. 25.28 Targeted therapies for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). Chimeric 
antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells and bi-specic T-cell engager (BITE) both promote 
T-cell killing of the ALL cell. CAR-T as described in Fig. 25.17 and BITE by using an 
antibody that can simultaneously bind to a leukaemia cell and a T cell to bring them 
together. TKIs include imatinib, dasatinib and ponatinib. Inotuzumab–ozogamicin is 
a conjugate of an antibody and a chemotherapy agent. The antibody binds to CD22 
on the cell surface; antibody and CD22 are internalised and the chemotherapy agent 
calicheamicin causes DNA damage. (TKI = tyrosine kinase inhibitor)

[[p1025]]
Haematological malignancies    967
Metabolic problems Frequent monitoring of uid balance and renal, 
hepatic and haemostatic function is necessary. Patients are often 
severely anorexic and diarrhoea is common as a consequence of the 
side-effects of therapy; they may nd drinking difcult and hence require 
intravenous uids and electrolytes. Renal toxicity occurs with some 
antibiotics (e.g. aminoglycosides) and antifungal agents (amphotericin). 
Cellular breakdown during induction therapy (tumour lysis syndrome; 
p. 142) releases intracellular ions and nucleic acid breakdown prod-
ucts, causing hyperkalaemia, hyperuricaemia, hyperphosphataemia and 
hypocalcaemia. This may lead to renal failure. Allopurinol and intravenous 
hydration are given to try to prevent this. In patients at high risk of tumour 
lysis syndrome, e.g. acute leukaemia with a white cell count of more than 
100 × 109/L, prophylactic rasburicase (a recombinant urate oxidase 
enzyme) is used. Occasionally, dialysis may be required.
Psychological problems Psychological support is a key aspect of care. 
Patients should be kept informed, and their questions answered and 
fears allayed as far as possible. A multidisciplinary approach to patient 
care involves input from many services, including psychology. Key mem-
bers of the team include haematology specialist nurses, who are often 
the central point of contact for patients and families throughout the 
illness.
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)
This is described on page 945. In patients with high-risk acute leukae-
mia, allogeneic HSCT can improve 5-year survival from 20% to around 
50%. Reduced-intensity conditioning has allowed HSCT to be delivered 
to a higher proportion of patients with acute leukaemias, up to the age of 
about 65 years. Improved knowledge of the biology of leukaemia alters 
the denition of high risk. For example, patients with AML with a normal 
karyotype and isolated NPM1 gene mutations are considered good risk 
and are not routinely transplanted in rst remission. However, otherwise 
similar patients with isolated FLT3-ITD mutations are poor risk and con-
sidered for transplant in rst remission.
Prognosis
Without treatment, the median survival of patients with acute leukaemia 
is about 5 weeks. This may be extended to a number of months with 
supportive treatment. Patients who achieve remission with specic ther-
apy have a better outlook. Around 80% of adult patients under 60 years 
of age with ALL or AML achieve remission, although remission rates are 
lower for older patients. However, the relapse rate continues to be high. 
Box 25.48 shows the survival in ALL and AML and the inuence of prog-
nostic features. The level of detectable leukaemia cells after induction 
therapy, called measurable residual disease (MRD), can be a powerful 
prognostic tool and is now used routinely in some forms of acute leukae-
mia (e.g. ALL and AML with NPM1 mutation) to determine subsequent 
consolidation therapy.
Advances in treatment have led to steady improvement in survival 
from acute leukaemia. Some 90% of children with ALL are cured and 
about 50% of adults aged less than 60 years are cured from AML. As 
discussed above, APML has a 90% cure rate. Prognosis remains poor 
in most other groups of patients with acute leukaemias, especially in old 
age. Current trials aim to improve survival, especially in standard and 
poor-risk disease, with strategies that include better use of allogeneic 
HSCT, better ability to predict relapse using MRD and new targeted ther-
apies (see Figs. 25.27 and 25.28).
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative stem cell disor-
der resulting in proliferation of all haematopoietic lineages, but manifest-
ing predominantly in the granulocytic series. Maturation of cells proceeds 
fairly normally. The disease occurs chiey between the ages of 30 and 
80 years, with a peak incidence at 55 years. It is rare, with an annual inci-
dence in the UK of 1.8/100 000, and accounts for 15% of all leukaemias. 
It is found in all races.
The dening characteristic of CML is the chromosome abnormality 
known as the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. This is a shortened chro-
mosome 22 resulting from a reciprocal translocation of material with 
chromosome 9. The break on chromosome 22 occurs in the break-
point cluster region (BCR). The fragment from chromosome 9 that joins 
the BCR carries the abl oncogene, which forms a fusion gene with the 
remains of the BCR. This BCR ABL fusion gene codes for a 210 kDa 
protein with tyrosine kinase activity, which plays a causative role in the dis-
ease as an oncogene (p. 132), inuencing cellular proliferation, differenti-
ation and survival and is a target for very effective tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
(TKI) therapy (Fig. 25.29 and see Box 25.21). In some patients in whom 
conventional chromosomal analysis does not detect a Ph chromosome, 
the BCR-ABL gene product is detectable by molecular techniques.
Natural history
The disease has three phases:
 A chronic phase, in which the disease is responsive to treatment 
and is easily controlled, which used to last 3–5 years. With the intro-
duction of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) (Box 25.49),this phase 
has been prolonged to encompass a normal life expectancy in many 
patients.
 An accelerated phase (not always seen), in which disease control 
becomes more difcult.
 Blast crisis, in which the disease transforms into an acute leukaemia, 
either myeloblastic (70%) or lymphoblastic (30%), which is relatively 
refractory to treatment. This is the cause of death in the majority of 
patients; survival is therefore dictated by the timing of blast crisis, 
which cannot be predicted. Prior to TKI therapy (see below), approx-
imately 10% of patients per year would transform; the transformation 
rate has been reduced to 0.5%–2.5% per year with TKI therapy.
Clinical features
Symptoms at presentation may include lethargy, weight loss, abdominal 
discomfort, gout and sweating, but about 25% of patients are asymp-
tomatic at diagnosis. Splenomegaly is present in 90%; in about 10% 
the enlargement is massive, extending to over 15 cm below the cos-
tal margin. A friction rub may be heard in cases of splenic infarction. 
Hepatomegaly occurs in about 50%. Lymphadenopathy is unusual.
Investigations
FBC results are variable between patients. There is usually a normo-
cytic, normochromic anaemia. The leucocyte count can vary from 10 to 
600 × 109/L. In about one-third of patients, there is a very high platelet 
25.48 Outcome in adult acute leukaemia
Disease/risk
Risk factors
5-year overall 
survival
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
Good risk
Promyelocytic leukaemia t(15;17) 
t(8;21)  
inv(16) or t(16;16)
90%
65%
70%
Poor risk
Cytogenetic abnormalities
5, 7, del 
5q, abn(3q), complex (>5)
21%
Intermediate risk
AML with none of the above
48%
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
Poor risk
Philadelphia chromosome
High white count >100 × 109/L
Abnormal short arm of chromosome 
11 t(1;19)
20%
Standard
ALL with none of the above
37%

[[p1026]]
968    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
count, sometimes as high as 2000 × 109/L. In the blood lm, the full 
range of granulocyte precursors, from myeloblasts to mature neutro-
phils, is seen but the predominant cells are neutrophils and myelocytes 
(see Fig. 25.3). Myeloblasts usually constitute less than 10% of all white 
cells. There is often an absolute increase in eosinophils and basophils, 
and nucleated red cells are common. If the disease progresses through 
an accelerated phase, the percentage of more primitive cells increases. 
Blast transformation is characterised by a dramatic increase in the num-
ber of circulating blasts. In patients with thrombocytosis, very high plate-
let counts may persist during treatment, in both chronic and accelerated 
phases, but usually drop dramatically at blast transformation. Basophilia 
tends to increase as the disease progresses.
Bone marrow should be obtained to conrm the diagnosis and phase 
of disease by morphology, chromosome analysis to demonstrate the 
presence of the Ph chromosome, and RNA analysis to demonstrate the 
presence of the BCR-ABL gene product. Blood LDH is elevated and uric 
acid may be high due to increased cell breakdown.
Management
Chronic phase
There are now ve available tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for the treat-
ment of CML (see Box 25.49). These specically inhibit BCR-ABL tyros-
ine kinase activity. Imatinib, nilotinib and dasatinib are recommended 
as rst-line therapy in chronic phase CML; they usually normalise the 
blood count within a month and within 3–6 months produce complete 
cytogenetic response (disappearance of the Ph chromosome) in some 
90% of patients. Patients are monitored by 3-monthly real-time quanti-
tative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for BCR-ABL mRNA transcripts 
in blood. The aim is to reduce the BCR-ABL transcript levels by 3–5 logs 
from baseline and this is called major molecular response (MR3–MR5). 
A proportion of patients achieve a complete molecular response where 
the transcripts are not detectable by PCR. Up to 50% of patients with 
a complete or major molecular response may be able to discontinue 
TKI therapy. For those failing to respond or who lose their response and 
progress on rst-line therapy, options include switching to a different TKI 
(see Box 25.49). Some patients develop detectable mutations in the 
BCR-ABL gene, which causes resistance to one or more of the TKIs. 
The T315I mutation is particularly problematic as this causes wide-rang-
ing resistance, but the third-generation TKI ponatinib can be effective. 
Allogeneic HSCT (p. 945) is now reserved for patients who fail TKI ther-
apy. Hydroxycarbamide and interferon were previously used for control 
of disease. Hydroxycarbamide is still useful in palliative situations and 
interferon is used in women planning pregnancy.
Accelerated phase and blast crisis
Management is more difcult. For patients in accelerated phase, TKI 
therapy is indicated, most commonly with nilotinib or dasatinib. When 
blast transformation occurs, the type of blast cell should be determined. 
Response to appropriate acute leukaemia treatment (see Box 25.49) is 
better if disease is lymphoblastic rather than myeloblastic. Second- or 
third-generation TKIs such as dasatinib are used in combination with 
chemotherapy to try to achieve remission. In younger and tter patients 
BCR-ABL
ATP
ADP
Chronic myeloid
leukaemia
Substrate
Substrate
Tyrosine
Phosphate
Effector
A
BCR-ABL
TKI
Chronic myeloid
leukaemia
Substrate
Substrate
Tyrosine
Phosphate
Effector
B
Fig. 25.29 Mode of action in tyrosine kinase inhibition of BCR-ABL.
phosphorylates tyrosine residues on substrate molecules, and hence activates 
these molecules, by transferring phosphate groups from ATP. In turn these 
Tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment (imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, posatinib, bosutanib). 
These molecules bind to the tyrosine kinase domain of BCR-ABL and block the 
phosphorylation process and hence inhibit the downstream effector pathways, so 
reversing the process causing CML. (CML = chronic myeloid leukaemia)
25.49 Tyrosine kinase inhibition in chronic myeloid leukaemia
Agents
First-line
 Imatinib
 Nilotinib
 Dasatinib
Second-line
 Imatinib
 Nilotinib
 Dasatinib
 Bosutinib
 Ponatinib*
Outcomes
 90% achieve complete cytogenetic response
 Responses faster with nilotinib and dasatinib
 Median survival comparable to normal population
*For patients with T315I kinase domain mutations use ponatinib.

[[p1027]]
Haematological malignancies    969
an allogeneic HSCT is appropriate therapy if a return to chronic phase is 
achieved. Hydroxycarbamide can be an effective single agent and low-
dose cytarabine can also be used palliatively in older patients.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most common variety of leu-
kaemia, accounting for 30% of cases. The male-to-female ratio is 2:1 
and the median age at presentation is 65–70 years. CLL is characterised 
by the clonal expansion of small mature-looking B cells. Failure to apop-
tose because of overexpression of BCL-2 and in some cases mutations 
in TP53 leads to an ever-increasing accumulation of immuno-incom-
petent leukaemic B cells. This is to the detriment of immune function 
and normal bone marrow haematopoiesis. CLL cells are dependent on 
abnormal and persistent signalling through the B-cell receptor (BCR) 
pathway. Drugs that can inhibit these pathways are now available and 
show great promise (Fig. 25.30).
Clinical features
The onset is usually insidious. Indeed, in around 70% of patients the diag-
nosis is made incidentally on a routine FBC. Presenting problems may be 
anaemia, infections, painless lymphadenopathy, and systemic symptoms 
such as night sweats or weight loss; these more often occur later in the 
course of the disease or in disease that is advanced at presentation.
Investigations
The diagnosis is based on the peripheral blood ndings of a mature lym-
phocytosis (>5 × 109/L) with characteristic morphology and cell surface 
markers. Immunophenotyping reveals the lymphocytes to be monoclo-
nal B cells expressing the B-cell antigens CD19 and CD23, with either 
kappa or lambda immunoglobulin light chains and, characteristically, an 
aberrant T-cell antigen CD5. On ow cytometry, some people are shown 
to have circulating CLL cells at a level less than 5 × 109/L. This is known 
BCL-2
BTK
PI3K
PI3K inhibitor
Idelalisib
Anti-CD20 antibodies
Rituximab
Obinotuzumab
BCL-2 inhibitor
Venetoclax
Antibody
Mitochondrion
Survival/
growth
signal
BTK inhibitors
Ibrutinib
Acalabrutinib
CD20
Anti-apoptosis
BCR
Fig. 25.30 Targeted therapies for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). CLL 
cells are ‘addicted’ to stimulation of the B-cell receptor (BCR), which is surface 
immunoglobulin. This pathway can now be inhibited by drugs that block the 
downstream effector pathways of BCR involving BTK and PI3K molecules. CLL cells 
also depend on anti-apoptosis signals, especially increased BCL-2. Venetoclax inhibits 
BCL-2 and induces apoptosis. The anti-CD20 ‘naked’ antibodies are used with 
chemotherapy to enhance CLL cell killing. (BCR = B-cell receptor; BTK = Bruton’s 
tyrosine kinase; PI3K = phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase)
as monoclonal B lymphocytosis of uncertain signicance (MBL). Such 
patients progress to CLL at a rate of 1% per year.
Other useful investigations in CLL include a reticulocyte count and 
a direct Coombs test, as autoimmune haemolytic anaemia may occur 
(p. 958). Serum immunoglobulin levels should be estimated to establish 
the degree of hypogammaglobulinaemia, which is common and progres-
sive. Bone marrow examination by aspirate and trephine is not essential 
for the diagnosis of CLL, but may be helpful in difcult cases, for prog-
nosis (patients with diffuse marrow involvement have a poorer prognosis) 
and to monitor response to therapy. The main prognostic factor is stage 
of disease (Box 25.50); however, loss of chromosome 17p or mutation 
in the TP53 gene, which resides at this genetic locus, is a powerful prog-
nostic marker of poor outcome and predictor of response to therapy. A 
mutation in TP53 is present in <10% of patients at presentation, but rises 
to 30% of cases at relapse. This test should be performed in all patients 
prior to the initiation of therapy.
Management
No specic treatment is required for most clinical stage A patients, unless 
progression occurs. The patient should be offered clear information 
about CLL and be reassured about the indolent nature of the disease, as 
the diagnosis of leukaemia inevitably causes anxiety.
Treatment is required only if there is evidence of bone marrow failure, 
massive or progressive lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly, systemic 
symptoms such as weight loss or night sweats, a rapidly increasing lym-
phocyte count, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia or thrombocytopenia. 
Initial therapy for those requiring treatment (progressive stage A and 
stages B and C) is based on the age and tness of the patient and the 
TP53 mutation status. For patients who are under 70 years, t and TP53
mutation-negative, udarabine in combination with the alkylating agent 
cyclophosphamide and the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab 
(FCR) is standard care. For older, less t patients, rituximab is combined 
with gentler chemotherapy: bendamustine or oral chlorambucil. A more 
potent anti-CD20 antibody, obinutuzumab, produces better responses in 
combination with chlorambucil than rituximab.
Ibrutinib inhibits Bruton’s tyrosine kinase and idelalisib inhibits PI3 
kinase, both components of the BCR pathway (see Fig. 25.30). Ibrutinib 
and idelalisib are licensed for relapsed CLL, but are effective in TP53
mutated disease at all stages. Ibrutinib is rst-line standard of care in 
TP53-mutated CLL. CLL cells are resistant to apoptosis and express 
increased levels of anti-apoptotic proteins, including BCL-2. Venetoclax 
is an inhibitor of BCL-2 and is so effective at killing CLL cells that it 
frequently causes tumour lysis syndrome when rst administered. 
Venetoclax is licensed in combination with obinutuzumab for the treat-
ment of adult patients with previously untreated CLL and is attractive as 
it is given for a xed period of two years. Venetoclax can also be used for 
patients with TP53 mutation or who have failed previous therapy. Bone 
marrow failure or autoimmune cytopenias may respond to glucocorticoid 
treatment or rituximab.
Supportive care is increasingly required in progressive disease, 
such as transfusions for symptomatic anaemia or thrombocyto-
penia, prompt treatment of infections and, for some patients with 
25.50 Staging of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Clinical stage A (60% patients)
 No anaemia or thrombocytopenia and fewer than three areas of lymphoid 
enlargement
Clinical stage B (30% patients)
 No anaemia or thrombocytopenia, with three or more involved areas of lymphoid 
enlargement
Clinical stage C (10% patients)
 Anaemia and/or thrombocytopenia, regardless of the number of areas of 
lymphoid enlargement

[[p1028]]
970    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
hypogammaglobulinaemia, immunoglobulin replacement. Radiotherapy 
may be used for lymphadenopathy that is causing discomfort or local 
obstruction and for symptomatic splenomegaly. Splenectomy may be 
required to improve low blood counts due to autoimmune destruction or 
to hypersplenism and can relieve massive splenomegaly.
Prognosis
The majority of clinical stage A patients have a normal life expectancy, 
but patients with advanced CLL are more likely to die from their disease 
or infectious complications. Survival is inuenced by other prognostic 
features of the leukaemia, particularly TP53 mutation status, and tradi-
tionally whether patients can tolerate and respond to udarabine-based 
treatment. In those able to be treated with chemotherapy and rituximab, 
90% are alive 4 years later. The newer agents may replace and surpass 
immunochemotherapy as rst-line therapy. As in other haematological 
malignancies the presence of MRD is prognostically important. Ibrutinib 
and especially venetoclax are more likely to produce an MRD negative 
state. Rarely, CLL transforms to an aggressive high-grade lymphoma, 
called Richter’s transformation.
Prolymphocytic leukaemia
Prolymphocytic leukaemia (PLL) is a form of chronic leukaemia found 
mainly in males over the age of 60 years; 25% of cases are of T cell 
origin. There is typically massive splenomegaly with little lymphadenop-
athy and a very high leucocyte count, often in excess of 400 × 109/L. 
Effusions and involvement of skin are well recognized. The character-
istic cell is a large lymphocyte with a prominent nucleolus. Treatment 
is generally unsuccessful and the prognosis very poor. Leukapharesis, 
splenectomy and chemotherapy may be tried. The anti-CD52 antibody 
alemtuzumab, when given intravenously, has produced responses in 
some 90% of patients with T-PLL. Younger patients who respond to 
treatment may be considered for allogeneic HSCT.
Hairy cell leukaemia
This is a rare chronic B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder. The male-
to-female ratio is 6:1 and the median age at diagnosis is 50 years. 
Presenting symptoms are general ill health and recurrent infections. 
Splenomegaly occurs in 90% but lymph node enlargement is unusual.
Severe neutropenia, monocytopenia and the characteristic hairy cells 
in the blood and bone marrow are typical. These cells usually have a 
B-lymphocyte immunotype, but they also characteristically express 
CD25 and CD103. Recently, all patients with hairy cell leukaemia have 
been found to have a mutation in the BRAF gene and this may become 
a therapeutic target. Chemotherapy treatments such as cladribine and 
deoxycoformycin can produce long-lasting remissions.
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) constitute a group of clonal hae-
matopoietic disorders with the common features of ineffective blood 
cell production and a tendency to progress to AML. As such, they 
are pre-leukaemic and represent genetic steps in the development of 
leukaemia. These genetic abnormalities have been identied and are 
increasingly present with age as a manifestation of clonal haematopoi-
esis, occurring in about 20% of patients over the age of 80. Blood counts 
are normal (clonal haematopoiesis of indeterminate potential, CHIP), but 
there is an increased risk of developing MDS, AML or non-haematolog-
ical disease such as coronary artery disease. The common CHIP gene 
mutations include DNMT3a, TET2 and ASXL1
Some 80% of patients with MDS have one or more acquired 
mutations in specic genes and these are now routinely identied by 
 multi-gene next generation sequencing (NGS) using a so-called ‘myeloid 
gene panel’. Some are associated with specic phenotypes of MDS, e.g. 
80% of cases with ring sideroblasts have a mutation in the splice factor 
gene SF3B1. Others have prognostic signicance, e.g. TP53 or two or 
more mutations carry a poor prognosis. Chromosome analysis frequently 
reveals abnormalities, particularly of chromosome 5 or 7.
MDS presents with consequences of bone marrow failure (anaemia, 
recurrent infections or bleeding), usually in older people (median age at 
diagnosis is 73 years). The overall incidence is 4/100 000 in the popula-
tion, rising to more than 30/100 000 in the over-seventies. The blood lm 
is characterised by cytopenias and abnormal-looking (dysplastic) blood 
cells, including macrocytic red cells and hypogranular neutrophils with 
nuclear hyper- or hyposegmentation. The bone marrow is hypercellu-
lar, with dysplastic changes in at least 10% of cells of one or more cell 
lines. Blast cells may be increased but do not reach the 20% level that 
indicates acute leukaemia. The WHO classication of MDS is shown in 
Box 25.51
Prognosis
The natural history of MDS is progressive worsening of dysplasia leading 
to fatal bone marrow failure or progression to AML in 30% of cases. 
The time to progression varies (from months to years) with the subtype 
of MDS, being slowest in MDS with ring sideroblasts and single-line-
age dysplasia and most rapid in MDS with excess blasts. The revised 
International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS-R) predicts clinical out-
come based on karyotype and cytopenias in blood, as well as per-
centage of bone marrow blasts (Box 25.52). There are ve prognostic 
groups. The median survival for low-risk patients (IPSS-R very low and 
low) is 5–9 years, that for the intermediate group is 3 years and that for 
high-risk patients (IPSS-R high and very high) is 1–1.5 years.
Management
For the vast majority of patients who are in old age, the disease is incur-
able, and supportive care with red cell and platelet transfusions is the 
mainstay of treatment. A trial of erythropoiesis stimulating agents (ESA) 
is recommended in some patients with low-risk MDS (IPSS-R very low, 
low and intermediate) to improve haemoglobin. Responders have better 
quality of life, lower risk of progression to AML and possibly better overall 
survival. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) is recommended 
for short-term use in neutropenic patients with active infection. A rare 
subtype called MDS with isolated del(5q) responds well to the immu-
nomodulatory drug lenalidomide, with two-thirds of anaemic patients 
becoming transfusion-independent for up to 2 years. Allogeneic stem 
cell transplantation may afford a cure in patients with a good perfor-
mance status and is considered in high-risk patients (IPSS-R high and 
very high) and some low-risk patients. The hypomethylating agent azac-
itidine has improved survival by a median of 9 months compared to sup-
portive care or low intensity chemotherapy for high-risk patients, and is a 
recommended standard of care for those not eligible for transplantation.
25.51 WHO classication of myelodysplastic syndromes 
(MDS)
Disease
Bone marrow ndings
MDS with single-lineage 
dysplasia
<5% blasts and single-lineage dysplasia 
only
MDS with ring  
sideroblasts (MDS-RS)
>15% ring sideroblasts, or 6%–14%  
and presence of SF3B1 gene mutation
MDS with multilineage  
dysplasia
<5% blasts and dysplasia in two or more 
lineages
MDS with excess blasts
5%–19% blasts
MDS with isolated del(5q)
Myelodysplastic syndrome associated  
with a del(5q) cytogenetic abnormality
<5% blasts
Often normal or increased blood platelet 
count
MDS, unclassiable
None of the above or inadequate material

[[p1029]]
Haematological malignancies    971
Lymphomas
These neoplasms arise from lymphoid tissues and are diagnosed from 
the pathological ndings on biopsy as Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lym-
phoma. The majority are of B-cell origin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are 
classied as low- or high-grade tumours on the basis of their proliferation 
rate. The normal architecture of the lymph node is outlined in Fig. 25.31
 High-grade tumours divide rapidly, are typically present for a matter 
of weeks before diagnosis, and may be life-threatening with high risk 
of extranodal involvement.
 Low-grade tumours divide slowly, may be present for many months 
before diagnosis, and typically behave in an indolent fashion.
Hodgkin lymphoma
The histological hallmark of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is the presence of 
Reed–Sternberg cells: large, malignant lymphoid cells of B-cell origin 
(Fig. 25.32). They are often present only in small numbers, but are sur-
rounded by large numbers of reactive non-malignant T cells, plasma cells 
and granulocytes, including eosinophils.
The epidemiology of HL is shown in Box 25.53 and its histological 
WHO classication in Box 25.54
Nodular lymphocyte-predominant HL is slow-growing, localised and 
rarely fatal. It has biological features, such as CD20-positive Hodgkin 
cells, and clinical features that make it more akin to a low-grade B-cell 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Classical HL is divided into four histological 
subtypes from the appearance of the Reed–Sternberg cells and sur-
rounding reactive cells. The nodular sclerosing type is more common in 
young patients and in women. Mixed cellularity is more common in older 
patients. Lymphocyte-rich HL usually presents in men. Lymphocyte-
depleted HL is rare and probably represents large-cell or anaplastic 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Clinical features
There is painless, rubbery lymphadenopathy, usually in the neck or supra-
clavicular fossae; the lymph nodes may uctuate in size. Young patients 
with nodular sclerosing disease may have large mediastinal masses that 
are surprisingly asymptomatic, but may cause dry cough and some 
25.52 Revised International Prognostic Scoring 
System and outcomes in myelodysplasia*
Risk category
Overall  
score
Median  
survival  
(years)
25% progression 
to acute myeloid 
leukaemia (years)
Very low
≤1.5
8.8
Not reached
Low
>1.5–3
5.3
10.8
Intermediate
>3–4.5
3.0
3.2
High
>4.5–6
1.6
1.4
Very high
>6
0.8
0.73
*The IPSS-R is based on three prognostic factors: the blast percentage in bone marrow; 
karyotype; and number and degree of blood cytopenias. A score is derived from which patients 
can be stratied into ve risk categories for survival and leukaemic transformation.
Germinal centre
B-cell follicle
Mantle zone
Marginal zone
Afferent
lymph
Paracortex
Cortex
Efferent lymph
Medulla
Blood vessels
Capsule
Fig. 25.31 Schema of lymph node architecture. Different lymphocyte populations 
reside in different areas of the node: B cells in the follicles, T cells in the paracortex 
and plasma cells in the medulla. B cells are selected for antigen in the follicle centre. 
Errors during this process result in B-cell lymphomas, which are by far the most 
common type.
Fig. 25.32 Hodgkin lymphoma. In the centre of this lymph node biopsy is a large 
typical Reed–Sternberg cell with two nuclei containing a prominent eosinophilic 
nucleolus.
25.53 Epidemiology and aetiology of Hodgkin lymphoma
Incidence
 Approximately 4 new cases/100 000 population/year
Sex ratio
 Slight male excess (1.5:1)
Age
 Median age 31 years; rst peak at 20–35 years and second at 50–70 years
Aetiology
 Unknown
 More common in patients from well-educated backgrounds and small families
 Three times more likely with a past history of infectious mononucleosis but no 
denitive causal link to Epstein–Barr virus infection proven
25.54 WHO pathological classication of Hodgkin 
lymphoma (HL)
Type
Histology classication
Proportion of HL
Nodular lymphocyte-
predominant HL
5%
Classical HL
Nodular sclerosing
Mixed cellularity
Lymphocyte-rich
Lymphocyte-depleted
70%
20%
5%
Rare

[[p1030]]
972    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
breathlessness. Isolated subdiaphragmatic nodes occur in fewer than 
10% at diagnosis. Hepatosplenomegaly may be present, but does not 
always indicate disease in those organs. Spread is contiguous from one 
node to the next, and extranodal disease, such as bone, brain or skin 
involvement, is rare. Systemic symptoms include so-called ‘B symp-
toms’ of drenching night sweats, fever and loss of 10% body weight. 
Other symptoms can include pruritis and rarely, but dramtically, alco-
hol-induced pain within lymph nodes.
Investigations
Treatment of HL depends on the stage at presentation; investigations 
therefore aim not only to diagnose lymphoma, but also to determine the 
extent of disease (Box 25.55).
 FBC may be normal. If a normochromic, normocytic anaemia or 
lymphopenia is present, this is a poor prognostic factor, particularly 
in advanced disease. An eosinophilia, neutrophilia or thrombocytosis 
may be present.
 ESR may be raised and is an adverse prognostic factor.
 Renal function tests are required to ensure function is normal prior to 
treatment.
 Liver function may be abnormal in the absence of disease or may 
reect hepatic inltration. An obstructive pattern may be caused by 
nodes at the porta hepatis.
 LDH may be raised and is an adverse prognostic factor.
 Chest X-ray may show a mediastinal mass.
 CT scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis permits staging. Bulky 
disease (>10 cm in a single node mass) is an adverse prognostic 
feature.
 Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) scanning identies 
nodes involved with HL that are 18uorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid 
and this allows more accurate staging and monitoring of response 
(Fig. 25.33).
 Lymph node biopsy may be undertaken surgically or by percutane-
ous needle biopsy under radiological guidance (Fig. 25.34).
Management
Given the high cure rate and excellent prognosis of a majority of young 
and middle-aged patients with HL, the aim is to maximize cure rates while 
minimising long-term treatment-related toxicity. Treatment approaches 
involve dening patients as early-stage disease (stages IA and IIA) or 
advanced stage disease (IB, IIB, III and IV). The ABVD regimen (doxo-
rubicin (adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine) is widely 
A
B
C
Fig. 25.33 Positron emission tomography (PET) scans in Hodgkin lymphoma, 
demonstrating response to treatment.
Hodgkin lymphoma at presentation, showing a left-sided anterior–superior mediastinal 
PET-CT image showing no FDG uptake (PET negativity), representing complete 
response at the end of treatment.
25.55 Clinical stages of Hodgkin lymphoma (Ann Arbor 
classication)
Stage
Denition
I
Involvement of a single lymph node region (I) or extralymphatic*
site (IE)
II
Involvement of two or more lymph node regions (II) or an 
extralymphatic site and lymph node regions on the same side of 
(above or below) the diaphragm (IIE)
III
Involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of the 
diaphragm with (IIIE) or without (III) localised extralymphatic 
involvement or involvement of the spleen (IIIs), or both (IIISE)
IV
Diffuse involvement of one or more extralymphatic tissues,  
e.g. liver or bone marrow
Each stage is subclassied
A
No systemic symptoms
B
Weight loss >10%, drenching sweats, fever
*The lymphatic structures are dened as the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, Waldeyer’s ring, 
appendix and Peyer’s patches.
used in the UK, while the more intensive BEACOPP regimen (bleomy-
cin, etoposide, doxorubicin (adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, vincristine 
(oncovin), procarbazine, prednisolone) is a more effective alternative, 
though with a greater risk of side-effects including infertility and treat-
ment-related MDS and AML.
Standard therapy for early-stage patients without additional risk fac-
tors, such as bulk disease or high ESR, is two cycles of ABVD com-
bined with 20 Gy radiotherapy to the involved sites of disease. Standard 
therapy for early-stage patients with additional risk factors is four cycles 
of ABVD combined with 30 Gy radiotherapy. Careful planning of radio-
therapy is required to limit the doses delivered to normal tissues and 
new planning techniques continue to improve targeting of radiotherapy. 
Nevertheless, the long-term risks of second cancers and heart and lung 
disease within the radiation elds remain a concern, especially for young 
people with a high cure rate and potentially decades of life ahead of 
them. Early-stage patients who have a negative FDG PET-CT scan after 

[[p1031]]
Haematological malignancies    973
three or four cycles of combination chemotherapy can safely omit radio-
therapy. Young women receiving breast irradiation during the treatment 
of chest disease have an increased risk of breast cancer and should par-
ticipate in a breast screening programme. Patients continuing to smoke 
after lung irradiation are at particular risk of future lung cancer.
ABVD chemotherapy can cause cardiac and pulmonary toxicity, due 
to doxorubicin and bleomycin, respectively. The incidence of infertility 
and secondary myelodysplasia/AML is low with this regimen but higher 
with BEACOPP.
Patients with advanced-stage disease are most commonly managed 
with chemotherapy alone. Standard treatment in the UK is 6–8 cycles of 
ABVD, followed by an assessment of response. A negative FDG PET-CT 
after two cycles of ABVD (interim PET-2 response) predicts a very good 
outcome from continuing with up to six cycles of ABVD. Indeed, the 
same outcome can be achieved by omitting the bleomycin from the last 
four cycles and using just AVD, thus reducing the risk of lung toxicity. 
Even more impressive results of >90% 5-year progression-free survival 
can be achieved with just four cycles of BEACOPP if the interim PET-2 
scan is negative. Patients who have a positive FDGPET-CT after two 
cycles, however, have a very high relapse risk if they continue with ABVD, 
with only 13% being relapse-free at 2 years. Switching to BEACOPP 
from ABVD or continuing with BEACOPP for six cycles in these patients 
improves the relapse-free survival to approximately 65%–90%.
Patients with relapsed disease that responds to salvage chemother-
apy and ideally becomes FDG PET-CT-negative should be considered for 
autologous stem cell transplantation (p. 945). Those with resistant dis-
ease might benet from an allogeneic stem cell transplant. Brentuximab 
vedotin is an antibody–drug conjugate directed against CD30 on the 
Reed–Sternberg cell surface. This antibody delivers the antimitotic toxin 
monomethyl auristatin E to the Hodgkin cells and, as a single agent, can 
produce good responses in patients who have failed, or are not suita-
ble for, an autologous transplant and can be a ‘bridge’ to an allogeneic 
transplant. Reed–Sternberg cells over-express the cell surface protein 
Programme Death Ligand 1 (PDL-1). This engages with Programmed 
Death Protein 1 (PD-1) on T cells and leads to T-cell ‘exhaustion’ (see 
Fig. 7.12). This ‘immune checkpoint’ is an important survival mechanism 
for Reed–Sternberg cells. The immunotherapy drugs pembrolizumab 
and nivolumab can inhibit this ‘checkpoint’ in the immune response and 
allow T-cell killing of Reed–Sternberg cells. Both drugs are available for 
patients who have failed multiple lines of treatment and can produce 
further remissions.
Prognosis
Over 90% of patients with early-stage HL achieve complete remission 
when treated with chemotherapy, followed by involved eld radiotherapy, 
and the great majority are cured. The major challenge is how to reduce 
treatment intensity, and hence long-term toxicity, without reducing the 
excellent cure rates in this group. Omitting radiotherapy in the majority of 
FDG PET-CT-negative patients is one major step forward in this regard.
Historically, between 50% and 70% of those with advanced-stage HL 
were cured. The Hasenclever index (Box 25.56) can be helpful in assign-
ing approximate chances of cure when discussing treatment plans with 
patients. More recent data using FDG PET-CT to direct therapy suggests 
that long-term survival is improving to beyond 80%. Patients who fail to 
respond to initial chemotherapy or relapse within a year of initial therapy 
have a poor prognosis, but some may achieve long-term survival after 
autologous HSCT. Patients relapsing after 1 year may obtain long-term 
survival with further chemotherapy alone, but t patients frequently pro-
ceed to autologous HSCT.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) represents a monoclonal proliferation of 
lymphoid cells of B-cell (90%) or T-cell (10%) origin. The incidence of 
these tumours increases with age, to 62.8/million population per annum 
at age 75 years, and the overall rate is increasing at about 3% per year.
The epidemiology of NHL is shown in Box 25.57. Previous classica-
tions were based principally on histological appearances. The current 
WHO classication straties according to cell lineage (T or B cells) and 
incorporates clinical features, histology, genetic abnormalities and con-
cepts related to the biology of the lymphoma. Clinically, the most impor-
tant factor is grade, which is a reection of proliferation rate. High-grade 
NHL has high proliferation rates, rapidly produces symptoms, is fatal if 
untreated, but is potentially curable. Low-grade NHL has low prolifera-
tion rates, may be asymptomatic for many months or even years before 
presentation, runs an indolent course, but is frequently disseminated at 
diagnosis and not curable by conventional therapy. Of all cases of NHL in 
the developed world, over 50% are either diffuse large B-cell NHL (high-
grade) or follicular NHL (low-grade) (Fig. 25.35). Other forms of NHL, 
including Burkitt lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas and T-cell lymphomas, are individu-
ally less common.
Clinical features
Unlike Hodgkin lymphoma, NHL is often widely disseminated at pres-
entation, including in extranodal sites. Patients present with lymph node 
enlargement (Fig. 25.36), which may be associated with systemic upset: 
weight loss, sweats, fever and itching. Hepatosplenomegaly may be 
present. Sites of extranodal involvement include the bone marrow, gut, 
thyroid, lung, skin, testis, brain and, more rarely, bone. Bone marrow 
involvement is more common in low-grade (50%–60%) than high-grade 
Biopsy
needle
Enlarged
lymph nodes
Fig. 25.34 CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of retroperitoneal nodes 
involved by lymphoma.
25.56 The Hasenclever prognostic index for advanced Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Score 1 for each of the following risk factors present at diagnosis:
 Age >45 years
 Male gender
 Serum albumin <40 g/L
 Hb <105 g/L
 Stage IV disease
 White blood cell count >15 × 109/L
 Lymphopenia <0.6 × 109/L
Score
5-year rate of freedom  
from progression (%)
5-year rate of overall 
survival (%)
0–1
79
90
>2
60
74
>3
55
70
>4
47
59

[[p1032]]
974    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Investigations
These are as for HL, but in addition the following should be performed:
 Bone marrow aspiration and trephine to identify bone marrow 
involvement.
 Immunophenotyping of surface antigens to distinguish T-cell from 
B-cell tumours. This may be done on blood, marrow or nodal 
material.
 Cytogenetic analysis to detect chromosomal translocations, 
particularly rearrangements of the oncogene c-MYC and 
molecular testing for T-cell receptor or immunoglobulin gene 
rearrangements.
 Immunoglobulin determination. Some lymphomas are associated 
with IgG or IgM paraproteins, which serve as markers for treatment 
response.
 Measurement of urate levels. Some very aggressive high-grade 
NHLs are associated with very high urate levels, which can precip-
itate renal failure when treatment is started as a consequence of 
tumour lysis syndrome.
 HIV testing. HIV is a risk factor for some lymphomas and affects 
treatment decisions.
 Hepatitis B and C testing. This should be done prior to therapy with 
rituximab.
Management
Low-grade NHL
The majority of patients (80%) present with advanced stage disease 
and will run a relapsing and remitting course over several years. Overall 
survival has improved in recent years with more treatment options. 
Asymptomatic patients may not require therapy and are managed by 
‘watching and waiting’. Indications for treatment include marked sys-
temic symptoms, lymphadenopathy causing discomfort or disgurement, 
25.57 Epidemiology and aetiology of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Incidence
 12 new cases/100 000 people/year
Sex ratio
 Slight male excess
Age
 Median age 65–70 years
Aetiology
 No single causative abnormality described
 Lymphoma is a late manifestation of HIV infection (Ch. 14)
 Specic lymphoma types are associated with viruses: e.g. Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV) with post-transplant NHL, human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) with a primary 
effusion lymphoma, and human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) with adult 
T-cell leukaemia lymphoma
 Gastric lymphoma can be associated with Helicobacter pylori infection
 Some lymphomas are associated with specic chromosomal translocations:
The t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma results in the dysregulated expression of 
the BCL-2 gene product, which inhibits apoptotic cell death
The t(8;14) found in Burkitt lymphoma and the t(11;14) in mantle cell 
lymphoma alter function of c-myc and cyclin D1, respectively, resulting in 
malignant proliferation
Large B-cell lymphomas with rearrangements of c-myc with BCL-2 and/or 
BCL-6 (double and triple hit lymphomas)
 Lymphoma occurs in congenital immunodeciency states and in 
immunosuppressed patients after organ transplantation
Fig. 25.36 Bulky axillary lymphadenopathy with distended supercial veins in 
a patient presenting with high-grade lymphoma. From Howard MR, Hamilton PJ. 
Haematology: An illustrated colour text, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Elsevier Ltd; 2013
A
B
Fig. 25.35 Histology of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
(Low-grade) follicular or nodular 
(10%) disease. Other extranodal sites tend to be more common in high-
grade disease, particularly CNS involvement. Compression syndromes 
may occur, including gut obstruction, ascites, superior vena cava 
obstruction and spinal cord compression.
The same staging system (see Box 25.55) is used for both HL and 
NHL, but NHL is more likely to be stage III or IV at presentation.

[[p1033]]
Haematological malignancies    975
bone marrow failure or compression syndromes. In follicular lymphoma, 
the options are:
 Radiotherapy. This can be used for localised stage I disease, which 
is rare. FDG PET-CT-conrmed stage I disease has a 70% cure rate 
with radiotherapy.
 Chemotherapy. Most patients will respond to oral therapy with chlor-
ambucil, which is well tolerated, but not curative and is reserved 
nowadays for older/frail patients. More intensive intravenous chemo-
therapy in younger patients produces better quality of life through 
long periods of remission.
 Monoclonal antibody therapy. Humanised monoclonal antibodies 
(‘biologic therapy’; p. 945) can be used to target surface antigens 
on tumour cells and to induce tumour cell apoptosis directly. The 
anti-CD20 antibody rituximab has been shown to induce durable 
clinical responses in up to 60% of patients when given alone, and 
acts synergistically when given with chemotherapy. Rituximab (R) in 
combination with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone 
(R-CVP), cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubicin), 
vincristine (oncovin), prednisolone (R-CHOP) or bendamustine 
(R-bendamustine) is commonly used as rst-line therapy. Two 
years of maintenance therapy with single-agent rituximab, following 
achievement of rst or second response, especially if this is only a 
partial response, delays the time to next treatment. As yet, however, 
rituximab maintenance has not shown a survival benet. New and 
more potent monoclonal antibodies are in development; a recent 
trial of obinutuzumab combined with chemotherapy showed longer 
progression-free survival compared to similar chemotherapy with 
rituximab.
 Targeted therapy. The PI3 kinase inhibitor idelalisib is approved for 
relapsed follicular lymphoma and ibrutinib (Fig. 25.30) is approved 
for relapsed mantle cell lymphoma (a poor-prognosis lymphoma 
with low-grade histology, but aggressive clinical behaviour) and for 
relapsed Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinaemia (also known as lym-
phoplasmacytic lymphoma, see below. Newer targeted therapies 
are likely to become more widely used in low-grade lymphomas in 
the near future.
 Transplantation. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous HSCT 
can produce long remissions in patients with relapsed disease. 
Decisions on the timing of such treatment are complex in the 
context of rituximab maintenance and newer targeted therapies. 
However, younger patients with short rst or second remissions or 
who relapse during rituximab maintenance should be considered.
High-grade NHL
Patients with diffuse large B-cell NHL need treatment at initial presentation:
 Chemotherapy. The majority (>90%) are treated with intravenous 
combination chemotherapy, typically with the CHOP regimen 
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubicin), vincristine 
(oncovin) and prednisolone).
 Monoclonal antibody therapy. When combined with CHOP chemo-
therapy, rituximab (R) increases the complete response rates and 
improves overall survival. R-CHOP, 4–6 cycles, is currently recom-
mended as rst-line therapy for all relatively t patients. Dose reduc-
tion (R-mini CHOP) is preferable in those over 80 years of age and 
replacement of doxorubicin with gemcitibine (R-GCVP) is considered 
in those with impaired cardiac function.
 Radiotherapy. Stage I patients without bulky disease are treated with 
four cycles of CHOP or R-CHOP, followed by involved site radio-
therapy. Radiotherapy is also indicated for a residual localised site 
of bulk disease after chemotherapy and for spinal cord and other 
compression syndromes.
 HSCT. Autologous HSCT (p. 945) benets patients with relapsed 
disease that is sensitive to salvage immunochemotherapy. As with 
HL, achieving a negative FDG PTC-CT negativity to autologous 
transplantation is desirable.
 CAR-T-cell therapy (Fig. 25.17) is licensed for certain patients with 
multiply relapsed DLBL or high-grade transformation of follicular 
lymphoma and can salvage patients from a desparate situation.
Prognosis
Low-grade NHL runs an indolent remitting and relapsing course, with an 
overall median survival of 12 years. Transformation to a high-grade NHL 
occurs in 3% per annum and is associated with poor survival.
In diffuse large B-cell NHL treated with R-CHOP, some 75% of patients 
overall respond initially to therapy and 50% will have disease-free survival 
at 5 years. The prognosis for patients with high grade NHL is further 
rened according to the international prognostic index (IPI). For high-
grade NHL, 5-year survival ranges from over 75% in those with low-
risk scores (age <60 years, stage I or II, one or fewer extranodal sites, 
normal LDH and good performance status) to 25% in those with high-
risk scores (increasing age, advanced stage, concomitant disease and 
a raised LDH).
Rearrangements of the c-MYC oncogene, either alone (more com-
monly Burkitt lymphoma) or with rearrangements of BCL-2 and/or BCL-6
(double or triple hit high-grade lymphomas) are recognised entities in 
WHO classication with poor prognoses and are increasingly treated 
more aggressively.
Relapse is associated with a poor response to further chemotherapy 
(<10% 5-year survival), but in patients under 65 years HSCT improves 
survival.
Paraproteinaemias
A gammopathy refers to over-production of one or more classes of 
immunoglobulin. It may be polyclonal in association with acute or chronic 
inammation, such as infection including HIV, sarcoidosis, autoimmune 
disorders or some malignancies. Alternatively, a monoclonal increase in 
a single immunoglobulin class may occur in association with normal or 
reduced levels of the other immunoglobulins. Such monoclonal proteins 
(also called M-proteins, paraproteins or monoclonal gammopathies) 
occur as a feature of myeloma, solitary plasmacytomas, lymphoma and 
amyloidosis, in connective tissue disease such as rheumatoid arthritis or 
polymyalgia rheumatica, in infection such as HIV and in solid tumours. In 
addition, they may be present with no underlying disease. Gammopathies 
are detected by plasma immunoelectrophoresis.
Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain signicance
In monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain signicance (MGUS, also 
known as benign monoclonal gammopathy), a paraprotein is present 
in the blood but there are no other features of myeloma, Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia (see below), lymphoma or related disease. It is a 
common condition associated with increasing age; a paraprotein can 
be found in 1% of the population aged over 50 years, increasing to 5% 
over 80 years.
Clinical features and investigations
Patients are usually asymptomatic and the paraprotein is found on blood 
testing for other reasons. The routine blood count and biochemistry are 
normal, the paraprotein is usually present in small amounts with no asso-
ciated immune paresis and there are no lytic bone lesions. The bone 
marrow may have increased plasma cells, but these usually constitute 
less than 10% of nucleated cells.
Prognosis
After follow-up of 20 years, only one-quarter of cases will progress to 
myeloma or a related disorder (i.e. around 1% per annum). There is no 
certain way of predicting progression in an individual patient. However, 
an abnormal ratio of kappa to lambda light chains (serum free light chain 
ratio, SFLR) increases the risk of progression. Patients with an abnormal 
ratio should be monitored for progression on an annual basis.

[[p1034]]
976    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia
This is a low-grade lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma associated with an 
IgM paraprotein, causing clinical features of hyperviscosity syndrome. It 
is a rare tumour occurring in old age and more commonly affects males.
Patients classically present with features of hyperviscosity, such as 
nosebleeds, bruising, delirium and visual disturbance. However, pres-
entation is more commonly with anaemia, systemic symptoms, sple-
nomegaly or lymphadenopathy, or may be asymptomatic with an IgM 
paraprotein detected on routine screening. Patients are found on inves-
tigation to have an IgM paraprotein associated with a raised plasma vis-
cosity. The bone marrow has a characteristic appearance, with inltration 
of lymphoid cells, plasma cells and sometimes prominent mast cells. A 
high proportion of patients have a mutation in the MYD88 gene.
Management
If patients show symptoms of hyperviscosity and anaemia, plasmapher-
esis is required to remove IgM and make blood transfusion possible. 
Chemotherapy with alkylating agents, such as chlorambucil, has histor-
ically been the mainstay of treatment, controlling disease in over 50%. 
Fludarabine may be more effective in this disease, but has more side-
effects. Rituximab in combination with chemotherapy, e.g bendamustine, 
is now most commonly used; ibrutinib is very effective and has recently 
been licensed for use. Rituximab alone can cause a rapid release of IgM 
and increase in viscosity. The median survival is 5 years.
Multiple myeloma
This is a malignant proliferation of plasma cells. Normal plasma cells are 
derived from B cells and produce immunoglobulins that contain heavy 
and light chains. Normal immunoglobulins are polyclonal, which means 
that a variety of heavy chains are produced and each may be of kappa 
or lambda light chain type (Ch. 4). In myeloma, plasma cells produce 
immunoglobulin of a single heavy and light chain, a monoclonal protein 
commonly referred to as a paraprotein. In most cases an excess of light 
chain is produced and in some cases only light chain is produced; this 
appears in the urine as Bence Jones proteinuria and can be measured in 
the urine or serum as free light chain. The frequency of different isotypes 
of monoclonal protein in myeloma is shown in Box 25.58
Although a small number of malignant plasma cells are present in the 
circulation, the majority are present in the bone marrow. The malignant 
plasma cells produce cytokines, which stimulate osteoclasts and result 
in net bone reabsorption. The resulting lytic lesions cause bone pain, 
fractures and hypercalcaemia. Marrow involvement can result in anaemia 
or pancytopenia.
Clinical features and investigations
The incidence of myeloma is 4/100 000 new cases per annum, with a 
male-to-female ratio of 2:1. The median age at diagnosis is 60–70 years 
and the disease is more common in people of African Caribbean origin. 
The clinical features are demonstrated in Fig. 25.37
Diagnosis of myeloma requires two of the following criteria to be 
fullled:
 increased malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow
 serum and/or urinary M-protein
 skeletal lytic lesions.
Bone marrow aspiration, plasma and urine electrophoresis, and a skel-
etal survey are thus required; the latter is classically a series of plain X-rays, 
but more often now low-dose CT scan or whole-body MRI is performed. 
Normal immunoglobulin levels, i.e. the absence of immunoparesis, should 
cast doubt on the diagnosis. Paraproteinaemia can cause an elevated 
ESR, but this is a non-specic test; only approximately 5% of patients 
with a persistently elevated ESR above 100 mm/hr have underlying mye-
loma. Serum albumin and β2-microglobulin are measured for prognostic 
purposes, along with a cytogenetic analysis of the tumour cells.
Management
If patients are asymptomatic with no evidence of end-organ damage 
(e.g. to kidneys, bone marrow or bone), treatment may not be required. 
So-called asymptomatic myeloma should be monitored closely for the 
development of end-organ damage.
Immediate support
 High uid intake to treat renal impairment and hypercalcaemia  
(p. 676)
 Analgesia for bone pain
 Bisphosphonates for hypercalcaemia and to delay other skeletal- 
related events (p. 1051)
 Allopurinol to prevent urate nephropathy
 Plasmapheresis, if necessary, for hyperviscosity
 Antibiotic prophylaxis with levooxacin during the rst 3 months of 
therapy.
Chemotherapy with or without HSCT
Patients are initially assessed for their tness and eligibility for autolo-
gous HSCT and treatment pathways vary accordingly. Myeloma therapy 
has improved with the addition of novel agents, initially the immunomod-
ulatory drug thalidomide and more recently the proteasome inhibitors 
bortezomib and carlzomib, the second- and third-generation immuno-
modulatory drugs lenalidomide and pomalidomide and the anti-myeloma 
antibodies daratumumab and isatuximab, which binds to CD 38 on the 
malignant plasma cell (Fig. 25.38).
For rst-line therapy in older patients who are unsuitable for transplant, 
thalidomide combined with the alkylating agent melphalan and predni-
solone (MPT) has increased the median overall survival to more than 
4 years. Lenalidomide is approved rst-line treatment for patients not 
eligible for transplantation and who are intolerant of, or unsuitable for, 
thalidomide. Thalidomide and lenalidomide both have anti-angiogenic 
effects against tumour blood vessels and immunomodulatory effects. 
Both can cause somnolence, constipation, peripheral neuropathy and 
thrombosis, though lenalidomide has a better side-effect prole. It is vital 
that females of child-bearing age use adequate contraception, as thalid-
omide and lenalidomide are teratogenic. Treatment is administered until 
paraprotein levels have stopped falling. This is termed ‘plateau phase’ 
and can last for weeks or years.
In younger, tter patients considered eligible for transplant, stand-
ard treatment includes rst-line therapies, such as cyclophosphamide, 
thalidomide and dexamethasone (CTD) or bortezomib (Velcade), tha-
lidomide and dexamethasone (VTD) to maximum response, and then 
autologous HSCT. This improves quality of life and prolongs survival, 
but does not cure myeloma. In all patients who have achieved maximal 
response, lenalidomide maintenance has been shown to prolong the 
response.
When myeloma progresses, treatment is given to induce a further pla-
teau phase. In the UK, the proteosome inhibitor bortezomib and lenalid-
omide have been used as second- and third-line therapy, as appropriate. 
However, as they have been used more frequently in the rst or sec-
ond line with prognostic benet, subsequent relapses are more difcult 
to treat. Pomalidomide, carlzomib and daratumumab show promise 
in relapsed/refractory disease and are increasingly used. Patients who 
respond may benet from a second autologous HSCT.
25.58 Classication of multiple myeloma
Type of monoclonal (M)-protein
Relative frequency (%)
IgG
55
IgA
21
Light chain only
22
Others (D, E, non-secretory)
2

[[p1035]]
Haematological malignancies    977
Spinal cord compression
Bony collapse
Extradural mass
Amyloid
‘Panda’ eyes
Nephrotic syndrome
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Abnormal blood tests
Bone pain/fracture
Retinal bleeds
Bruising
Heart failure
Cerebral ischaemia
Engorged retinal veins
in hyperviscosity
Hyperviscosity
Renal failure due to:
Paraprotein deposition
Hypercalcaemia
Infection
NSAIDs
Amyloid
Lytic lesions
Lytic lesions in
skull
Anaemia
Normo- or macrocytic
Pancytopenia
Raised ESR
Bone marrow
Plasmacytosis > 10%
Bence Jones proteinuria
Serum free light chains
Paraproteinaemia
Immune paresis
Plasma cells in bone marrow
Lytic lesion eroding
right superior pubic
ramus and acetabulum
Hypercalcaemia
Renal impairment
Fig. 25.37 Clinical and laboratory features of multiple myeloma. (ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
Chemotherapy
Steroids
Melphalan
Anthracyclins
Platinum-based drugs
Myeloma
plasma cell
Immune modulators (IMIDs)
Thalidomide
Lenalidomide
Pomalidomide
Targeted antibodies/
small molecules
Anti-CD38: daratumumab,
  isatuximab
Anti-SLAMF7: elotuzumab
Histone deacetylase inhibitor:
  panobinostat
Proteosome inhibitors
Bortizomib
Carfilzomib
Ixazomib
Fig. 25.38 Myeloma therapy. The four main groups of drugs that may be used in 
the management of myeloma. (IMIDs = immunomodulatory imide drugs)
Radiotherapy
This is effective for localised bone pain not responding to simple anal-
gesia and for pathological fractures. It is also useful for the emer-
gency treatment of spinal cord compression complicating extradural 
plasmacytomas.
Bisphosphonates
Long-term bisphosphonate therapy reduces bone pain and skeletal 
events. These drugs protect bone and may cause apoptosis of malig-
nant plasma cells. There is evidence that intravenous zoledronate in 
combination with anti-myeloma therapy confers a survival advantage 
over oral bisphosphonates. Osteonecrosis of the jaw may be associated 
with long-term use or poor oral hygiene and gum sepsis; regular dental 
review, including a check before starting therapy, is therefore important.
Prognosis
The international staging system (ISS) identies poor prognostic features, 
including a high β2-microglobulin and low albumin at diagnosis (ISS stage 
3, median survival 29 months). Those with a normal albumin and a low 
β2-microglobulin (ISS stage 1) have a median survival of 62 months. 
Increasingly, cytogenetic analysis is used to identify poor-risk patients, e.g. 
t(4;14), del(17/17p), t(14;16), t(14;20), non-hyperdiploidy and gain(1q). 
Use of autologous HSCT and advances in drug therapy with the newer 
agents have increased survival. Over one-third of patients are now surviv-
ing for 5 years, compared with only one-quarter 10 years ago. The outlook 
may improve further with new drugs and combinations of treatments.
Some general considerations regarding haematological malignancy in 
old age are summarised in Box 25.59.
Solitary plasmacytomas
These are rare presentations of plasma cell malignancy in which an iso-
lated tumour occurs in soft tissues or bone. Two-thirds of cases occur in 
soft tissues and are commoly centred around the upper aero-digestive 
tract, but can occur anywhere. Others present as bone tumours, 

[[p1036]]
978    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
commonly in long bones and vertebrae. Patients present with pain, pal-
pable lumps or compression symptoms, such as difculty swallowing, 
shortness of breath or cord compression.
Diagnosis involves tissue biopsy, which demonstrates a solid tumour 
of monoclonal plasma cells, and staging to exclude disseminated multi-
ple myeloma. Some cases are associated with a low-level paraprotein, 
but other features of myeloma are absent.
Primary treatment is usually with radiotherapy. This can be curative, 
especially in soft tissue plasmacytomas, which less frequently progress 
to myeloma. Plasmacytomas of bone have a high rate of progression to 
myeloma and must be monitored carefully or treated as myeloma from 
the outset. Rarely myeloma presents as multiple plasmacytomas of bone.
Histiocytic disorders
These are a group of rare tissue inltrating conditions affecting children 
and less commonly adults. Histiocytes are immune cells found in vari-
ous tissues throughout the body whose functions include phagocytosis 
(tissue macrophages), activation of the immune system and promot-
ing immune tolerance via antigen presentation to T cells (Fig. 25.39). 
Disorders resulting from pathological inltration of tissues by histocytes 
are shown in Box 25.60
LCH is the commonest type and is caused by mutations in cell signal-
ling known as the MAPKinase pathway. Key genes mutated in this path-
way include BRAF (65%–70%) and MAP2K (20%). LCH can present with 
isolated painless lumps, e.g. of bone (eosinophilic granuloma) or with 
symptoms of disseminated tissue involvement including bone, lung, skin 
25.59 Haematological malignancy in old age
 Median age: approximately 70 years for most haematological malignancies.
 Poor-risk biological features: adverse cytogenetics or the presence of a 
multidrug resistance phenotype are more frequent.
 Prognosis: increasing age is an independent adverse variable in acute 
leukaemia and aggressive lymphoma.
 Chemotherapy: may be less well tolerated. Older people are more likely to 
have antecedent cardiac, pulmonary or metabolic problems, tolerate systemic 
infection less well and metabolise cytotoxic drugs differently.
 Cure rates: similar to those in younger patients, in those who do tolerate 
treatment.
 Decision to treat: should be based on the individual’s biological status, the 
level of social support available, and the patient’s wishes and those of the 
immediate family, but not on chronological age alone.
A
B
Fig. 25.39 Histiocytic disorder.
noticeable on the right. The intense PET signal relates to excretion of radioactive glucose in urine into the renal pelvis. Courtesy of Dr Mark Gandhi, Radiology Department, 
Aberdeen Royal Inrmary.
(e.g. persistent nappy rash), lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and peri-
odontal disease. Diagnosis can be difcult because of the rarity and mul-
tiple symptoms at presentation. Management includes surgical excision 
or radiotherapy of an isolated lesion or topical or systemic chemotherapy 
drugs, including methotrexate, etoposide and cladribine in disseminated 
LCH. The BRAF inhibitors, e.g. vemurafenib, have shown promising 
activity in relapsed LCH.
HLH results from mutations in immune genes, e.g. perforin. 
Presentation is predominantly in children with tissue inltration by his-
tiocytes and macrophages. Abnormal cytokine preduction, e.g. interfer-
on-gamma and activation of complement, leads to hyperinammation 
and associated haemophagocytosis of blood cells producing pancyto-
penia. Treatment is based around immunosuppression with glucocor-
ticoids, chemotherapy or ciclosporin, all with the aim of proceding to 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Newer treatments aimed at inhibit-
ing cytokines or complement activation are being studied.
An acquired form of reactive haemophagocytosis called macrophage 
activation syndrome (MAS) or secondary HLH is associated with a range 
of conditions including rheumatological conditions, e.g. juvenile idio-
pathic arthritis, SLE and Kawasaki disease, acute viral infections, e.g. 
EBV, CMV and HHV6 and T-cell lymphomas. These diverse conditions 
generate a cytokine storm, which drives the MAS. Patients present very 
unwell with fever, severe pancytopenia, deranged coagulation tests, 
hepatomegaly and a very high ferritin level (often measured in the tens of 
thousands μg/L). Management includes supportive care, glucocorticoids 
or other immunosuppression, inhibition of IL-1 with anakinra and, if pos-
sible, treatment of the underlying condition.
Aplastic anaemia
Primary idiopathic acquired aplastic anaemia
This is a rare disorder in Europe and North America, with 2–4 new cases 
per million population per annum. The disease is much more common 
25.60 Histiocytic disorders
 Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)
 Cutaneous and mucocutaneous histiocytosis (C)
 Malignant histiocytosis (M)
 Rosai–Dorfman disease (RD)
 Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)

[[p1037]]
Myeloproliferative neoplasms    979
in certain other parts of the world, e.g. east Asia. The basic problem is 
failure of the pluripotent stem cells because of an autoimmune attack, 
producing hypoplasia of the bone marrow with a pancytopenia in the 
blood. The diagnosis rests on exclusion of other causes of second-
ary aplastic anaemia (see below) and rare congenital causes, such as 
Fanconi’s anaemia.
Clinical features and investigations
Patients present with symptoms of bone marrow failure, usually 
anaemia or bleeding, and less commonly, infections. An FBC demon-
strates pancytopenia, low reticulocytes and often macrocytosis. Bone 
marrow aspir ation and trephine reveal hypocellularity. The severity 
of aplastic anaemia is graded according to the Camitta criteria 
(Box 25.61).
Management
All patients will require blood product support and aggressive man-
agement of infection. The prognosis of severe aplastic anaemia man-
aged with supportive therapy only is poor and more than 50% of 
patients die, usually in the rst year. The curative treatment for patients 
under 35 years of age with severe idiopathic aplastic anaemia is allo-
geneic HSCT if there is an available sibling donor (p. 945). Patients 
aged 35–50 may be candidates if they have no comorbidities. Those 
with a compatible sibling donor should proceed to transplantation as 
soon as possible; they have a 75%–90% chance of long-term cure. In 
older patients and those without a suitable donor, immunosuppressive 
therapy (IST) with anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) and ciclosporin is the 
treatment of choice and gives 5-year survival rates of 75%. Unrelated 
donor allografts are considered for suitable patients who fail IST. The 
thrombopoietin receptor agonist eltrombopag has produced trilineage 
responses in patients who fail IST and is licensed for this indication. 
Non-transplanted patients may relapse or other clonal disorders of 
haematopoiesis may evolve, such as paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglo-
binuria (p. 959), mye lodysplastic syndrome (p. 970) and AML (p. 964). 
Patients with aplastic anaemia must be followed up long-term.
Secondary aplastic anaemia
Causes of this condition are listed in Box 25.62. It is not practical to list 
all the drugs that have been suspected of causing aplasia. It is important 
to check the reported side-effects of all drugs taken over the preceding 
months. In some instances, the cytopenia is more selective and affects 
only one cell line, most often the neutrophils. Frequently, this is an inci-
dental nding, with no ill health. It probably has an immune basis, but this 
is difcult to prove.
The clinical features and methods of diagnosis are the same as for 
primary idiopathic aplastic anaemia. An underlying cause should be 
treated or removed, but otherwise management is as for the idiopathic 
form.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
These make up a group of chronic conditions characterised by clonal 
proliferation of marrow stem/precursor cells. Polycythaemia rubra vera 
(PRV), essential thrombocythaemia and myelobrosis are the non-leu-
kaemic myeloproliferative neoplasms. Although the majority of patients 
are classiable as having one of these disorders, some have overlap-
ping features and there is often progression from one to another, e.g. 
PRV to myelobrosis. A mutation in the gene on chromosome 9 encod-
ing the signal transduction molecule JAK-2 (JAK-2 V617F) has been 
found in more than 90% of PRV cases and 50% of those with essential 
thrombocythaemia and myelobrosis; less frequently, mutations may 
be identied in exon 12 of JAK-2. Mutations in the calreticulin gene 
(CALR), which produces a chaperone protein that protects proteins 
moving from the endoplasmic reticulin to the cytoplasm, have been 
found in a further 25% of patients with essential thrombocythaemia. 
Less commonly, mutations can be detected in the thrombopoietin 
receptor gene MPL
Myelobrosis
In myelobrosis, the marrow is initially hypercellular, with an excess of 
abnormal megakaryocytes that release growth factors, such as plate-
let-derived growth factor, to the marrow microenvironment, resulting 
in a reactive proliferation of broblasts. As the disease progresses, the 
marrow becomes brosed.
Most patients present over the age of 50 years, with lassitude, weight 
loss and night sweats. The spleen can be massively enlarged due to 
extramedullary haematopoiesis (blood cell formation outside the bone 
marrow), and painful splenic infarcts may occur.
The characteristic blood picture is leucoerythroblastic anaemia, with 
circulating immature red blood cells (increased reticulocytes and nucle-
ated red blood cells) and granulocyte precursors (myelocytes). The red 
cells are shaped like teardrops (teardrop poikilocytes), and giant platelets 
may be seen in the blood. The white count varies from low to moderately 
high and the platelet count may be high, normal or low. Urate levels 
may be high due to increased cell breakdown, and folate deciency is 
common. The marrow is often difcult to aspirate and a trephine biopsy 
shows an excess of megakaryocytes, increased reticulin and brous tis-
sue replacement. The presence of a pathological JAK-2 mutation sup-
ports the diagnosis.
Management and prognosis
Median survival is 4 years from diagnosis, but ranges from 1 year to 
over 20 years. Treatment is directed at control of symptoms, e.g. red 
cell transfusions for anaemia. Folic acid should be given to prevent 
deciency. Cytotoxic therapy with hydroxycarbamide may help control 
spleen size, the white cell count or systemic symptoms. Splenectomy 
25.61 Camitta criteria
Severe AA (SAA)
 Marrow cellularity <25% (or 25%–50% with <30% residual haematopoietic 
cells), plus at least two of:
Neutrophils <0.5 × 109/L
Platelets <20 × 109/L
Reticulocyte count <20 × 109/L
Very severe AA (VSAA)
 As for SAA but neutrophils <0.2 × 109/L
Non-severe AA (NSAA)
 AA not fullling the criteria for SAA or VSAA
25.62 Causes of secondary aplastic anaemia
 Drugs:
Cytotoxic drugs
Antibiotics – chloramphenicol, sulphonamides
Antirheumatic agents – penicillamine, gold, phenylbutazone, indometacin
Antithyroid drugs – carbimazole, propylthiouracil
Anticonvulsants
Immunosuppressants – azathioprine
 Chemicals:
Benzene, toluene solvent misuse – glue-snifng
Insecticides – chlorinated hydrocarbons (DDT), organophosphates and 
carbamates (Ch. 10)
 Radiation
 Viral hepatitis
 Pregnancy
 Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria

[[p1038]]
980    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
may be required for a grossly enlarged spleen or symptomatic 
pancytopenia secondary to splenic pooling of cells and hypersplenism. 
Allogeneic HSCT may be considered for younger patients. Ruxolitinib, 
an inhibitor of JAK-2, is effective at reducing systemic symptoms and 
splenomegaly and may improve life expectancy with longer-term use.
Essential thrombocythaemia
Uncontrolled proliferation of megakaryocytes results in a raised level of 
circulating platelets that are often dysfunctional. Prior to a diagnosis of 
essential thrombocythaemia being made, reactive causes of thrombo-
cytosis must be excluded (see Box 25.15). The presence of pathogenic 
JAK-2 V617F, CALR or, rarely, MPL mutations supports the diagnosis, 
but is not universal. Patients present at a median age of 60 years with 
vascular occlusion, acrocyanosis (painful discoloured nger tips) or 
bleeding, or with an asymptomatic isolated raised platelet count. A small 
percentage (around 5%) will transform to acute leukaemia and others to 
myelobrosis.
It is likely that most patients with essential thrombocythaemia benet 
from low-dose aspirin to reduce the risk of occlusive vascular events. Low-
risk patients (age <40 years, platelet count <1500 × 109/L and no bleeding 
or thrombosis) may not require treatment to reduce the platelet count. 
For those with a platelet count above 1500 × 109/L, with symptoms, or 
with other risk factors for thrombosis such as diabetes or hypertension, 
treatment to control platelet counts should be given. Agents include oral 
hydroxycarbamide or anagrelide, an inhibitor of megakaryocyte matura-
tion. Intravenous radioactive phosphorus (32P) may be useful in old age, 
but is rarely available nowadays, and interferon-alfa has a role in younger 
patients, including pregnant women and women planning to conceive.
Polycythaemia rubra vera
PRV occurs mainly in patients over the age of 40 years and presents 
either as an incidental nding of a high haemoglobin, or with symptoms 
of hyperviscosity, such as lassitude, loss of concentration, headaches, 
dizziness, blackouts, pruritus and epistaxis. Some patients present with 
manifestations of peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease. Venous 
thromboembolism may also occur. Peptic ulceration is common, some-
times complicated by bleeding. Patients are often plethoric and many 
have a palpable spleen at diagnosis.
Investigation of polycythaemia is discussed on page 933. The diag-
nosis of PRV now rests on the demonstration of a high haematocrit and 
the presence of a pathogenic JAK-2 mutation (positive in 95% of cases). 
In the occasional JAK 2-negative cases, a raised red cell mass and 
absence of causes of a secondary erythrocytosis must be established. 
The spleen may be enlarged and neutrophil and platelet counts are fre-
quently raised, an abnormal karyotype may be found in the marrow and 
in vitro culture of the marrow can be used to demonstrate autonomous 
growth in the absence of added growth factors.
Management and prognosis
Aspirin reduces the risk of thrombosis. Venesection gives prompt relief of 
hyperviscosity symptoms. Between 400 and 500 mL of blood (less if the 
patient is in old age) are removed and the venesection is repeated every 
5–7 days until the haematocrit is reduced to below 45%. Less frequent, 
regular venesection will maintain this level until the haemoglobin remains 
reduced because of iron deciency.
Suppression of marrow proliferation with hydroxycarbamide or 
interferon-alfa may reduce the risk of vascular occlusion, control 
spleen size and reduce transformation to myelobrosis. The JAK-2 
inhibitor ruxolitinib is licensed for patients whose disease is not 
controlled by hydroxycarbamide. Median survival after diagnosis in 
treated patients exceeds 10 years. Some patients survive more than 
20 years; however, cerebrovascular or coronary events occur in up 
to 60% of patients. The disease may convert to another myelopro-
liferative disorder, with about 15% developing acute leukaemia or 
myelobrosis.
Bleeding disorders
Disorders of primary haemostasis
The initial formation of the platelet plug (see Fig. 25.6A; also known 
as ‘primary haemostasis’) may fail in thrombocytopenia (p. 938), von 
Willebrand disease (p. 984), and also in platelet function disorders and 
diseases affecting the vessel wall.
Vessel wall abnormalities
Vessel wall abnormalities may be:
 congenital, such as hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
 acquired, as in a vasculitis (Ch. 26) or scurvy.
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a dominantly inher-
ited condition caused by mutations in the genes encoding endoglin 
and activin receptor-like kinase, which are endothelial cell receptors for 
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), a potent angiogenic cytokine. 
Telangiectasia and small aneurysms are found on the ngertips, face and 
tongue, and in the nasal passages, lung and gastrointestinal tract. A sig-
nicant proportion of these patients develop larger pulmonary arterio-
venous malformations (PAVMs) that cause arterial hypoxaemia due to a 
right-to-left shunt. These predispose to paradoxical embolism, resulting 
in stroke or cerebral abscess. All patients with HHT should be screened 
for PAVMs and cerebral AVMs; if these are found, ablation by embolisa-
tion should be considered.
Patients present either with recurrent bleeds, particularly epistaxis, or 
with iron deciency due to occult gastrointestinal bleeding. Treatment 
can be difcult because of the multiple bleeding points, but regular iron 
therapy often allows the marrow to compensate for blood loss. Local 
cautery or laser therapy may prevent single lesions from bleeding. A vari-
ety of medical therapies have been tried but none has been found to be 
universally effective.
Ehlers–Danlos disease
Vascular Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (type 4) is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder (1/100 000) caused by a defect in type 3 collagen that results 
in fragile blood vessels and organ membranes, leading to bleeding and 
organ rupture. Classical joint hypermobility (Ch. 26) is often limited in this 
form of the disease, but skin changes and facial appearance are typical. 
The diagnosis should be considered when there is a history of bleeding 
with normal laboratory tests.
Scurvy
Vitamin C deciency affects the normal synthesis of collagen and results 
in a bleeding disorder characterised by perifollicular and petechial haem-
orrhage, bruising and subperiosteal bleeding. The key to diagnosis is the 
dietary history (Ch. 22).
Platelet function disorders
Bleeding may result from thrombocytopenia (see Box 25.14) or from 
congenital or acquired abnormalities of platelet function. The most com-
mon acquired disorders are iatrogenic, resulting from the use of aspirin, 
clopidogrel, ticagrelor, dipyridamole and the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors 
to prevent arterial thrombosis (see Box 25.26). Inherited platelet function 
abnormalities are relatively rare. Congenital abnormalities may be due to 
deciency of the membrane glycoproteins, e.g. Glanzmann’s thrombas-
thenia (IIb/IIIa) or Bernard–Soulier syndrome (Ib), or due to the presence 
of defective platelet granules, e.g. a deciency of dense (delta) gran-
ules (see Fig. 25.7) giving rise to storage pool disorders. The congenital 
macrothrombocytopathies that are due to mutations in the myosin heavy 
chain gene MYH-9 are characterised by large platelets, inclusion bodies 

[[p1039]]
Bleeding disorders    981
in the neutrophils (Döhle bodies) and a variety of other features, including 
sensorineural deafness and renal abnormalities. Other familial throm-
bocytopathies are important, as they can be associated with somatic 
features (TAR; thrombocytopenia with absent radii (TAR)), and some are 
associated with a propensity for development of bone marrow failure or 
dysplasia (e.g. mutations in RUNX-1 and ANKRD 26).
Apart from Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia, these conditions are mild 
disorders, with bleeding typically occurring after trauma or surgery, 
but rarely spontaneous. Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia is an autosomal 
recessive condition associated with a variable, but often severe bleed-
ing disorder. These conditions are usually managed by local mechan-
ical measures, but antibrinolytics, such as tranexamic acid, may be 
useful and, in severe bleeding, platelet transfusion may be required. 
Recombinant VIIa is licensed for the treatment of resistant bleeding in 
Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia.
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia occurs in many disease processes, as listed in 
Box 25.14, many of which are discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is immune-mediated with 
involvement of autoantibodies, most often directed against the platelet 
membrane glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, which sensitise the platelet, resulting in 
premature removal from the circulation by cells of the reticulo-endothelial 
system. It is not a single disorder; some cases occur in isolation while 
others are associated with underlying immune dysregulation in condi-
tions such as connective tissue diseases, HIV infection, B-cell malignan-
cies, pregnancy and certain drug therapies. The clinical presentation and 
pathogenesis are similar, whatever the cause of ITP.
Clinical features and investigations
The presentation depends on the degree of thrombocytopenia. 
Spontaneous bleeding typically occurs only when the platelet count is 
below 20 × 109/L. At higher counts, the patient may complain of easy 
bruising or sometimes epistaxis or menorrhagia. Many cases with counts 
of more than 50 × 109/L are discovered by chance.
In adults, ITP more commonly affects females and may have an insid-
ious onset. Unlike ITP in children, it is unusual for there to be a history 
of a preceding viral infection. The development of ITP in the context of 
COVID-19 infection has been documented. Symptoms or signs of a 
connective tissue disease may be apparent at presentation or emerge 
several years later. Patients aged over 65 years should be considered for 
a bone marrow examination to look for an accompanying B-cell malig-
nancy and appropriate autoantibody testing performed if a diagnosis of 
connective tissue disease is suspected. HIV testing should be consid-
ered because a positive result will have major implications for appropriate 
therapy. The peripheral blood lm is normal, apart from a greatly reduced 
platelet number, while the bone marrow reveals an obvious increase in 
megakaryocytes.
Management
Many patients with stable compensated ITP and a platelet count of more 
than 30 × 109/L do not require treatment to raise the platelet count, 
except at times of increased bleeding risk, such as surgery and biopsy. 
First-line therapy for patients with spontaneous bleeding is with high 
doses of glucocorticoids, either prednisolone (1 mg/kg daily) or dexa-
methasone (40 mg daily for 4 days), to suppress antibody production 
and inhibit phagocytosis of sensitised platelets by reticulo-endothelial 
cells. Administration of intravenous immunoglobulin can raise the platelet 
count by blocking antibody receptors on reticulo-endothelial cells and 
is combined with glucocorticoid therapy if there is severe haemostatic 
failure, especially with evidence of signicant mucosal bleeding or a slow 
response to glucocorticoids alone. Persistent or potentially life-threaten-
ing bleeding should be treated with platelet transfusion in addition to the 
other therapies.
The condition may become chronic, with remissions and relapses. 
Relapses should be treated by re-introducing glucocorticoids. If a patient 
has two relapses or primary refractory disease, second-line therapies are 
considered. The options for second-line therapy include the thrombo-
poietin receptor agonists (TPO-RA) eltrombopag and romiplostim (which 
stimulate new platelet formation), the splenic tyrosine kinase inhibitor fos-
tamatinib, splenectomy and immunosuppression. Where splenectomy is 
considered, the precautions shown in Box 25.37 need to be in place. 
Splenectomy produces complete remission in about 70% of patients and 
improvement in a further 20%–25% in favourable cases. The TPO-RAs 
induce response in around 75% of cases, usually within 10–14 days. 
Low-dose glucocorticoid therapy and immunosuppressants such as 
rituximab, ciclosporin, mycophenolate and tacrolimus may also produce 
remissions. The order in which therapies should be used is not entirely 
clear, although the TPO-RAs and fostamatinib are licensed for this indi-
cation, while the immunosuppressive agents are not.
Coagulation disorders
Normal coagulation is explained in Figure 25.6 and the effects of age are 
discussed in Box 25.63. Coagulation factor deciency may be congen-
ital or acquired and may affect one or several of the coagulation factors 
(Box 25.64). Inherited disorders are almost uniformly related to 
decreased synthesis, as a result of mutation in the gene encoding a 
key protein in coagulation. Von Willebrand disease is the most com-
mon inherited bleeding disorder. Haemophilia A and B are the most 
common single coagulation factor deciencies, but inherited decien-
cies of all the other coagulation factors are seen. Acquired disorders 
may be due to under-production (e.g. in liver failure), increased con-
sumption (e.g. in DIC) or inhibition of function of coagulation factors 
(such as heparin therapy or immune inhibitors of coagulation, e.g. 
acquired haemophilia A).
Haemophilia A
Factor VIII deciency resulting in haemophilia A affects 1/10 000 indi-
viduals. It is the most common congenital coagulation factor deciency. 
Factor VIII is primarily synthesised by the liver and endothelial cells and 
has a half-life of about 12 hours. It is protected from proteolysis in the 
circulation by binding to von Willebrand factor (vWF).
Genetics
The factor VIII gene is located on the X chromosome. Haemophilia is 
associated with a range of mutations in the factor VIII gene; these include 
major inversions, large deletions and missense, nonsense and splice site 
abnormalities. As the factor VIII gene is on the X chromosome, haemo-
philia A is a sex-linked disorder (Ch. 3). Thus all daughters of a patient 
with haemophilia are obligate carriers and they, in turn, have a 1 in 4 
chance of each pregnancy resulting in the birth of an affected male baby, 
a normal male baby, a carrier female or a normal female. Antenatal diag-
nosis by chorionic villous sampling is possible in families with a known 
mutation.
Haemophilia ‘breeds true’ within a family; all members have the 
same factor VIII gene mutation and a similarly severe or mild pheno-
type. Female carriers of haemophilia may have reduced factor VIII lev-
els because of random inactivation of their normal X chromosome in 
the developing fetus. This can result in a mild bleeding disorder; thus all 
known or suspected carriers of haemophilia A should have their factor 
VIII level measured.
Clinical features
The extent and patterns of bleeding are closely related to residual factor 
VIII levels (Box 25.65). Patients with severe haemophilia (factor VIII levels 
<0.01 U/mL) present with spontaneous bleeding into skin, muscle and 
joints. Retroperitoneal and intracranial bleeding is also a feature. Babies 
with severe haemophilia have an increased risk of intracranial haemor-
rhage and, although there is insufcient evidence to recommend routine 

[[p1040]]
982    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
The major morbidity of recurrent bleeding in severe haemophilia is 
musculoskeletal. Bleeding is typically into large joints, especially knees, 
elbows, ankles and hips. Muscle haematomas are also characteristic, 
most commonly in the calf and psoas muscles. If early treatment is not 
given to arrest bleeding, a hot, swollen and very painful joint or mus-
cle haematoma develops. Recurrent bleeding into joints leads to syn-
ovial hypertrophy, destruction of the cartilage and chronic haemophilic 
arthropathy (Fig. 25.40). Complications of muscle haematomas depend 
on their location. A large psoas bleed may extend to compress the fem-
oral nerve; calf haematomas may increase pressure within the inexible 
fascial sheath, causing a compartment syndrome with ischaemia, necro-
sis, brosis, and subsequent contraction and shortening of the Achilles 
tendon.
Management
The aim of management of severe haemophilia A (and B; see below) 
in high-income countries is to render patients ‘bleed free’. This can be 
achieved by prophylaxis using coagulation factor concentrates or, in hae-
mophilia A, by a bispecic monoclonal antibody called emicizumab that 
mimics factor VIII activity. Emicizumab binds to both activated factor IX 
and factor X to allow the formation of the tenase complex that results in 
thrombin and clot formation (Fig. 25.41). Prophylaxis using concentrates 
aims to achieve trough levels of factor VIII or IX that protect the patient 
against spontaneous bleeding. There is debate about optimal trough val-
ues needed to achieve this aim. Prophylaxis can be provided in many 
different ways: daily, on alternate days, or on information from pharma-
cokinetic studies that inform on the best way of scheduling prophylaxis. 
Practice in haemophilia A and B is also changing due to the introduction 
of recombinant factor concentrates that have been manipulated to alter 
their half-life. In addition to standard half-life recombinant factor VIII and 
IX, there are new products produced by Fc fusion and pegylation/glyco-
pegylation that extend the half-life of the coagulation factor to the degree 
that it can be used to alter dosing schedules for prophylaxis.
The alternative approach, which still needs to be used in low- and 
middle-income countries, is to treat on demand. In severe haemophilia A, 
bleeding episodes should be treated by raising the factor VIII level, usu-
ally by intravenous infusion of factor VIII concentrate. Factor VIII concen-
trates are freeze-dried and stable at 4°C and can therefore be stored in 
domestic refrigerators, allowing patients to treat themselves at home at 
the earliest indication of bleeding. Coagulation factor concentrates pre-
pared from blood donor plasma are now screened for many blood-borne 
pathogens including HBV, HCV and HIV, and undergo two separate virus 
inactivation or removal processes during manufacture; these prepara-
tions have a good safety record. However, factor concentrates prepared 
by recombinant technology are now widely available and, although more 
expensive, are perceived as being safer than those derived from human 
plasma in relation to infection risk. In addition to raising factor VIII or IX 
concentrations, resting of the bleeding site with either bed rest or a splint 
reduces continuing haemorrhage. Once bleeding has settled, the patient 
should be mobilised and physiotherapy used to restore strength to the 
surrounding muscles. All non-immune potential recipients of pooled 
blood products should be offered hepatitis A and B immunisation.
25.63 Haemostasis and thrombosis in old age
 Thrombocytopenia: reasonably common because of the rising prevalence 
of disorders in which it may be a secondary feature and also because of the 
greater use of drugs that can cause it.
 ‘Senile’ purpura: presumed to be due to an age-associated loss of 
subcutaneous fat and the collagenous support of small blood vessels, making 
them more prone to damage from minor trauma.
 Thrombosis: incidence of thromboembolic disease rises with increasing age. 
This may be due to stasis and concurrent illness, to which older people are 
prone. Some studies show increased platelet aggregation with age and others 
age-associated hyperactivity of the haemostatic system, which could contribute 
to a prothrombotic state.
 Thromboprophylaxis: should be considered in all older patients who are 
immobile as a result of acute illness. Prophylaxis is not required in chronic 
immobility without a medical cause, as there is no associated increase in 
thromboembolism.
 Anticoagulation: older patients are more sensitive to the anticoagulant effects 
of warfarin, partly due to the concurrent use of other drugs and the presence 
of other pathology. Life-threatening or fatal bleeds on warfarin are signicantly 
more common in those over 80 years.
25.64 Causes of coagulopathy
Congenital
X-linked
 Haemophilia A and B
Autosomal
 Von Willebrand disease
 Factor II, V, VII, X, XI and XIII deciencies
 Combined II, VII, IX and X deciency
 Combined V and VIII deciency
 Hypobrinogenaemia
 Dysbrinogenaemia
Acquired
Under-production
 Liver failure
 Vitamin K deciency
Increased consumption
 Coagulation activation:
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
 Immune-mediated:
Acquired haemophilia and von Willebrand syndrome
 Others:
Acquired factor X deciency (in amyloid)
Acquired von Willebrand syndrome in Wilms’ tumour
Acquired factor VII deciency in sepsis
Drug-induced
 Inhibition of function:
Heparins
Argatroban
Bivalirudin
Fondaparinux
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Dabigatran
Edoxaban
 Inhibition of post-translational modication:
Warfarin
caesarean section for these births, it is appropriate to avoid head trauma 
and to perform cranial imaging of the newborn within the rst 24 hours 
of life. Individuals with moderate and mild haemophilia (factor VIII levels 
0.01–0.4 U/mL) present with the same pattern of bleeding, but usually 
after trauma or surgery when bleeding is disproportionate to the severity 
of the insult.
25.65 Severity of haemophilia (ISTH criteria)
Severity
Factor VIII or IX level
Clinical presentation
Severe
<0.01 U/mL
Spontaneous haemarthroses and 
muscle haematomas
Moderate
0.01–0.05 U/mL
Mild trauma or surgery causes 
bleeding
Mild
>0.05–0.4 U/mL
Major injury or surgery results in 
excess bleeding
(ISTH = International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis)

[[p1041]]
Bleeding disorders    983
D
B
C
A
Haemophilia B in the descendants of Queen Victoria
Albert
Victoria
23
33
31
21
20
2
56 4
14
31
Numerical value = age at death
Affected with 
haemophilia (male)
Carrier for 
haemophilia (female)
Chronic haemophilic
arthropathy with joint swelling
and muscle wasting on left
Left thigh muscle haematoma
in severe haemophilia
Massive bruising
X-ray of advanced
haemophilic arthropathy
Massive retroperitoneal haemorrhage
Hepatoma in cirrhotic liver
secondary to HCV infection
contracted from coagulation
factor concentrate
X-linked inheritance of haemophilia B
Fig. 25.40 Clinical manifestations of haemophilia. On the knee X-ray, repeated bleeds have led to broadening of the femoral epicondyles, and there is no cartilage present, 
as evidenced by the close proximity of the femur and tibia (A); sclerosis (B), osteophyte (C) and bony cysts (D) are present. (HCV = hepatitis C virus) Inset (Massive bruising) 
From Hoffbrand VA. Color atlas of clinical hematology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Mosby, Elsevier Inc.; 2000
Emicizumab – replaces
function of factor VIII in
the tenase complex
High-weight vWF
multimers in TTP
Caplacizumab
 – binds the A1
domain of vWF
preventing
platelet binding
IXa
X
Thrombin
Fibrin
Platelet
Fibrin clot formation
Prothrombin
Fig. 25.41 Mechanism of action of novel agents in haemostasis and thrombosis.
Emicizumab is a bispecic antibody that acts in a similar manner to Factor 
VIIIa by binding to factor IXa and factor X and so can be used in haemophilia A. 
Capalacizumab inhibits the A1 domain on von Willebrand factor (vWF), preventing 
binding to platelets and subsequent platelet aggregation. It is increasingly used in the 
treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
The vasopressin receptor agonist desmopressin raises the vWF and 
factor VIII levels 3–4-fold, which is useful in arresting bleeding in patients 
with mild or moderate haemophilia A. The dose required for this pur-
pose is higher than that used in diabetes insipidus, usually 0.3 µg/kg, 
and is given intravenously or subcutaneously. Alternatively, the same 
effect can be achieved by intranasal administration of a 300 µg dose. 
Following repeated administration of desmopressin, patients need to be 
monitored for evidence of water retention, which can result in signi-
cant hyponatraemia. Desmopressin is contraindicated in patients with a 
history of severe arterial disease, because of a propensity to provoke a 
thrombotic event, and in young children where hyponatraemia can result 
in ts.
Complications of coagulation factor therapy
Before 1986, coagulation factor concentrates from human plasma were 
not fully virus-inactivated and many patients became infected with HIV 
and HBV/HCV. Concern that the infectious agent that causes variant 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD) (Ch. 28) might be transmissible by 
blood and blood products has been conrmed in recipients of red cell 
transfusion (p. 940), and in one recipient of factor VIII. Another serious 
complication of factor VIII treatment is the development of anti-factor 
VIII antibodies, which arise in about 25% of those with severe haemo-
philia. These antibodies rapidly neutralise therapeutic infusions, making 
treatment relatively ineffective. Infusions of activated clotting factors, e.g. 

[[p1042]]
984    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
VIIa or factor VIII inhibitor bypass activity (FEIBA), may stop bleeding. 
Emicizumab has a major role in the treatment of patients with haemo-
philia A who have developed inhibitory antibodies.
Haemophilia B (Christmas disease)
Aberrations of the factor IX gene, which is also present on the X chro-
mosome, result in a reduction of the plasma factor IX level, giving rise 
to haemophilia B. This disorder is clinically indistinguishable from hae-
mophilia A, but is less common. The frequency of bleeding episodes 
is related to the severity of the deciency of the plasma factor IX level. 
Treatment is with a factor IX concentrate, used in much the same way 
as factor VIII for haemophilia A. The new extended half-life recombinant 
factor IX products made by Fc fusion, albumin fusion and pegylation 
offer the possibility of prophylaxis on a once-weekly or even two-weekly 
schedule. Although factor IX concentrates shared the problems of virus 
transmission seen with factor VIII, they do not commonly induce inhibi-
tory antibodies (<1% patients); when this does occur, however, it may be 
heralded by the development of a severe allergic-type reaction.
Von Willebrand disease
Von Willebrand disease is a common and usually mild bleeding disorder 
caused by a quantitative (types 1 and 3) or qualitative (type 2) deciency of 
von Willebrand factor (vWF). This protein is synthesised by endothelial cells 
and megakaryocytes, and is involved in both platelet function and coagu-
lation. It normally forms a multimeric structure that is essential for its inter-
action with subendothelial collagen and platelets (see Figs. 25.6 and 25.7). 
vWF acts as a carrier protein for factor VIII, to which it is non- covalently 
bound; deciency of vWF lowers the plasma factor VIII level. vWF also 
forms bridges between platelets and subendothelial components (e.g. 
collagen; see Fig. 25.6B), allowing platelets to adhere to damaged vessel 
walls; deciency of vWF therefore leads to impaired platelet plug formation. 
Blood group antigens (A and B) are expressed on vWF, reducing its sus-
ceptibility to proteolysis; as a result, people with blood group O have lower 
circulating vWF levels than individuals with non-O groups.
Most patients with von Willebrand disease have a type 1 disorder, 
characterised by a quantitative decrease in a normal functional protein. 
This usually arises through reduced synthesis or increased clearance of 
vWF. Patients with type 2 disorders inherit vWF molecules that are func-
tionally abnormal. The type of abnormality depends on the site of the 
mutation in the vWF gene and how it affects binding to platelets, colla-
gen and factor VIII. Patients with type 2 A disease have abnormalities in 
vWF-dependent platelet adhesion; those with mutations in the platelet 
glycoprotein Ib binding site, resulting in increased afnity for glycopro-
tein 1b, have type 2B disease; those with mutations in the factor VIII 
binding site have type 2 N disease; and those with other abnormalities 
in platelet binding, but with normal vWF multimeric structure, have type 
2 M disease. The patterns of laboratory abnormality accompanying these 
types are described in Box 25.66. The gene for vWF is located on chro-
mosome 12 and the disease is usually autosomal dominantly inherited, 
except in type 2 N and type 3, where inheritance is autosomal recessive.
Clinical features
Patients present with haemorrhagic manifestations similar to those in 
individuals with reduced platelet function. Supercial bruising, epistaxis, 
menorrhagia and gastrointestinal haemorrhage are common. Bleeding 
episodes are usually much less frequent than in severe haemophilia, and 
excessive haemorrhage may be observed only after trauma or surgery. 
Within a single family, the disease has variable penetrance, so that some 
members may have quite severe and frequent bleeds, whereas others 
are relatively asymptomatic.
Investigations
The disorder is characterised by reduced activity of vWF and factor VIII. 
The disease can be classied using a combination of assays that include 
functional and antigenic measures of vWF, multimeric analysis of the 
protein, and specic tests of function to determine binding to platelet 
glycoprotein Ib (RIPA) and factor VIII (see Box 25.66). In addition, analysis 
for mutations in the vWF gene can be informative.
Management
Many episodes of mild haemorrhage can be successfully treated by local 
means or with desmopressin, which raises the vWF level, resulting in 
a secondary increase in factor VIII. Tranexamic acid may be useful in 
mucosal bleeding. For more serious or persistent bleeds, haemostasis 
can be achieved with selected factor VIII concentrates, which contain 
considerable quantities of vWF in addition to factor VIII. Pure plasma-
derived and recombinant vWF concentrates are now available, improving 
the options and the perceived safety of treatment. Young children and 
patients with severe arterial disease should not receive desmopressin, 
and patients with type 2B disease develop thrombocytopenia that may 
be troublesome following desmopressin. Bleeding in type 3 patients 
responds only to factor VIII/vWF concentrate.
Rare inherited bleeding disorders
Severe deciencies of factor VII, X and XIII occur as autosomal recessive 
disorders. They are rare, but are associated with severe bleeding. Typical 
features include haemorrhage from the umbilical stump and intracranial 
haemorrhage. Factor XIII deciency in women is typically associated with 
recurrent fetal loss.
Factor XI deciency may occur in heterozygous or homozygous indi-
viduals. Bleeding is very variable and is not accurately predicted by coag-
ulation factor levels. In general, severe bleeding is conned to patients 
with levels below 15% of normal.
Acquired bleeding disorders
DIC is an important cause of bleeding that begins with exaggerated and 
inappropriate intravascular coagulation. It is discussed later under throm-
botic disorders.
Liver disease
Although, traditionally, severe parenchymal liver disease is associated 
with an excess of bleeding, it is now clear that these patients also have an 
increased risk of venous thrombosis. The description of end-stage liver 
25.66 Classication of von Willebrand disease
Type
Defect
Inheritance
Investigations/patterns
1
Partial quantitative
AD
Parallel decrease in vWF:Ag, 
RiCoF and Vlll:c
2A
Qualitative
AD
Absent HWM of vWF
Ratio of vWF activity to antigen 
<0.7
2B
Qualitative
AD
Reduced HWM of vWF
Enhanced platelet agglutination 
(RIPA)
2M
Qualitative
AD
Ratio of vWF activity to antigen 
<0.7
Normal multimers of vWF
Abnormal vWF/platelet 
interactions
2N
Qualitative
AR
Defective binding of vWF to VIII
Low VIII
3
Severe quantitative
AR or CH
Very low vWF and VIII:c activity
Absent multimers
(AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; CH = compound heterozygote; HWM = 
high-weight multimers of vWF; RiCoF = ristocetin co-factor; RIPA = ristocetin-induced platelet 
agglutination; VIII:c = coagulation factor VIII activity in functional assay; vWF = von Willebrand 
factor; vWF:Ag = vWF antigen measured by ELISA)

[[p1043]]
Thrombotic disorders    985
disease as a state of auto-anticoagulation is misleading. Although there 
is reduced hepatic synthesis of procoagulant factors, this is balanced 
to a degree by the reduced production of natural anticoagulant proteins 
and reduced brinolytic activity in patients with advanced liver disease. In 
severe parenchymal liver disease, bleeding may arise from many different 
causes. Major bleeding, is often from structural abnormalities such as 
oesophageal varices or peptic ulcer, and sepsis and volume overload are 
common precipitants of bleeding. There is reduced hepatic synthesis, 
for example, of factors V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, prothrombin and brinogen. 
Clearance of plasminogen activator is reduced. Thrombocytopenia may 
occur secondary to hypersplenism in the presence of portal hyperten-
sion and due to reduced production and activity of thrombopoietin in 
advanced liver disease. In cholestatic jaundice, there is reduced vitamin 
K absorption, leading to deciency of factors II, VII, IX and X, but also of 
proteins C and S. Treatment with plasma products or platelet transfusion 
should be reserved for acute bleeds or to cover interventional proce-
dures such as liver biopsy. Vitamin K deciency can be readily corrected 
with parenteral administration of vitamin K.
Renal failure
The severity of the haemorrhagic state in renal failure is proportional to the 
plasma urea concentration. Bleeding manifestations are those of platelet 
dysfunction, with gastrointestinal haemorrhage being particularly com-
mon. The causes are multifactorial and include anaemia, mild thrombo-
cytopenia and the accumulation of low-molecular-weight waste products, 
normally excreted by the kidney, that inhibit platelet function. Treatment is 
by dialysis to reduce the urea concentration. Rarely, in severe or persis-
tent bleeding, platelet concentrate infusions and red cell transfusions are 
indicated. Increasing the concentration of vWF, either by cryoprecipitate 
or by desmopressin, may promote haemostasis. Patients with signicant 
renal impairment have an increased risk of anticoagulant-related bleeding, 
particularly with drugs that are at least partially renally excreted.
Thrombotic disorders
Venous thromboembolic disease (venous 
thromboembolism)
While the most common presentations of venous thromboembolism 
(VTE) are deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the leg (p. 188) and/or pul-
monary embolism (PE; see also p. 546), similar management principles 
apply to rarer manifestations such as jugular vein thrombosis, upper limb 
DVT, cerebral sinus thrombosis (p. 1186) and intra-abdominal venous 
thrombosis (e.g. Budd–Chiari syndrome; p. 909).
VTE has an annual incidence of approximately 1:1000 in Western pop-
ulations. The relative incidence of DVT:PE is approximately 2:1. Mortality 
30 days after DVT is approximately 10%, compared to 15% for PE. All 
forms of VTE are increasingly common with age and many of the deaths 
are related to coexisting medical conditions, such as active cancer or 
inammatory disease, which predispose the patient to thrombosis in 
the rst place. Risk factors for VTE are often present (Box 25.67) and 
it is appropriate to seek evidence of these risk factors in determining 
the long-term management strategy. Figure 25.42 illustrates some of the 
causes and consequences of VTE. The diagnosis of DVT and PE are 
discussed on pages 188 and 546, respectively.
Management of VTE
The mainstay of treatment for all forms of VTE is anticoagulation. This 
can be achieved in several ways. One option is to use LMWH followed 
by a coumarin anticoagulant, such as warfarin. Treatment of acute VTE 
with LMWH should continue for a minimum of 5 days. Patients treated 
with warfarin should achieve a target INR of 2.5 (range 2–3; pp. 930 and 
Box 25.25) with LMWH continuing until the INR is above 2. Alternatively, 
patients may be treated with a DOAC. Rivaroxaban and apixaban may 
be used immediately from diagnosis without the need for LMWH, while 
25.67 Factors predisposing to venous thrombosis
Patient factors
 Increasing age
 Obesity
 Varicose veins
 Previous deep vein thrombosis
 Family history, especially of unprovoked venous thromboembolism when young
 Transient additional risk factors:
Pregnancy/puerperium
Oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy
Immobility, e.g. long-distance travel (>4 hrs)
Intravenous drug use involving the femoral vein
Surgery (see below)
Medical illnesses (see below)
Surgical conditions
 Major surgery, especially if >30 mins’ duration
 Abdominal or pelvic surgery, especially for cancer
 Major lower limb orthopaedic surgery, e.g. joint replacement and hip fracture surgery
Medical conditions
 Myocardial infarction/heart failure
 Inammatory conditions: inammatory bowel disease, connective tissue 
disorders and vasculitis
 Malignancy (anti-cancer chemotherapy increases the risk of venous 
thromboembolism compared with cancer alone)
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Severe infection, bacterial or viral
 Neurological conditions associated with immobility, e.g. stroke, paraplegia, 
Guillain–Barré syndrome
 Any high-dependency admission
Haematological disorders
 Polycythaemia rubra vera
 Essential thrombocythaemia
 Deciency of natural anticoagulants: antithrombin, protein C, protein S
 Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
 Gain-of-function prothrombotic mutations: factor V Leiden, prothrombin gene 
G20210A
 Myelobrosis
Antiphospholipid syndrome
the licences for dabigatran and edoxaban include initial treatment with 
LMWH for a minimum of 5 days before commencing the DOAC (see 
Fig. 25.41). In patients with active cancer and VTE, maintenance anticoagu-
lation with LMWH is associated with a lower recurrence rate than warfa-
rin. The use of DOACs in cancer-associated thrombosis is under study. 
Small studies suggest a possible role for apixaban and rivaroxaban in 
this context. Patients who have had VTE and have a strong contraindica-
tion to anticoagulation and those who continue to have new pulmonary 
emboli despite therapeutic anticoagulation should have an inferior vena 
cava (IVC) lter inserted to prevent life-threatening PE.
The optimal initial period of anticoagulation is between 6 weeks and 
6 months. Patients with a provoked VTE in the presence of a temporary 
risk factor, which is then removed, can usually be treated for short peri-
ods (e.g. 3 months), and indeed anticoagulation for more than 6 months 
does not alter the rate of recurrence following discontinuation of therapy. 
If there are ongoing risk factors that cannot be alleviated, such as active 
cancer, long-term anticoagulation is usually recommended, provided 
that the risk of bleeding is not deemed excessive.
For patients with unprovoked VTE, the optimum duration of anticoag-
ulation can be difcult to establish. Recurrence of VTE is about 2%–3% 
per annum in patients who have a temporary medical risk factor at pres-
entation and about 7%–10% per annum in those with apparently unpro-
voked VTE. This plateaus at around 30%–40% recurrence at 5 years. 
As such, many patients who have had unprovoked episodes of VTE 
will benet from long-term anticoagulation. Several factors predict risk 
of recurrence following an episode of unprovoked VTE. The strongest 

[[p1044]]
986    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
predictors of recurrence are male sex and a positive D-dimer assay 
measured 1 month after stopping anticoagulant therapy. These factors 
are incorporated into scoring systems to predict recurrence such as the 
DASH score, HERDOO2 score and the Vienna prediction model.
The management of DVT of the leg should also include elevation and 
analgesia; in limb-threatening DVT, thrombolysis may also be consid-
ered. Thrombolysis for PE is discussed in Chapter 17. Post-thrombotic 
syndrome is due to damage of venous valves by the thrombus. It occurs 
in around 30% of patients who sustain a proximal lower limb DVT and 
results in persistent leg swelling, heaviness and discoloration. The most 
severe complication of this syndrome is ulceration around the medial 
malleolus (see Fig. 25.42). Use of elastic compression stockings follow-
ing a DVT does not reduce the incidence of post-thrombotic syndrome.
Prophylaxis of VTE
All patients admitted to hospital should be assessed for their risk of 
developing VTE and appropriate prophylactic measures should be put in 
place. Both medical and surgical patients are at increased risk. A sum-
mary of the risk categories is given in Box 25.68. Early mobilisation of 
patients is important to prevent DVT and those at medium or high risk 
require additional antithrombotic measures; these may be pharmacolog-
ical or mechanical. There is increasing evidence in high-risk groups, such 
as patients who have had major lower limb orthopaedic surgery and 
abdominal or pelvic cancer surgery, for protracted thromboprophylaxis 
for as long as 30 days or so after the procedure. Particular care should 
be taken with the use of pharmacological prophylaxis in patients with a 
high risk of bleeding or with specic risks of haemorrhage related to the 
site of surgery or the use of spinal or epidural anaesthesia.
Inherited and acquired thrombophilia and 
prothrombotic states
Several inherited conditions predispose to VTE (see Box 25.67), and 
have several points in common that are worth noting:
 None of them is strongly associated with arterial thrombosis.
 All are associated with a slightly increased incidence of adverse 
outcome of pregnancy, including recurrent early fetal loss, but there 
are no data to indicate that any specic intervention changes that 
outcome.
 Apart from in antithrombin deciency and homozygous factor V 
Leiden, most carriers of these genes will never have an episode of 
VTE; if they do, it will be associated with the presence of an addi-
tional temporary risk factor.
 There is little evidence that detection of these abnormalities predicts 
recurrence of VTE over and above the validated scoring systems 
mentioned above.
Lateral sinus
thrombosis is an
uncommon form of
venous thrombosis
at an unusual site
l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
h
t
a
P
Fatal intracerebral
haemorrhage is the
most common cause
of haemorrhagic death
in patients on warfarin
Postmortem
fatal massive
pulmonary
embolism
Absent IVC
predisposes
to lower
limb DVT
Inferior vena cava
Common iliac vein
Common femoral vein
Superficial femoral vein
Popliteal vein
External and internal iliac veins
Profunda femoris vein
Gastrocnemius vein
Anterior tibial vein
Soleus muscle sinus
Massive haemorrhage may complicate
heparin therapy. This is particularly
problematic in patients with renal failure
on haemodialysis
Iliac vein thrombosis
IVC filter
Post-thrombotic syndrome
complicates 30% of
cases of lower limb DVT.
Severe cases
are complicated
by ulceration
Fig. 25.42 Causes and consequences of venous thromboembolic disease and its treatment. (DVT = deep vein thrombosis; IVC = inferior vena cava)

[[p1045]]
Thrombotic disorders    987
 None of these conditions per se requires treatment with anticoag-
ulants. Patients with thrombosis should receive anticoagulation, as 
discussed earlier. Patients who are deemed to be at high risk of 
thrombosis, e.g. those with antithrombin deciency in pregnancy, 
should receive treatment or prophylactic doses of unfractionated or 
LMW heparin to cover the period of risk only.
Antithrombin deciency
Antithrombin (AT) is a serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) that inactivates 
the activated coagulation factors IIa, IXa, Xa and XIa. Heparins and 
fondaparinux achieve their therapeutic effect by potentiating the activity 
of AT. Familial deciency of AT is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner; homozygosity for mutant alleles is not compatible with life. 
Around 70% of affected individuals will have an episode of VTE before 
the age of 60 years and the relative risk for thrombosis compared with 
the background population is 10–20-fold. Pregnancy is a high-risk period 
for VTE and this requires fairly aggressive management with doses of 
LMWH that are greater than the usual prophylactic doses (≥100 U/kg/
day). AT concentrate (either plasma-derived or recombinant) is availa-
ble; this is required for cardiopulmonary bypass and may be used as an 
adjunct to heparin in surgical prophylaxis and in the peripartum period.
Protein C and S deciencies
Protein C and its co-factor protein S are vitamin K-dependent natural 
anticoagulants involved in switching off coagulation factor activation (fac-
tors Va and VIIIa) and so thrombin generation (see Fig. 25.6F). Inherited 
deciency of either protein C or S results in a prothrombotic state with 
a 5-fold relative risk of VTE compared with the background population.
Factor V Leiden
Factor V Leiden results from a gain-of-function, single-base-pair muta-
tion, which prevents the cleavage and hence inactivation of activated 
factor V. This results in a relative risk of venous thrombosis of 5 in 
heter ozygotes and 50 or more in rare homozygotes. The mutation is 
found in about 5% of Northern Europeans, 2% of Hispanics, 1.2% of 
African Americans, 0.5% of Asian Americans and 1.25% of Indigenous 
Americans, and is rare in Chinese and Malay people.
Prothrombin G20210A
This gain-of-function mutation in the non-coding 3  end of the prothrom-
bin gene is associated with an increased plasma level of prothrombin. 
It is present in about 2% of Northern Europeans, but is rare in native 
populations of Korea, China, India and Africa. In the heterozygous state, 
it is associated with a 2–3-fold increase in risk of VTE compared with the 
background population.
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a clinicopathological entity in which 
a constellation of clinical conditions, alone or in combination, is found in 
association with a persistently positive test for an antiphospholipid anti-
body. The antiphospholipid antibodies are heterogeneous and typically 
are directed against proteins that bind to phospholipids (Box 25.69). 
Although causal roles for these antibodies have been proposed, the 
mechanisms underlying the clinical features of APS are not clear. In clin-
ical practice, two types of test are used, which detect:
 antibodies that bind to negatively charged phospholipid on an ELISA 
plate (called an anticardiolipin antibody test); these assays usually 
contain β2-glycoprotein 1 (β2-GP1)
 those that interfere with phospholipid-dependent coagulation tests 
like the APTT or the dilute Russell viper venom time (DRVVT; called a 
lupus anticoagulant test).
The term antiphospholipid antibody encompasses both a lupus anti-
coagulant and an anticardiolipin antibody/anti-β2-GP1; individuals may 
be positive for one, two or all three of these activities. It has been shown 
that patients who are ‘triple positive’ have an increased likelihood of 
thrombotic events compared with single or double positives.
Clinical features and management
APS may present in isolation (primary APS) or in association with one of 
the conditions shown in Box 25.69, most typically systemic lupus ery-
thematosus (secondary APS). Most patients present with a single man-
ifestation and APS is now most frequently diagnosed in women with 
25.68 Antithrombotic prophylaxis
Indications
Patients in the following categories should be considered for specic 
antithrombotic prophylaxis:
Moderate risk of DVT
 Major surgery:
In patients >40 years or with other risk factor for VTE
 Major medical illness, e.g.:
Heart failure
Myocardial infarction with complications
Sepsis
Inammatory conditions, including inammatory bowel disease
Active malignancy
Nephrotic syndrome
Stroke and other conditions leading to lower limb paralysis
High risk of DVT
 Major abdominal or pelvic surgery for malignancy or with history of DVT or 
known thrombophilia (see Box 25.4)
 Major hip or knee surgery
 Neurosurgery
Methods of VTE prophylaxis
Mechanical
 Intermittent pneumatic compression
 Mechanical foot pumps
  Graduated compression stockings
Pharmacological
 LMWHs
 Unfractionated heparin
 Fondaparinux
 Dabigatran
 Rivaroxaban
 Apixaban
 Warfarin
(DVT = deep vein thrombosis; VTE = venous thromboembolism)
25.69 Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)
Clinical manifestations
 Adverse pregnancy outcome
Recurrent rst trimester abortion (≥3)
Unexplained death of morphologically normal fetus after 10 weeks’ gestation
Severe early pre-eclampsia
 Venous thromboembolism
 Arterial thromboembolism
 Livedo reticularis, catastrophic APS, transverse myelitis, skin necrosis, chorea
Conditions associated with secondary APS
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic sclerosis
 Behçet’s disease
 Temporal arteritis
 Sjögren syndrome
Targets for antiphospholipid antibodies
 β2-glycoprotein 1
 Protein C
 Annexin V
 Prothrombin (may result in haemorrhagic presentation)

[[p1046]]
988    HAEMATOLOGY AND TRANSFUSION MEDICINE 
adverse outcomes of pregnancy. It is extremely important to make the 
diagnosis in patients with APS, whatever the manifestation, because 
it affects the prognosis and management of arterial thrombosis, VTE 
and pregnancy.
Arterial thrombosis, typically stroke, associated with APS should 
probably be treated with anti-coagulation, as opposed to anti-
platelet therapy. APS-associated VTE is one of the situations in which 
the predicted recurrence rate is high enough to indicate long-term anti-
coagulation after a rst event. Recent evidence suggests that patients 
with APS presenting with thrombotic events should receive warfarin as 
opposed to a DOAC as anticoagulant of choice. In women with obstetric 
presentations of APS, intervention with heparin and aspirin is almost 
routinely prescribed, although there is little evidence from clinical trials 
that it is an effective therapy in increasing the chance of a successful 
pregnancy outcome.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may complicate a range 
of illnesses (Box 25.70). It is characterised by systemic activation of the 
pathways involved in coagulation and its regulation. This may result in 
the generation of intravascular brin clots causing multi-organ failure, 
with simultaneous coagulation factor and platelet consumption, causing 
bleeding. The systemic coagulation activation is induced either through 
cytokine pathways, which are activated as part of a systemic inamma-
tory response, or by the release of procoagulant substances such as 
tissue factor. In addition, suboptimal function of the natural anticoagulant 
pathways and dysregulated brinolysis contribute to DIC. There is con-
sumption of platelets, coagulation factors (notably factors V and VIII) and 
brinogen. The lysis of brin clot results in production of brin degrada-
tion products (FDPs), including D-dimers.
Investigations
DIC should be suspected when any of the conditions listed in Box 25.70
are met. Measurement of coagulation times (APTT and PT; see Box 25.3) 
along with brinogen, platelet count and FDPs, helps in the assessment 
of prognosis and aids clinical decision-making with regard to both bleed-
ing and thrombotic complications.
Management
Therapy is primarily aimed at the underlying cause. These patients will 
often require intensive care to deal with concomitant issues, such as aci-
dosis, dehydration, renal failure and hypoxia. Blood component therapy, 
such as fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate and platelets, should be 
given if the patient is bleeding or to cover interventions with a high bleed-
ing risk, but should not be prescribed routinely based on coagulation 
tests and platelet counts alone. Prophylactic doses of heparin should be 
given, unless there is a clear contraindication. Established thrombosis 
should be treated cautiously with therapeutic doses of unfractionated 
heparin, unless clearly contraindicated. Patients with DIC should not, in 
general, be treated with antibrinolytic therapy, e.g. tranexamic acid.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Like DIC and also heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (p. 937), throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a disorder in which thrombosis 
is accompanied by paradoxical thrombocytopenia. TTP is characterised 
by a pentad of ndings, although few patients have all ve components:
 thrombocytopenia
 microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
 neurological sequelae
 fever
 renal impairment.
It is an acute autoimmune disorder mediated by antibodies against 
ADAMTS-13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin 
type 1 motif).
This enzyme normally cleaves vWF multimers to produce normal 
functional units, and its deciency results in large vWF multimers that 
cross-link platelets. The features are of microvascular occlusion by 
platelet thrombi affecting key organs, principally brain and kidneys. It is 
a rare disorder (1 in 750 000 per annum), which may occur alone or in 
association with drugs (ticlopidine, ciclosporin), HIV, shiga toxins (Ch. 13) 
and malignancy. It should be treated by emergency plasma exchange. 
Glucocorticoids, aspirin and rituximab also have a role in management. 
Caplacizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the A domain of 
vWF, is associated with improved outcomes, less relapse and faster time 
to recovery in patients with acquired TTP. Untreated mortality rates are 
90% in the rst 10 days, and even with appropriate therapy, the mortality 
rate is 20%–30% at 6 months.
25.70 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Underlying conditions
Infection/sepsis
Trauma
Obstetric, e.g. amniotic uid embolism, placental abruption, pre-eclampsia
Severe liver failure
Malignancy, e.g. solid tumours and leukaemias
Tissue destruction, e.g. pancreatitis, burns
Vascular abnormalities, e.g. vascular aneurysms, liver haemangiomas
Toxic/immunological, e.g. ABO incompatibility, snake bites, recreational drugs
ISTH scoring system for diagnosis of DIC
Presence of an associated 
disorder
Essential
Platelets (× 109/L)
>100 = 0
<100 = 1
<50 = 2
Elevated brin degradation 
products
No increase = 0
Moderate = 2
Strong = 3
Prolonged prothrombin time
<3 secs = 0
>3 secs but <6 secs = 1
>6 secs = 2
Fibrinogen
>1 g/L = 0
<1 g/L = 1
Total score
≥5 = Compatible with overt DIC
<5 = Repeat monitoring over 1–2 days
(ISTH = International Society for Thrombosis and Haemostasis)
Further information
Websites
b-s-h.org.uk/guidelines Guidelines from the British Society for Haematology.
cibmtr.org Center for International Blood & Marrow Transplant Research.
transfusionguidelines.org.uk Contains the UK Transfusion Services’ Handbook of 
Transfusion Medicine and links to other relevant sites.
ukhcdo.org UK Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation.

[[p1047]]
Multiple Choice Questions
25.1. Which of the following is not true of emicizumab?
A. It emulates the role of factor VIII by allowing formation of the 
tenase complex
B. It is useful in the management of haemophilia A
C. It is useful in the management of haemophilia A patients 
with inhibitors
D. It is a bispecic monoclonal antibody
E. It is given intravenously three times weekly to provide 
prophylaxis
Answer: E.
Emicizumab is a bispecic monoclonal antibody which replicates the 
action of factor VIII in making the tenase complex. This results in down-
stream activation of factor X and subsequently thrombin and clot genera-
tion. Emicizumab can therefore be used in all categories of haemophilia A 
and has had its greatest effect on patients with inhibitors. Its great clinical 
advantage is that it is a subcutaneous preparation
 25.2.  A 20-year-old woman who has sustained an apparently 
unprovoked pulmonary embolism has a positive test for a lupus 
anticoagulant on admission. Both anticardiolipin and anti-beta2
glycoprotein-1 antibodies are negative. She has no history of 
SLE or any connective tissue disease. Which of the following 
best describes the diagnosis and management?
A. She has antiphospholipid syndrome and she should be 
anticoagulated indenitely with low molecular weight hepa-
rin which is the drug of choice in APS
B. She does not have antiphospholipid syndrome because 
aCL and anti-B2 GP-1 are both negative
C. She has antiphospholipid syndrome and she should be 
anticoagulated indenitely with warfarin which is the drug of 
choice in APS
D. She may have APS but only if she has a repeated positive 
LA 12 weeks after the rst positive
E. She does not have proven APS and should be anticoag-
ulated indenitely with rivaroxaban
Answer: D.
APS is a clinicopathological entity comprising a clinical event 
(thrombosis in arterial or venous circulation or adverse outcome of 
pregnancy) accompanied by a persistent positive antiphospholipid 
antibody test (any) on two occasions at least 12 weeks apart. Recent 
data from the TRAPs study has resulted in the regulatory bodies indi-
cating that warfarin is the optimal anticoagulant for patients with VTE 
associated with APS.
 25.3.  A 7-year-old Italian boy attends the local hospital. He has 
been unwell for 5 days with a mild fever, low energy and poor 
appetite. On examination he is listless with conjunctival pallor. 
His cheeks appear ushed. A widespread, ne erythematous 
rash over the trunk and limbs is noted. Bloods show:
WBC 14.9 × 109 /L (4–11)
Hb 51 g/L (113–141)
MCV 72 fL (80–100)
Reticulocytes 12 × 109/L (25–85)
Bilirubin 62 µmol/L (3–21)
Blood lm: many spherocytes and atypical lymphocytes
What is the most likely diagnosis?
 A. Hereditary spherocytosis with acute haemolytic crisis
 B. Infectious mononucleosis
 C. Hereditary spherocytosis with megaloblastic crisis
 D. Hereditary elliptocytosis with acute haemolytic crisis
 E. Hereditary spherocytosis with aplastic crisis
Answer: E.
Parvovirus B19 (erythrovirus) will precipitate an aplastic crisis in 
hereditary spherocytosis. There is a characteristic ‘ushed cheeks’ rash. 
The virus directly invades red cell precursors and temporarily switches 
off red cell production. Patients present with severe anaemia and a low 
reticulocyte count. An elevated MCV is associated with a megaloblastic 
crisis and an acute haemolytic crisis where a reticulocytosis will also be 
prominent. Elliptocytes are found in hereditary elliptocytosis. Infection 
mononucleosis presents with sore throat, lymphadenopathy and atypical 
mononuclear cells on the blood lm in the absence of spherocytes.
 25.4.  A 55-year-old man presents with further relapse of diffuse 
large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (DLBL) having failed 
previous treatments with R-CHOP chemotherapy and R-DHAP 
chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation. 
In considering further treatment with CAR-T-cell therapy which 
of the following statements is true?
A. The patient must achieve a negative FDG PET-CT prior to 
CAR-T-cell therapy
B. CAR-T cells can be prepared and delivered within one week
C. The T cells are most commonly provided by an unrelated donor
D. A chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) is composed of part 
antibody molecule and part T-cell receptor
E. The treatment works by exhausting cytotoxic T-cell function
Answer: D.
The patient fulls one of the currently licensed indications for CAR-T-
cell therapy of multiply relapsed DLBL. The patient does not have to be in 
remission but the disease needs to be controlled enough for the patient to 
be t enough for the procedure. The process of preparing CAR-T cells is 
complex and takes about 8 weeks in total. Current CAR-T cells use autol-
ogous T cells taken from the patient. Future CAR-T-cell products may be 
prepared from donor T cells as so-called ‘off the shelf CAR-T cells’. The 
CAR-T cells work by enhanced recognition and killing of lymphoma cells 
by the modied T cells. T-cell exhaustion is a process by which tumours 
protect themselves. Checkpoint inhibitors reverse this process.
 25.5.  A 40-year-old woman presents with a persistent blocked nose 
associated with swelling of the left cheek. A CT scan shows 
a mass in the post-nasal space and involving the left maxillary 
sinus. A biopsy conrms plasmacytoma. Which of the following 
is in keeping with a diagnosis of solitary plasmacytoma?
A. Multiple lytic bone lesions on an MRI scan
B. 20% plasma cells in a bone marrow sample taken from the 
posterior iliac crest
C. Pancytopenia
D. Hypercalcaemia associated with acute renal failure
E. Low-level IgG paraprotein
Answer: E.
Extramedullary solitary plasmacytomas most commonly occur in the 
upper aero-digestive tract. They present as isolated tumours of plasma 
cells and other features of disseminated myeloma including multiple lytic 
lesions, hypercalcaemia, widespread marrow involvement and cyotopen-
ias are absent. A low-level intact paraprotein is commonly seen.

[[p1048]]
Rheumatology and 
bone disease
26
GPR Clunie
SH Ralston
Clinical examination of the musculoskeletal system 990
Functional anatomy and physiology 992
Bone 992
Joints 994
Skeletal muscle 995
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease 995
Joint aspiration 995
Imaging 996
Blood tests 997
Tissue biopsy 999
Electromyography 1000
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease 1000
Monoarthritis 1000
Polyarthritis 1000
Fracture 1001
Generalised musculoskeletal pain 1001
Muscle weakness 1002
Regional musculoskeletal pain 1003
Principles of management 1007
Education and lifestyle interventions 1007
Non-pharmacological interventions 1008
Pharmacological treatment 1009
Osteoarthritis 1014
Crystal-induced arthritis 1018
Fibromyalgia 1023
Bone and joint infections 1025
Rheumatoid arthritis 1027
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis 1032
Spondyloarthritides 1032
Axial spondyloarthritis 1033
Reactive arthritis 1035
Psoriatic arthritis 1036
Enteropathic (spondylo)arthritis 1038
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases 1038
Vasculitis 1044
Diseases of bone 1047
Osteoporosis 1047
Osteomalacia, rickets and vitamin D deciency 1053
Paget’s disease of bone 1057
Other bone diseases 1058
Bone and joint tumours 1059
Rheumatological involvement in other diseases 1059
Miscellaneous conditions 1060

[[p1049]]
990    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Observation
Extensor surfaces
Rheumatoid nodules
Swollen bursa
Psoriasis rash
Face
Rash
Alopecia
Mouth ulcers
Eyes
Trunk
Kyphosis
Scoliosis
Tender spots (fibromyalgia,
enthesitis)
 General appearance
 Gait
 Deformity
 Swelling
 Redness
 Rash
Hands
Swelling
Deformity
Nail changes
Tophi
Raynaud’s
Feet
Deformity
Swelling (gout, dactylitis)
Redness
Rheumatoid nodules
Heberdens and Bouchard’s
nodes in osteoarthritis
Synovitis and deformity
in rheumatoid arthritis
Butterfly rash in systemic
lupus erythematosus
Scleritis in rheumatoid
arthritis
Legs
Deformity
Swelling
Restricted movement
Bone deformity in
Paget’s disease
Nail dystrophy in
psoriatic arthritis
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
1
3
4
5
6
Clinical examination of the musculoskeletal system

[[p1050]]
Clinical examination of the musculoskeletal system    991
26
Ask patient to put hands behind
head (tests shoulder movements)
Inspect
hands for
swelling or
deformity
2 Arms
Ask patient to
make a fist and
open and close
fingers (tests
hand function)
Squeeze
metacarpals
(tests for
inflammation)
3 Legs
Flex each hip
with hand on knee.
Rotate hips
internally and
externally (tests
hip movements
and detects
knee crepitus)
Inspect ankles and feet.
Squeeze forefoot (tests for
metatarsophalangeal synovitis)
Palpate each knee for warmth
and swelling
(tests for synovitis and effusion)
4 Spine
5 Schöber’s test
Patient slides hand down
leg to knee (tests lateral
spine flexion)
10 cm
15 cm
Ask patient to try to put
ear on shoulder (tests
lateral flexion cervical
spine)
Patient looks at ceiling
and then puts chin on
chest (tests flexion and
extension cervical spine)
Mark skin with pen in
midline about 4 cm
below superior iliac
crest. Make another
mark in midline 10 cm
above first. Ask patient
to bend forwards.
Normally, distance
between marks should
increase to 15 cm
Stand behind
patient and hold
their pelvis.
Ask them to turn
from side to side
without moving
their feet (tests
thoracolumbar
rotation)
Inspect spine from behind and side,
looking for scoliosis, kyphosis or
localised deformity. Ask patient to
touch toes
1 Gait
Ask patient to walk for a
few steps, then come back.
Look for pain or limp
Press over supraspinatus
(tests for hyperalgesia)
Patient turns palms up and
down with elbows at side (tests
supination and pronation
of wrists and elbow)
Patient flexes elbows to touch
shoulder (tests elbow flexion)
General Assessment of Locomotor System (GALS) and Schöber’s test

[[p1051]]
992    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Osteocytes
Osteoblasts
Osteoclasts
Trabecular bone
Haversian system
Blood
vessels
Collagen
lamellae
Osteocytes
Cortical bone
Synovium
Articular cartilage
Growth
plate
Calcified zone
Hypertrophic zone
Proliferative zone
Bone
Synovial
lining cells
Joint
capsule
Myofilament
Myofibril
Fascicle
Chondrocytes
Calcified
cartilage
Subchondral
bone
Muscle
Epiphysis
Enthesis
Tendon
Bone
Fig. 26.1 Structure of the major musculoskeletal tissues.
Disorders of the musculoskeletal system affect all ages and ethnic 
groups. In the UK, about 25% of new consultations in general prac-
tice are for musculoskeletal symptoms. Musculoskeletal diseases may 
arise from processes affecting bones, joints, muscles, or connective tis-
sues such as skin and tendon. The principal manifestations are pain and 
impairment of locomotor function.
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system tend to be more common in 
women and most increase in frequency with increasing age. They are the 
most common cause of physical disability in older people and account 
for one-third of physical disability at all ages.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The musculoskeletal system is responsible for movement of the body, 
provides a structural framework to protect internal organs and acts as a 
reservoir for storage of calcium and phosphate in the regulation of min-
eral homeostasis. The main components of the musculoskeletal system 
are depicted in Figure 26.1.
Bone
Bones fall into two main types, based on their embryonic development. 
Flat bones, such as the skull, develop by intramembranous ossication, 
in which embryonic broblasts differentiate directly into bone within con-
densations of mesenchymal tissue during early fetal life. Long bones, 
such as the femur and radius, develop by endochondral ossication from 
a cartilage template. During development, the cartilage is invaded by 
vascular tissue containing osteoprogenitor cells and is gradually replaced 
by bone from centres of ossication situated in the middle and at the 
ends of the bone. A thin remnant of cartilage called the growth plate or 
epiphysis remains at each end of long bones and chondrocyte prolifera-
tion here is responsible for skeletal growth during childhood and adoles-
cence. At the end of puberty, the increased levels of sex hormones halt 
cell division in the growth plate. The cartilage remnant then disappears 
as the epiphysis fuses and longitudinal bone growth ceases.
Two types of bone tissue are present in the normal skeleton (Fig.26.1). 
Cortical bone is formed from Haversian systems, comprising concentric 
lamellae of bone tissue surrounding a central canal that contains blood 
vessels. Cortical bone is dense and forms a hard envelope around the 
long bones. Trabecular or cancellous bone lls the centre of the bone 
and consists of an interconnecting meshwork of trabeculae, separated 
by spaces lled with bone marrow. Important cell types in bone are:
 Osteoclasts: multinucleated cells of haematopoietic origin, responsible 
for bone resorption.
 Osteoblasts: mononuclear cells derived from marrow stromal cells 
responsible for bone formation.
 Osteocytes: cells that differentiate from osteoblasts that become 
embedded in bone matrix during bone formation. They are responsible 
for sensing and responding to mechanical stimuli and for coordinating 
osteoclast and osteoblast activity by producing receptor activator of 
nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) and sclerostin (SOST).
 Bone marrow stromal cells: cells that produce RANKL and macro-
phage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), which act together to 
stimulate osteoclast formation, and other cytokines that support 
haematopoiesis.
 Bone lining cells: attened cells lining the bone surface that differ-
entiate from osteoblasts when bone formation is complete.

[[p1052]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    993
26
Bone-lining cells
Osteoclasts
Microdamage
Formation
Quiescence
Resorption
Reversal
Apoptotic
osteoclast
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
Osteocytes
Mineralisation
Fig. 26.2 The bone remodelling cycle. Bone is renewed and repaired by the 
process of bone remodelling. This begins by removal of old and damaged bone by 
osteoclasts during the phase of bone resorption. After about 10 days, the osteoclasts 
undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis) and during the reversal phase are 
replaced by osteoblasts, which begin to ll in the resorbed area with new bone 
matrix, heralding the start of bone formation. The bone matrix is initially uncalcied 
(osteoid) but then becomes mineralised to form mature bone.
Bone matrix and mineral
The most abundant protein of bone is type I collagen, which is formed 
from two α1 peptide chains and one α2 chain wound together in a triple 
helix. Type I collagen is proteolytically processed inside the cell before 
being laid down in the extracellular space, releasing propeptide frag-
ments that can be used as biochemical markers of bone formation. 
Subsequently, the collagen brils become ‘cross-linked’ to one another 
by pyridinium molecules, a process that enhances bone strength. When 
bone is broken down by osteoclasts, the cross-links are released into 
the circulation. These can be measured biochemically and are some-
times used clinically to assess levels of bone resorption. Bone is nor-
mally laid down in an orderly fashion, but when bone turnover is high, 
as in Paget’s disease or severe hyperparathyroidism, it is laid down in a 
chaotic pattern, giving rise to ‘woven bone’ that is mechanically weak. 
Bone matrix also contains growth factors, other structural proteins and 
proteoglycans, thought to be involved in helping bone cells attach to 
bone matrix and in regulating bone cell activity. The other major compo-
nent of bone is mineral, comprised of calcium and phosphate crystals 
deposited between the collagen brils in the form of hydroxyapatite [Ca10
(PO4)6 (OH)2]. Mineralisation is essential for bone rigidity and strength, but 
over-mineralisation causes bone to become brittle. In clinical practice, 
increased mineralisation can occur in some types of osteogenesis imper-
fecta and in response to long-term bisphosphonate therapy.
Bone remodelling
Bone remodelling is required for renewal and repair of the skeleton 
throughout life. This is a cyclical process that has four phases: quies-
cence, resorption, reversal and formation, as illustrated in Figure 26.2. 
Remodelling starts with the attraction of osteoclast precursors in periph-
eral blood to the target site, probably by local release of chemotactic fac-
tors from areas of microdamage. The osteoclasts resorb bone and, after 
about 10 days, undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis), heralding 
the start of the reversal phase when osteoblast precursors are recruited 
to the resorption site. The osteoblast precursors differentiate into mature 
osteoblasts and form new bone during the formation phase. Initially, the 
matrix is unmineralised (osteoid) but eventually becomes mineralised to 
form mature bone. Some osteoblasts become trapped in bone matrix 
and differentiate into osteocytes, which play a key regulatory role in coor-
dinating bone formation and resorption, whereas others differentiate into 
bone-lining cells.
The cellular and molecular mediators of this bone remodelling are 
shown in more detail in Figure 26.3. Osteoclast precursors are derived 
from haematopoietic stem cells and differentiate into mature osteoclasts 
Osteoclast
precursor
RANKL
FGF23
SOST
OPG
M-CSF
RANKL
Wnt
Haematopoietic
stem cell
Bone marrow
stromal cells
Renal
phosphate
excretion
Osteoblast
Osteocyte
Osteoclast
Fig. 26.3 Cellular and molecular regulators of bone remodelling. Osteoclast precursors are derived from haematopoietic stem cells. They differentiate into mature 
osteoclasts in response to the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), which is produced by osteocytes, bone marrow stromal cells and activated T 
cells (not shown), and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), which is produced by bone marrow stromal cells. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is also produced in the 
bone microenvironment, where it inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption by blocking the effect of RANKL. Osteoblasts, which are derived from bone marrow stromal cells, are 
responsible for bone formation. Osteoblast activity is stimulated by signalling molecules in the Wnt family but inhibited by sclerostin (SOST), which is produced by osteocytes. In 
addition to their role in regulating osteoclast and osteoblast activity, osteocytes have an endocrine function in regulating phosphate homeostasis by producing broblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF23), which acts on the kidney to promote phosphate excretion.

[[p1053]]
994    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
26.1 Key regulators of bone remodelling
Mediator
Source
Main effects
Comment
RANKL
Osteocytes
Stimulates bone resorption
Activates RANK
Stromal cells
Activated T cells
Osteoprotegerin
Stromal cells
Inhibits bone resorption
Acts as decoy receptor for RANKL
Lymphocytes
Wnt
Stromal cells
Stimulates bone formation
Activates LRP receptors
Sclerostin
Osteocytes
Inhibits bone formation
Blocks effect of Wnt on LRP 
receptors
Parathyroid hormone
Parathyroid glands
Increases bone resorption and formation
Thyroid hormone
Thyroid gland
Increases bone resorption and formation
Oestrogen
Ovary
Inhibits bone resorption
Glucocorticoid
Adrenal gland
Inhibits bone formation
Exogenous
(LRP = lipoprotein receptor-related protein; RANKL = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand)
 26.2 Types of joint
Type
Range of  
movement
Examples
Fibrous
Minimal
Skull sutures
Fibrocartilaginous
Limited
Symphysis pubis
Costochondral junctions
Intervertebral discs
Sacroiliac joints
Synovial
Large
Most limb joints
Temporomandibular
Costovertebral
in response to M-CSF, produced by bone marrow stromal cells, and 
RANKL, produced by both osteocytes and bone marrow stromal cells. 
The RANKL binds to and activates a receptor called RANK (receptor 
activator of nuclear factor kappa B) on osteoclast precursors, promoting 
osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption. This effect is blocked by 
osteoprotegerin (OPG), which is a decoy receptor for RANKL that inhib-
its osteoclast formation. Once formed, mature osteoclasts attach to the 
bone surface by a tight sealing zone and secrete hydrochloric acid and 
proteolytic enzymes, including cathepsin K, into the space underneath, 
which is known as the Howship’s lacuna. The acid dissolves the mineral 
and cathepsin K degrades collagen. Osteocytes also produce sclerostin 
(SOST), which is a potent inhibitor of bone formation. Under conditions 
of mechanical loading, sclerostin production by osteocytes is inhibited, 
allowing bone formation to proceed, stimulated by members of the Wnt 
family of signalling proteins. The Wnt molecules stimulate bone forma-
tion by activating members of the lipoprotein receptor-related protein 
(LRP) family, the most important of which are LRP4, LRP5 and LRP6. 
Sclerostin antagonises the effects of Wnt family members by blocking 
their interaction with LRP family members. Finally, osteocytes play a crit-
ical role in phosphate homeostasis by producing the hormone FGF23, 
which regulates renal tubular phosphate reabsorption. Key regulators of 
bone remodelling are summarised in Box 26.1
Mineralisation of bone is critically dependent on the enzyme alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP), which is produced by osteoblasts and degrades 
pyrophosphate, an inhibitor of mineralisation. Bone remodelling is pre-
dominantly regulated at a local level but can be inuenced by circulating 
hormones or mechanical loading, which can up-regulate or down-regu-
late remodelling across the whole skeleton (Box 26.1).
Joints
There are three main types of joint: brous, brocartilaginous and syno-
vial (Box 26.2).
Fibrous and brocartilaginous joints
These comprise a simple bridge of brous or brocartilaginous tissue 
joining two bones together where there is little requirement for movement 
such as the symphysis pubis. The intervertebral disc is a special type of 
brocartilaginous joint in which an amorphous area, called the nucleus 
pulposus, lies in the centre of the brocartilaginous bridge. The nucleus 
has a high water content and acts as a cushion to improve the disc’s 
shock-absorbing properties.
Synovial joints
These are complex structures containing several cell types. They are 
found where a wide range of movement is needed (Fig. 26.4).
Articular cartilage
This avascular tissue covers the bone ends in synovial joints. Cartilage 
cells (chondrocytes) are responsible for synthesis and turnover of car-
tilage, which consists of a mesh of type II collagen brils that extend 
through a hydrated ‘gel’ of proteoglycan molecules. The most important 
proteoglycan is aggrecan, which consists of a core protein to which sev-
eral glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side chains are attached (Fig. 26.5). The 
GAGs are polysaccharides that consist of long chains of disaccharide 
repeats comprising one normal sugar and an amino sugar. The most 
abundant GAGs in aggrecan are chondroitin sulphate and keratan sul-
phate. Hyaluronan is another important GAG that binds to aggrecan 
molecules to form very large complexes with a total molecular weight of 
more than 100 million. Aggrecan has a strong negative charge and avidly 
binds water molecules to assume a shape that occupies the maximum 
possible volume available. The expansive force of the hydrated aggre-
can, combined with the restrictive strength of the collagen mesh, gives 
articular cartilage excellent shock-absorbing properties.
With ageing, the concentration of chondroitin sulphate decreases, 
whereas that of keratan sulphate increases, resulting in reduced water 
content and shock-absorbing properties. These changes differ from 
those found in osteoarthritis, where there is abnormal chondrocyte divi-
sion, loss of proteoglycan from matrix and an increase in water content. 

[[p1054]]
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease    995
26
Bone
Skin and
subcutaneous
tissue
Fibrocartilage
pad
Hyaline articular
cartilage
Joint space
Synovium
Capsule
Bursa
Tendon
Tendon
sheath
Ligamentous
thickening
of capsule
Muscle
Bursa
Fig. 26.4 Structure of a synovial joint.
Aggrecan
Core protein
Link protein
Chondroitin
sulphate
Keratan
sulphate
Type II collagen
fibrils
Hyaluronan
Fig. 26.5 Ultrastructure of articular cartilage.
Cartilage matrix is constantly turning over and in health there is a perfect 
balance between synthesis and degradation. Degradation of cartilage 
matrix is carried out by aggrecanases and matrix metalloproteinases, 
responsible for the breakdown of proteins and proteoglycans, and by 
glycosidases, responsible for the breakdown of GAGs. Pro-inammatory 
cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 
which are released during inammation, stimulate production of aggre-
canase and metalloproteinases, causing cartilage degradation.
Synovial uid
The surfaces of articular cartilage are separated by a space lled with 
synovial uid (SF), a viscous liquid that lubricates the joint. It is an ultra-
ltrate of plasma, into which synovial cells secrete hyaluronan and 
proteoglycans.
Intra-articular discs
Some joints contain brocartilaginous discs within the joint space that 
act as shock absorbers. The most clinically important are the menisci of 
the knee. These are avascular structures that remain viable because of 
diffusion of oxygen and nutrients from the SF.
Synovial membrane, joint capsule and bursae
The bones of synovial joints are connected by the joint capsule, a brous 
structure richly supplied with blood vessels, nerves and lymphatics which 
encases the joint. Ligaments are discrete, regional thickenings of the 
capsule that act to stabilise joints (see Fig. 26.4). The inner surface of 
the joint capsule is the synovial membrane, comprising an outer layer of 
blood vessels and loose connective tissue that is rich in type I collagen, 
and an inner layer 1–4 cells thick consisting of two main cell types. Type 
A synoviocytes are phagocytic cells derived from the monocyte/mac-
rophage lineage and are responsible for removing particulate matter from 
the joint cavity; type B synoviocytes are broblast-like cells that secrete 
SF. Most inammatory and degenerative joint diseases are associated 
with thickening of the synovial membrane and inltration by lymphocytes, 
polymorphs and macrophages.
Bursae are hollow sacs lined with synovium and contain a small 
amount of SF. They help tendons and muscles move smoothly in relation 
to bones and other articular structures.
Skeletal muscle
Skeletal muscles are responsible for body movements and respiration. 
Muscle consists of bundles of cells (myocytes) embedded in ne con-
nective tissue containing nerves and blood vessels. Myocytes are large, 
elongated, multinucleated cells formed by fusion of mononuclear pre-
cursors (myoblasts) in early embryonic life. The nuclei lie peripherally 
and the centre of the cell contains actin and myosin molecules, which 
interdigitate with one another to form the myobrils that are responsible 
for muscle contraction. The molecular mechanisms of skeletal mus-
cle contraction are the same as for cardiac muscle (p. 389). Myocytes 
contain many mitochondria that provide the large amounts of adeno-
sine triphosphate (ATP) necessary for muscle contraction and are rich 
in the protein myoglobin, which acts as a reservoir for oxygen during 
contraction.
Individual myobrils are organised into bundles (fasciculi) that are 
bound together by a thin layer of connective tissue (the perimysium). The 
surface of the muscle is surrounded by a thicker layer of connective tis-
sue, the epimysium, which merges with the perimysium to form the mus-
cle tendon. Tendons are tough, brous structures that attach muscles 
to a point of insertion on the bone surface called the enthesis. Entheses 
transmit tensile load from soft tissues to bone and are composed of 
either brous tissue or brocartilage, depending on the local needs of 
the tissue in adapting to physical stress. The entheses are particularly 
affected by inammation in patients with spondyloarthritis, as discussed 
later in this chapter.
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease
Clinical history and examination usually provide sufcient information 
for the diagnosis and management of many musculoskeletal diseases. 
Investigations are helpful in conrming the diagnosis, assessing disease 
activity and indicating prognosis. Investigations that are commonly used 
in musculoskeletal disease are discussed in more detail below
Joint aspiration
Joint aspiration with examination of SF is pivotal in patients with sus-
pected septic arthritis, crystal arthritis or intra-articular bleeding. It should 
be carried out in all individuals with acute monoarthritis and samples 
should be sent for microbiology and clinical chemistry.
It is possible to obtain SF by aspiration from most peripheral joints 
and only a small amount is required for diagnostic purposes. Normal SF 
is present in small volume, is clear and either colourless or pale yellow, 
and has a high viscosity. It contains few cells. With joint inammation, 
the volume increases, the cell count and the proportion of neutrophils 
rise (causing turbidity), and the viscosity reduces (due to enzymatic deg-
radation of hyaluronan and aggrecan). Turbid uid with a high neutro-
phil count occurs in septic arthritis, crystal arthritis and reactive arthritis. 
High concentrations of urate crystals or cholesterol can make SF appear 
white. Non-uniform blood-staining usually reects needle trauma to the 
synovium. Uniform blood-staining is most commonly due to a bleeding 
diathesis, trauma or pigmented villonodular synovitis, but can also occur 
in severe inammatory synovitis. A lipid layer oating above blood-stained 

[[p1055]]
996    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Fig. 26.6 Compensated polarised light microscopy of synovial uids (× 400).
positive birefringence under polarised light and are few in number. They are more 
difcult to detect than urate crystals.
26.3 Radiographic abnormalities in selected 
rheumatic diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis
 Periarticular osteoporosis
 Joint subluxation
 Marginal joint erosions
 Joint space narrowing
Osteoporosis
 Osteopenia
 Non-vertebral fractures
 Vertebral fractures
 Cortical thinning
Paget’s disease
 Bone expansion
 Osteosclerosis and lysis
 Abnormal trabecular pattern
 Pseudofractures
Psoriatic arthritis
 Sacroiliitis
 Proliferative enthesis erosions
 Syndesmophytes
 Enthesophytes
 Bone sclerosis
 Juxta-articular new bone
Osteoarthritis
 Joint space narrowing
 Osteophytes
 Subchondral sclerosis
 Joint deformity
 Subchondral cysts
uid is diagnostic of intra-articular fracture and is caused by release of 
bone marrow fat into the joint.
Crystals can be identied by compensated polarised light microscopy 
of fresh SF (to avoid crystal dissolution and post-aspiration crystallisa-
tion). Urate crystals are long and needle-shaped, and show a strong 
light intensity and negative birefringence (Fig. 26.6A). Calcium pyrophos-
phate crystals are smaller, rhomboid in shape and usually less numerous 
than urate crystals; they have weak intensity and positive birefringence 
(Fig. 26.6B).
Imaging
Plain X-rays
X-rays show structural changes that are of value in the differential diag-
nosis and monitoring of many bone and joint diseases (Box 26.3).
They are of diagnostic value in osteoarthritis (OA), where they demon-
strate joint space narrowing that tends to be focal rather than wide-
spread (as seen in inammatory arthritis). Other features of OA detected 
on X-rays include osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, bone cysts and 
calcied loose bodies within the synovium (see Fig. 26.18). Erosions and 
sclerosis of the sacroiliac joints and syndesmophytes in the spine may 
be observed in spondyloarthritis (SpA; see Fig. 26.41). Erosions, asso-
ciated with new bone formation and periosteal reaction, also occur in 
peripheral joints and at entheses in SpA. In tophaceous gout, well-de-
ned punched-out erosions may occur (see Fig. 26.27). Calcication of 
cartilage, tendons and soft tissues or muscle occurs mainly in chondro-
calcinosis (see Fig. 26.28), calcium-containing crystal diseases, tumoral 
calcinosis and autoimmune connective tissue diseases.
X-rays are of limited value in the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
because features such as erosions, joint space narrowing and periarticu-
lar osteoporosis may be detectable only after several months or even 
years. The main indication for X-rays in RA is in the assessment of dis-
ease over time when structural damage to the joints is suspected.
Radionuclide bone scintigraphy
Radionuclide bone scintigraphy is mainly used in the diagnosis of met-
astatic bone disease and Paget’s disease of bone. Abnormalities may 
also be observed in primary bone tumours, complex regional pain syn-
drome, OA and different types of inammatory arthritis, but the changes 
are non-specic and other imaging modalities are more commonly 
used. Bone scintigraphy involves gamma-camera imaging following an 
intravenous injection of 99mTc-labelled bisphosphonate. Early post-in-
jection images reect blood ow and can show increased perfusion of 
inamed synovium, Pagetic bone or primary or secondary bone tumours. 
Delayed images taken a few hours later reect bone remodelling as the 
99mTc-labelled bisphosphonate localises to sites of active bone turnover. 
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) combines radi-
onuclide imaging with computed tomography. Bone radionuclide SPECT 
can provide accurate anatomical localisation of abnormalities within 
bone and is of particular value in the assessment of patients with chronic 
low back and pelvic pain where standard scinti graphy has yielded incon-
clusive results.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) gives detailed information on anat-
omy, allowing three-dimensional visualisation of bone and soft tissues 
that cannot be adequately assessed by plain X-rays. The technique is 
valuable in the assessment and diagnosis of many musculoskeletal dis-
eases (Box 26.4). T1-weighted sequences are useful for dening anat-
omy, whereas T2-weighted sequences are useful for assessing tissue 
water content, which is often increased in synovitis and other inam-
matory disorders (Fig. 26.7). MRI sequences that suppress signal from 
fat, such as short TI inversion recovery (STIR), are helpful when evalu-
ating inammatory disease. Contrast agents, such as gadolinium, can be 
administered to increase sensitivity in detecting erosions and synovitis.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is a useful investigation for conrmation of small joint 
synovitis and erosions, for anatomical location of periarticular lesions, for 
characterisation of tendon lesions and for guided injection of joints and 
bursae. Ultrasonography is more sensitive than clinical examination for 
the detection of early synovitis and can be helpful in the diagnosis and 
assessment of patients with suspected inammatory arthritis. In addi-
tion to locating synovial thickening and effusions, ultrasound can detect 
A
B
26.4 Conditions detected by magnetic resonance imaging
 Osteonecrosis
 Intervertebral disc disease
 Nerve root entrapment
 Spinal cord compression
 Spinal stenosis
 Infection
 Complex regional  
pain syndrome
 Malignancy
 Fractures
 Meniscal disease
 Synovitis
 Sacroiliitis and enthesitides
 Inammatory myositis
 Rotator cuff tears, bursitis and 
tenosynovitis

[[p1056]]
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease    997
26
and as the T-score, which reect the number of standard deviations by 
which the patient’s BMD value differs from that in a young healthy control 
(Fig. 26.9). Osteoporosis is dened to be present when the T-score is 
2.5 or below; osteopenia is dened to be present when the T-score lies 
between 1.0 and 2.5; and normal BMD is dened to be present when 
the T-score lies between 
1.0 and below +2.5. T score values above 
+2.5 indicate high bone density. It is important to recognize that T-score 
values fall with age in the whole population as bone density falls, meaning 
that many people aged 60 and above have osteopenia or osteoporosis 
based on T-score, even though the BMD results are in the ‘normal range’ 
for that age group. Bone density needs to be interpreted carefully taking 
into account coexisting conditions, such as aortic calcication, vertebral 
fractures, degenerative disc disease and OA, all of which can cause high 
BMD results even in the presence of osteoporosis. Radiographic correla-
tion is helpful in these circumstances.
Blood tests
Haematology
Abnormalities in the full blood count (FBC) often occur in inammatory 
rheumatic diseases, but changes are usually non-specic. Examples 
include neutrophilia in crystal arthritides and septic arthritis neutrope-
nia in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and lymphopenia in auto-
immune rheumatic and connective tissue diseases. Reduced levels of 
increased blood ow within synovium using power Doppler imaging, an 
option that is available on most modern ultrasound machines (Fig. 26.8). 
Ultrasound is also used in the differential diagnosis of giant cell arteritis 
(GCA) to look for evidence of thickening of the vessel wall in the temporal 
or axillary arteries.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is used selectively for assessing patients 
with bone and joint disease. CT may be used when skeletal anatomy 
needs dening, when calcic lesions are being assessed, when MRI is 
contraindicated, or when articular regions are being evaluated in which 
an adjacent joint replacement creates signal artefacts on MRI (using spe-
cic metal artefact reduction algorithms).
Dual X-ray absorptiometry
Dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is used to measure bone mineral den-
sity (BMD) and has a key role in the diagnosis and management of osteo-
porosis. Measurements at lumbar spine, hip and sometimes forearm are 
obtained. DXA works on the principle that calcium in bone attenuates pas-
sage of X-rays through the tissue in proportion to the amount of mineral 
present: the more bone mineral present, the higher the BMD value. The 
results are presented in terms of BMD (in grams of hydroxyapatite per cm2) 
Fig. 26.7 Magnetic resonance image showing joint synovitis. Coronal post-
contrast T1-weighted image shows extensive enhancement consistent with synovitis 
(white areas, arrowed) in both wrists, at the second metacarpophalangeal joint and 
proximal interphalangeal joints of the right hand. Courtesy of Dr I. Beggs.
Effusion
.
P
Fig. 26.8 Ultrasound image showing synovitis. Lateral image of a metacar-
pophalangeal joint in inammatory arthritis. The periosteum (P) of the phalanx shows 
as a white line. The dark, hypo-echoic area indicates an effusion. The coloured areas 
demonstrated by power Doppler indicate increased vascularity. The inset shows a 
transverse image of the same joint. Courtesy of Dr N. McKay.
-24.5%#
-24.8%#
-27.7%#
-26.5%#
-22.1%#
BMD change
vs baseline
BMD change
vs previous
Scan date
Age
BMD
11.01.2021
78
0.648
T-score
-2.4
50
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
55 60 65
Age
Total
BMD
70 75 80
0.5%
03.01.2018
75
0.645
-2.4
3.9%
21.01.2014
71
0.620
-2.6
-1.6%
05.09.2008
66
0.630
-2.6
-5.7%*
13.12.2004
62
0.668
-2.2
-22.1%#
21.01.1993
*Statistically significant change since the previous scan results.
#Statistically significant change since baseline data in 1993.
50
0.857
-0.7
B
A
Fig. 26.9 Left hip dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan. 
mineral density (BMD) of the total hip ROI over time. The extent of the blue panels 
above and below the central line represents ±2 standard deviations from the average 
BMD of the reference population for age. Data panel: BMD estimates, corresponding 
T-scores (see text for explanation) and changes in BMD over time (and with ageing) 
are shown. By 2008 this patient had become osteoporotic (T-score < −2.5). Since 
2014 (age 71 years) the patient has been benetting from effective osteoporosis 
treatment and BMD has increased.

[[p1057]]
998    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
haemoglobin and raised platelets are a common and important nding 
in active inammatory diseases. Some disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs) and biologics can cause marrow toxicity and require 
regular monitoring of the FBC. Additional tests that are useful in assess-
ing rheumatic diseases include the direct antiglobulin test (which can 
indicate intravascular haemolysis in SLE).
Biochemistry
Routine biochemistry is useful for assessing metabolic bone disease, muscle 
diseases and gout, and is essential in monitoring DMARDs and biologic 
drugs (renal and hepatic function). Several bone diseases, including 
Paget’s disease, renal bone disease and osteomalacia, give a character-
istic pattern that can be helpful diagnostically (Box 26.5). Serum levels of 
uric acid are usually raised in gout, but a normal level does not exclude 
it, especially during an acute attack when uric acid levels temporarily fall. 
Equally, an elevated serum uric acid does not conrm the diagnosis, since 
most hyperuricaemic people never develop gout. Levels of C-reactive 
protein (CRP) are a useful marker of infection and inammation, and are 
more specic than the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). An exception 
is in autoimmune connective tissue diseases, such as SLE and systemic 
sclerosis, where CRP may be normal but the ESR raised in active disease. 
Accordingly, an elevated CRP in a patient with SLE or systemic sclerosis 
suggests an intercurrent illness, such as sepsis, rather than active disease. 
Serum creatine phosphokinase (CK) levels are useful in the diagnosis of 
myopathy or myositis, but specicity and sensitivity are poor and raised 
levels may occur in other conditions (Box 26.6).
Immunology
Autoantibody tests are widely used in the diagnosis of rheumatic dis-
eases. Whatever test is used, the results must be interpreted in light of 
the clinical picture and the different detection and assay systems used 
in different hospitals.
Rheumatoid factor
Rheumatoid factor (RF) is an antibody directed against the Fc fragment 
of human immunoglobulin. In routine clinical practice, immunoglobulin M 
(IgM) RF is usually measured. About 70% of patients with RA test posi-
tive for RF, but the specicity for RA is poor (Box 26.7). High RF titres in 
RA are associated with more severe disease and extra-articular features.
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPA) recognise peptides in which 
the amino acid arginine has been converted to citrulline by peptidylargi-
nine deiminase, an enzyme abundant in inamed synovium and in a vari-
ety of mucosal structures. Like RF, ACPA is positive in around 70% of 
people with RA, but specicity is higher (> 95%) and consequently ACPA 
has largely superseded RF in the diagnosis of RA. Like RF, ACPA posi-
tivity is associated with more severe disease and extra-articular features. 
It is important to emphasise that ACPA positivity does not equate to a 
diagnosis of RA since a proportion of people in the normal population 
are ACPA positive. These individuals are at increased risk of developing 
RA at some point in life, but may never do so. The pathogenic role of 
ACPAs is still debated but they may amplify the synovial response to an 
inammatory stimulus.
Antinuclear antibodies
Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) are directed against one or more compo-
nents of the cell nucleus, including nucleic acids and the proteins that 
process DNA or RNA. They occur in many inammatory rheumatic dis-
eases, but are also found at low titre in normal individuals and in other 
diseases (Box 26.8). ANAs are not associated with disease severity or 
activity. The most common indication for ANA testing is in patients sus-
pected of having SLE or other autoimmune connective tissue diseases. 
ANA has high sensitivity for SLE (100%), but low specicity (10%–40%). 
A negative ANA virtually excludes SLE but a positive result does not 
conrm it.
*The CK-MB cardiac-specic isoform is disproportionately elevated compared with total CPK.
26.7 Conditions associated with a positive rheumatoid factor*
Condition
Approximate  
frequency (%)
Rheumatoid arthritis with nodules and extra-articular 
manifestations
100
Rheumatoid arthritis (overall)
70
Primary Sjögren syndrome
90
Mixed essential cryoglobulinaemia
90
Primary biliary cholangitis
50
Infective endocarditis
40
Systemic lupus erythematosus
30
Tuberculosis
15
Age >65 years
20
*Normal healthy people can be positive for rheumatoid factor.
26.6 Causes of an elevated serum creatinine phosphokinase 
(CPK)
 Inammatory myositis ± vasculitis
 Muscular dystrophy
 Motor neuron disease
 Alcohol, drugs (especially statins)
 Myocardial infarction*
 Trauma, strenuous exercise, prolonged immobilisation after a fall
 Hypothyroidism, metabolic myopathy
 Viral myositis
26.5 Typical biochemical features in various bone diseases
Calcium
Phosphate
ALP
PTH
FGF23
25(OH)D
Osteoporosis
N
N
N (↑ after fracture)
N or ↑
N
N or ↓
Paget’s disease
N
N
↑↑
N or ↑
N
N or ↓
Renal osteodystrophy
N or ↓
↑
↑
↑↑
↑↑
N or ↓
Vitamin D-decient osteomalacia
N or ↓
N or ↓
↑
↑↑
N or ↓
↓↓
Hypophosphataemic rickets
N
↓↓
↑
N or ↑
↑↑
N or ↓
Primary hyperparathyroidism
↑/↑↑
N or ↓
N or ↑
↑/↑↑
N or ↑
N or ↓
(N = normal; single arrow = increased or decreased; double arrow = greatly increased or decreased; ALP = alkaline phosphatase; FGF23 = broblast growth factor 23; 25(OH)D = 25 hydroxy-
vitamin D; PTH = parathyroid hormone)

[[p1058]]
Investigation of musculoskeletal disease    999
26
Anti-DNA antibodies bind to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). They 
are useful in SLE monitoring as high titres are associated with more 
severe disease and an increase in antibody titre may precede relapse. 
Most commonly, testing for anti-DNA antibodies is performed by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) but immunouorescent 
staining of DNA from the microorganism Crithidia luciliae is also used 
and has a much higher specicity than dsDNA ELISA for the diagnosis 
of SLE. It is primarily used in patients where the clinical suspicion of 
SLE is high but where standard dsDNA tests have yielded equivocal 
results.
It is also possible to screen for antibodies to various extractable 
nuclear antigens (ENA). These act as biomarkers for certain subtypes of 
autoimmune connective tissue diseases and some complications of SLE, 
but for most disorders their sensitivity and specicity are poor (Box 26.9).
Antiphospholipid antibodies
These antibodies can be detected in patients with SLE and in the 
antiphospholipid syndrome (see Box 25.69). In clinical practice the most 
commonly used tests are for antibodies to cardiolipin/beta2-glycoprotein 1 
(β2GP1) and the dilute Russell viper venom test, which is a functional 
assay for antibodies that interfere with the clotting mechanism in vitro.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are IgG antibodies directed 
against the cytoplasmic constituents of neutrophils and are useful in 
the diagnosis and monitoring of systemic vasculitis. Two common pat-
terns are described by immunouorescence: cytoplasmic uorescence 
(c-ANCA), which is caused by antibodies to proteinase-3 (PR3); and per-
inuclear uorescence (p-ANCA), which is caused by antibodies to mye-
loperoxidase (MPO) and other proteins, such as lactoferrin and elastase. 
These antibodies are not specic for vasculitis and positive results may 
be found in autoimmune liver disease, malignancy, infection (bacterial 
and human immunodeciency virus, HIV), inammatory bowel disease 
(IBD), RA, SLE and pulmonary brosis.
Complement and complement component antibodies
Low complement C3 is an indicator of active SLE and some forms of 
vasculitis owing to consumption of complement by immune complexes 
(see Fig. 4.4). Low C4 is less specic for SLE activity. High C3 and func-
tional measures of complement activation are non-specic features of 
inammation. It is possible to screen for autoantibodies directed against 
a variety of other complement components. Some have clinical utility. For 
example, anti-C1q antibodies are associated with SLE, but also occur in 
hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome (HUVS).
Approach to autoantibody testing and interpretation
Testing for autoantibodies should only be performed to gain support 
for the diagnosis when clinical assessment suggests there may be an 
underlying autoimmune disease. They are not screening tests for the 
presence of autoimmune disease since they have limited sensitivity and 
specicity (see Box 26.9). Routine re-testing of autoantibody proles 
is seldom helpful unless the clinical features of the disease change or 
evolve with time.
Tissue biopsy
Tissue biopsy is useful in conrming the diagnosis in certain musculo-
skeletal diseases.
Synovial biopsy can be useful in selected patients with chronic inam-
matory monoarthritis or tenosynovitis to rule out chronic infectious 
causes, especially mycobacterial infections. Synovial biopsy can be 
obtained arthroscopically or by using ultrasound guidance under local 
anaesthetic.
Temporal artery biopsy can be of value in patients suspected of having 
giant cell arteritis.
Biopsies of affected tissues, such as skin, lung, nasopharynx, gut, 
kidney and muscle, are of value in conrming a diagnosis of systemic 
vasculitis.
Muscle biopsy is important in the investigation of myopathy and 
inammatory myositis. It is usually taken from the quadriceps or deltoid 
through a small skin incision under local anaesthetic. Since myositis can 
be patchy in nature, MRI is sometimes used to localise the best site 
for biopsy. Immunohistochemical staining, together with plain histology, 
gives information on primary and secondary muscle and neuromuscular 
26.8 Conditions associated with a positive 
antinuclear antibody*
Condition
Approximate  
frequency (%)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
100
Systemic sclerosis
90–95
Sjögren syndrome
40–70
Dermatomyositis or polymyositis
30–80
Mixed connective tissue disease
100
Autoimmune hepatitis
100
Rheumatoid arthritis
30–50
Autoimmune thyroid disease
30–50
Malignancy
Varies widely
Infectious diseases
Varies widely
*Low-titre positive antinuclear antibody can occur in people without autoimmune disease, 
without obvious clinical consequences, particularly in older adults.
26.9 Conditions associated with antibodies to 
extractable nuclear antigens
Antibody (target/other name)
Disease association
Anti-centromere antibody
Localised cutaneous systemic sclerosis 
(sensitivity 60%, specicity 98%)
Anti-histone antibody
Drug-induced lupus (80%)
Anti-Jo-1  
(anti-histidyl-tRNA synthetase)
Polymyositis, dermatomyositis or 
polymyositis–systemic sclerosis overlap 
(20%–30%)
Particularly associated with interstitial 
lung disease
Anti-La antibody  
(anti-SS-B)
Sjögren syndrome (60%)
SLE (20%–60%)
Anti-ribonucleoprotein  
antibody (anti-RNP)
Mixed connective tissue disease 
(100%)
SLE (25%–50%), usually in conjunction 
with anti-Sm antibodies
Anti-Ro antibody  
(anti-SS-A)
SLE (35%–60%): associated with 
photosensitivity, thrombocytopenia and 
subacute cutaneous lupus
Maternal anti-Ro antibodies associated 
with neonatal lupus and congenital 
heart block
Sjögren syndrome (40%–80%)
Anti-RNA polymerase
Diffuse systemic sclerosis (15%)
Anti Sm (anti-Smith antibody)
SLE (15%–30%); associated with renal 
disease
Anti-Scl-70  
(anti-topoisomerase I antibody)
Diffuse systemic sclerosis (15%); 
associated with more severe organ 
involvement, including pulmonary 
brosis
(SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus)

[[p1059]]
1000    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
26.10 Causes of monoarthritis
Common
 Gout
 Spondyloarthritis
 Pseudogout
 Psoriatic arthritis
 Trauma
 Reactive arthritis
 Haemarthrosis
 Enteropathic arthritis
Less common
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Tuberculosis
 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
 Leukaemia*
 Pigmented villonodular synovitis
 Gonococcal infection
 Foreign body reaction
 Osteomyelitis*
*In children, both leukaemia and osteomyelitis may present with monoarthritis.
disease. Repeat biopsies are sometimes used to monitor the response 
to treatment.
Bone biopsy is occasionally required in patients with inltrative disor-
ders of bone, renal bone disease, suspected chronic infection or malig-
nancy and rarely to conrm or exclude the presence of osteomalacia. 
For focal lesions, the biopsy should be taken under X-ray guidance or 
at open surgery, from an affected site. If a systemic bone disease or 
disorder of mineralisation is suspected, biopsies are usually taken from 
the iliac crest using a large-diameter (8 mm) trephine needle under local 
anaesthetic and processed without demineralisation.
Electromyography
Electromyography is of value in the investigation of suspected myopathy 
and inammatory myositis, when it shows the diagnostic triad of:
 spontaneous brillation
 short-duration action potentials in a polyphasic disorganised outline
 repetitive bouts of high-voltage oscillations on needle contact with 
diseased muscle.
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal 
disease
The pattern of joint involvement and time-course can often provide valu-
able clues to the underlying diagnosis. The most common clinical pres-
entations of musculoskeletal disease are discussed in this section.
Monoarthritis
This refers to pain and swelling affecting a single joint. The most com-
mon causes are crystal arthritis, sepsis, reactive arthritis and oligoar-
ticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Other potential causes are shown in 
Box 26.10
Clinical assessment
The clinical history, pattern of joint involvement, speed of onset, and age 
and gender of the patient all give clues to the most likely diagnosis. A very 
rapid onset (6–12 hours) is suggestive of either gout or acute calcium 
pyrophosphate arthritis (CPPA), which is also known as pseudogout. 
Both may be triggered by an intercurrent illness, dehydration or surgery. 
Gout classically affects younger men and particularly targets the rst 
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint, whereas CPPA tends to affect older 
women, often with pre-existing OA or calcium pyrophosphate deposition 
(CPPD) disease. Reactive arthritis can also develop acutely and may be 
preceded by a diarrhoeal illness or genital infection. Septic arthritis devel-
ops more slowly and continues to progress until treated. Haemarthrosis 
usually follows an injury and may be associated with a large effusion, 
in the absence of periarticular swelling or skin change. Pigmented villonodular 
synovitis also presents with synovial swelling and a large effusion, affect-
ing a single joint but with a gradual onset. Rheumatoid arthritis seldom 
presents with monoarthritis, but psoriatic arthritis (PsA) can present 
this way, although the onset is usually more gradual in both conditions. 
Osteoarthritis can present with pain affecting a single joint, but the onset 
is gradual. Although there may be bony swelling of joints affected by OA, 
synovitis and effusions are uncommon.
Investigations
Aspiration of the affected joint is mandatory in patients with sudden onset 
of a hot swollen joint. The uid should be sent for culture and Gram stain 
to seek the presence of organisms and should be checked by polar-
ised light microscopy for crystals. Blood cultures should also be taken 
in patients suspected of having septic arthritis. CRP and ESR should be 
measured. While values are raised with both infection and inammation, 
serial measurements can be useful in assessing the response to treat-
ment. Serum uric acid measurements are of limited value since urate is 
a negative acute phase reactant and values can fall to within the normal 
range in acute gout. If investigations suggest CPPA, an elevated serum 
calcium may suggest underlying primary hyperparathyroidism.
Management
If there is any suspicion of septic arthritis, intravenous antibiotics should 
be given promptly, pending the results of cultures (see Box 26.50). 
Patients with suspected crystal-induced arthritis or reactive arthritis 
may be given intra-articular glucocorticoid injections to help the pain 
and swelling, but only if Gram stain is negative and synovial uid culture 
has been negative for 48 hours. Longer-term management should be 
directed towards the underlying cause.
Polyarthritis
This term is used to describe pain and swelling affecting ve or more 
joints or joint groups. The possible causes are listed in Box 26.11 and 
extra-articular features are listed in Box 26.12.
Clinical assessment
The hallmarks of an inammatory polyarthritis are early-morning stiffness 
and worsening of symptoms with inactivity, along with synovial swelling 
and tenderness on examination.
The pattern of involvement can be helpful in reaching a diagnosis 
(Fig. 26.10). In RA there is typically symmetrical involvement targeting 
the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints 
of the hands and wrists as well as the ankles and metatarsophalangeal 
(MTP) and PIP joints of the feet. Other large joints may also be affected. 
In psoriatic arthritis (PsA), the PIP and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints 
of the hands are usually affected, often in an asymmetrical pattern and 
accompanied by nail pitting or early onycholysis. Large joints may also 
be affected, and psoriasis may or may not be present. In SLE there may 
be a polyarthritis, but this more usually causes polyarthralgia and teno-
synovitis, mainly of distal limb joints and tendons. OA has a similar pat-
tern of involvement to PsA in the hands, but can usually be distinguished 
by the presence of Heberden’s and Bouchard’s nodes and lack of syno-
vitis and other features of PsA.
Investigations
Blood samples should be taken for routine haematology, biochemistry, 
ESR, CRP, viral serology and an immunological screen, including ANA 
and ACPA (or RF). If there is clinical suspicion of an inammatory arthritis, 
but clinical signs of synovitis are absent, ultrasound examination or MRI 
may be helpful in conrming the diagnosis.
Management
Management should be tailored to the underlying diagnosis. While 
investigations are in progress non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) and analgesics may be considered for symptom control. While 

[[p1060]]
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease    1001
26
glucocorticoids can be helpful in treating symptoms of inammatory 
arthritis they should generally be avoided until a denitive diagnosis has 
been made.
Fracture
Fractures are a common presenting symptom of osteoporosis, but they 
also occur in other bone diseases, in osteopenia and in some people 
with a normal skeleton where there has been a high trauma injury.
Clinical assessment
The presentation is with localised bone pain, which is worsened by 
movement of the affected limb or region. There is usually a history of 
trauma, but spontaneous fractures can occur in the absence of trauma 
in severe osteoporosis. Fractures can be divided into several subtypes, 
based on the precipitating event and presence or absence of an under-
lying disease (Box 26.13). The main differential diagnosis is soft tissue 
injury, but fracture should be suspected when there is marked pain and 
swelling, abnormal movement of the affected limb, crepitus or deformity. 
Femoral neck fractures typically produce a shortened, externally rotated 
leg that is painful to move. The pain from vertebral fracture is variable and 
a high index of suspicion is key to making the diagnosis by imaging, as 
discussed below.
Investigations
X-rays of the affected site should be taken in at least two planes and 
examined for discontinuity of the cortical outline (Box 26.14). In addi-
tion to demonstrating the fracture, X-rays may also show evidence of an 
underlying disorder, such as osteoporosis, Paget’s disease or osteoma-
lacia. If the X-ray fails to show evidence of a fracture, but clinical suspi-
cion remains high, MRI should be obtained. In many countries patients 
with low trauma fractures above the age of 50 are referred for a DXA 
scan to screen for osteoporosis. DXA is also indicated in those under 50 
with very strong clinical risk factors for osteoporosis.
Management
Management of fracture in the acute stage requires adequate pain relief, 
with opiates if necessary, reduction of the fracture to restore normal anat-
omy and immobilisation of the affected limb to promote healing. This can 
be achieved either by the use of an external cast or splint, or by internal 
xation. Femoral neck fractures present a special management problem 
since non-union and osteonecrosis are common. This is especially true 
with intracapsular hip fractures, which should be treated by joint replace-
ment surgery. Following the fracture, rehabilitation is required with physi-
otherapy and a supervised exercise programme. If the DXA scan shows 
evidence of osteoporosis or other metabolic bone disease, this should 
be treated appropriately as described later in this chapter.
Generalised musculoskeletal pain
Clinical assessment
There are a variety of causes of generalised pain, as summarised in 
Box 26.15. Relentlessly progressive pain occurring in association 
with weight loss suggests malignant disease with bone metasta-
ses. Generalised bone pain may also arise in osteomalacia, primary 
26.11 Common causes of polyarthritis
Cause
Characteristics
Rheumatoid arthritis
Symmetrical, small and large joints, upper 
and lower limbs
Viral arthritis
Symmetrical, small joints; may be 
associated with rash and prodromal illness; 
self-limiting
Osteoarthritis
Symmetrical, targets PIP, DIP and rst CMC 
joints in hands, knees, hips, back and neck; 
associated with Heberden’s and Bouchard’s 
nodes
Psoriatic arthritis
Tends to be asymmetrical, affecting PIP and 
DIP joints in the hands but large joints may 
also be affected; often associated with nail 
pitting/onycholysis, dactylitis and enthesitis
Axial spondyloarthritis  
and enteropathic  
arthritis
Tends to affect mid-size and large joints 
and entheses, lower more than upper limbs; 
history of inammatory back pain
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Symmetrical, typically affecting small joints; 
clinical evidence of synovitis unusual
Juvenile idiopathic  
arthritis
Various patterns including: polyarticular, 
oligoarticular and systemic but also 
enthesitis-predominant
Chronic gout
Affects distal more than proximal joints; 
history of acute attacks
Chronic sarcoidosis
Small and large joints, often involves ankles
Poncet’s disease
A reactive arthritis often affecting large 
joints associated with tuberculosis
Calcium  
pyrophosphate  
arthritis
Chronic polyarthritis with involvement of 
wrists, ankles, knees and oligoarticular 
small hand joints
(CMC = carpometacarpal; DIP = distal interphalangeal; PIP = proximal interphalangeal)
26.12 Extra-articular features of inammatory arthritis
Clinical feature
Disease association
Skin, nails and mucous membranes
Psoriasis, nail pitting and dystrophy
Psoriatic arthritis
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Systemic sclerosis, antiphospholipid 
syndrome, SLE
Photosensitivity
SLE
Livedo reticularis
SLE, antiphospholipid syndrome
Splinter haemorrhages, nail-fold 
infarcts, purpuric lesions
Vasculitis
Urticaria and erythemas
SLE, adult-onset Still’s disease, 
systemic JIA, rheumatic fever
Oral ulcers
SLE, reactive arthritis, Behçet’s 
disease
Nodules
RA (mainly extensor surfaces), gout 
(tophi; eccentric, white deposits 
within), rheumatic fever
Xerostomia, dry skin, various rashes
Primary Sjögren syndrome
Eyes
Uveitis
SpA, sarcoid, JIA, Behçet’s disease
Conjunctivitis
Reactive arthritis
Episcleritis, scleritis
RA, vasculitis
Heart, lungs
Pleuro-pericarditis
SLE, RA, rheumatic fever
Aortic valve/root disease
HLA-B27-related SpA
Interstitial lung disease
RA, SLE, primary Sjögren syndrome
Abdominal organs
Hepatosplenomegaly
RA, SLE
Haematuria, proteinuria
SLE, vasculitis, systemic sclerosis
Urethritis
Reactive arthritis and SpA (sterile)
Fever, lymphadenopathy
Infection, systemic JIA, rheumatic 
fever
(HLA = human leucocyte antigen; JIA = juvenile idiopathic arthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; 
SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; SpA = spondyloarthritis)

[[p1061]]
1002    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
hyperparathyroidism and polyostotic Paget’s disease. An important 
common cause is bromyalgia (FM) syndrome, which presents with 
generalised pain that particularly affects the trunk, back and neck. 
Accompanying features include fatigue, poor concentration and focal 
areas of hyperalgesia. Widespread pain may also occur in association 
with Ehlers–Danlos syndrome hypermobility subtype (hEDS). Pain is a 
prominent feature in patients with polymyalgia rheumatica and GCA, but 
this tends to be localised to the pelvic and shoulder girdle. Similarly, pain 
is also a common feature of inammatory arthritis and OA but tends to 
be localised to affected joints. Widespread pain can occur in PsA if there 
is extensive enthesitis.
Investigations
Bone scintigraphy is of value in patients with suspected bone metasta-
ses or Paget’s disease and can also reveal evidence of stress fractures 
in osteomalacia. FBC, ESR and CRP may be abnormal in the presence 
of inammatory disease and myeloma. Plasma and urine protein elec-
trophoresis should be performed to screen for myeloma, and if abnor-
malities are detected further imaging should be considered with X-ray, 
low-dose CT or MRI. Routine biochemistry, vitamin D and parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) should be measured if osteomalacia is suspected. In 
Paget’s disease, the typical picture is of an elevation in ALP with oth-
erwise normal biochemistry. Investigations are unremarkable in patients 
with FM and hEDS.
Management
Management should be directed towards the underlying cause. Chronic 
pain of unknown cause and that associated with FM respond poorly 
to analgesics and NSAIDs, but may respond partially to antineuropathic 
agents, such as amitriptyline, duloxetine, gabapentin and pregabalin.
Muscle weakness
Muscle weakness can arise from a variety of causes, as shown in 
Box26.16. It is important to distinguish between a subjective feeling of 
generalised weakness occurring with fatigue, and an objective weakness 
with loss of muscle power and function. The former is a non-specic 
manifestation of many systemic conditions.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 26.10 Patterns of joint involvement in different forms of polyarthritis. 
joints of the hands, rst carpometacarpal joint at the base of the thumb, knees, hips, lumbar and cervical spine.
26.13 Characteristics of different fracture types
Fracture type
Precipitation factor
Disease
Fragility fracture
Fall from standing  
height or less
Osteoporosis
Osteopenia
Vertebral fracture
Bending, lifting, falling
Osteoporosis
Stress fracture
Running, excessive  
training
Normal
High-energy fracture
Major trauma
Normal
Pathological fracture
Spontaneous, minimal 
trauma
Malignancy
Paget’s disease
Osteomalacia
26.14 How to investigate a suspected fracture
 Order X-rays in two projections at right-angles to one another
 Include the whole bone and the joints at either end (this may reveal an 
additional unsuspected fracture)
 Check for evidence of displacement
 Check for a break in the cortex
 In suspected vertebral fracture, check for depression of the end plate
 If clinical suspicion is high but no fracture is seen, request magnetic resonance 
imaging
26.15 Some common causes of generalised pain
 Myositis
 Psoriatic arthritis (enthesopathic)
 Fibromyalgia
 Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, hypermobility type
 Parvovirus arthromyalgia
 Rheumatic fever/post-streptococcal infection
 Metastatic cancer
 Severe osteomalacia

[[p1062]]
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease    1003
26
Clinical assessment
Clinical examination should document the presence, pattern and sever-
ity of muscle weakness assessed using the Medical Research Council 
(MRC) scale (no power (0) to full power (5)). Proximal muscle weakness 
suggests the presence of a myopathy or myositis, which typically causes 
difculty in standing from a seated position, walking up steps, squatting 
and lifting overhead. Worsening of symptoms on exercise and post-exer-
tional cramps suggest a metabolic myopathy, such as glycogen storage 
disease. A strong family history and onset in childhood or early adulthood 
suggest muscular dystrophy. Alcohol excess can cause an inammatory 
myositis and atrophy of type 2 muscle bres. Proximal myopathy may 
be a complication of Cushing’s syndrome, glucocorticoid therapy and 
osteomalacia. Myopathy and myositis can also occur in association with 
many drugs (see Box 26.78) and viral infections, including HIV; in the 
latter case, it may be due to HIV itself or to treatment with zidovudine. 
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis in adults are frequently associated 
with an occult malignancy, emphasising the importance of a thorough 
general examination of patients with this presentation.
Investigations
Investigations should include routine biochemistry and haematology, 
ESR, CRP, creatine kinase, serum 25(OH)-vitamin D, PTH, parvovirus, 
hepatitis B/C, HIV and streptococcus serology, serum and urine protein 
electrophoresis, serum ACE, ANAs/ENAs, RF, complement and myosi-
tis-specic autoantibodies such as Jo-1. Open muscle biopsy (site-
guided by MRI detection of abnormal muscle) and electromyography 
(EMG) are usually required to make the diagnosis. Genetic testing may 
be of value in patients where an inherited disorder is suspected. Patients 
suspected to have myositis should be screened for malignancy. Initially 
this involves a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis followed by 
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy if necessary.
Management
Management is determined by the underlying cause, but all patients with 
muscle disease should be referred for physiotherapy and graded exer-
cises to maximise muscle function while specic treatment is introduced.
Regional musculoskeletal pain
Regional musculoskeletal pain is a common presenting complaint, 
usually occurring as the result of age-related degenerative disease of 
tendons and ligaments, OA and trauma.
Back pain
Back pain is a common symptom that affects 60%–80% of people at 
some time in their lives. Although the prevalence has not increased, 
reported disability from back pain has risen signicantly in the last 
30 years. In Western countries, back pain is the most common cause 
of sickness-related work absence. In the UK, 7% of adults consult their 
GP each year with back pain. Globally, low back pain is thought to affect 
about 9% of the population. The most important causes of low back pain 
are summarised in Box 26.17
Clinical assessment
The main purpose of clinical assessment is to differentiate the self-
limiting disorder of acute mechanical back pain from serious spinal 
pathology, as summarised in Figure 26.11. Mechanical back pain is the 
most common cause of acute back pain in people aged 20–55. This 
accounts for more than 90% of episodes, is usually acute and associ-
ated with lifting or bending. It is exacerbated by activity and is generally 
relieved by rest (Box 26.18). It is usually conned to the lumbar–sacral 
region, buttock or thigh, is asymmetrical and does not radiate beyond 
the knee (which would imply nerve root irritation). On examination, there 
may be asymmetric local paraspinal muscle spasm and tenderness, with 
painful restriction of some, but not all, movements. Low back pain is 
more common in manual workers, particularly those in occupations that 
involve heavy lifting and twisting. The prognosis is generally good. After 2 
days, 30% are better and 90% have recovered by 6 weeks. Recurrences 
of pain may occur and about 10%–15% of patients go on to develop 
chronic back pain that may be difcult to treat. Psychological elements, 
such as job dissatisfaction, depression and anxiety, are important risk 
factors for the transition to chronic pain and disability.
Back pain secondary to serious spinal pathology has different charac-
teristics (Box 26.19). If there is clinical evidence of spinal cord or nerve 
root compression, or a cauda equina lesion, then urgent investigation is 
needed. Spinal stenosis presents insidiously with leg discomfort on walk-
ing that is relieved by rest, bending forwards or walking uphill. Patients 
may adopt a characteristic simian posture, with a forward stoop and 
slight exion at hips and knees. The most common cause is the gradual 
development of coexisting contributing lesions such as facet joint arthri-
tis, ligament avum thickening or degenerative spondylolisthesis.
Degenerative disc disease and osteoarthritis is a common cause of 
chronic low back pain in middle-aged and older adults. Prolapse of an 
intervertebral disc presents when discs are still well hydrated (in young 
and early middle age) with nerve root pain, which can be accompanied 
by characteristic features such as sensory decit, motor weakness and 
asymmetrical reexes (Box 26.20). Examination may reveal a positive sci-
atic or femoral stretch test. About 70% of patients improve by 4 weeks. 
Inammatory back pain (IBP) due to axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) or 
26.16 Causes of proximal muscle weakness
Inammatory
 Polymyositis
 Inclusion body myositis
 Dermatomyositis
 Sarcoid
 Other autoimmune connective  
tissue disease
 Myasthenia gravis
Endocrine (Ch. 20)
 Hypothyroidism
 Cushing’s syndrome
 Hyperthyroidism
 Addison’s disease
Metabolic (Ch. 19)
 Myophosphorylase deciency
 Carnitine deciency
 Phosphofructokinase deciency
 Osteomalacia
 Hypokalaemia
 Hypercalcaemia
Genetic
 Muscular dystrophy
 Mitochondrial disease
Drugs/toxins
 Alcohol
 Cocaine
 Glucocorticoids
 Statins and brates
 Tumour necrosis factor inhibitors
 Zidovudine
Infections (Ch. 13)
 Viral (HIV, cytomegalovirus, rubella, 
Epstein–Barr, echovirus)
 Parasitic (schistosomiasis, 
cysticercosis, toxoplasmosis)
 Bacterial (Clostridium perfringens, 
staphylococci, tuberculosis, 
Mycoplasma)
26.17 Causes of low back pain
 Mechanical (soft-tissue lesion) back pain
 Intervertebral disc disease (degenerative or annulus tear and prolapse)
 Facet joint disease (osteoarthritis, psoriatic arthritis)
 Vertebral fracture
 Paget’s disease
 Axial spondyloarthritis
 Discitis (infective or inammatory [‘spondylodiscitis’])
 Bone metastases
 Spondylolisthesis

[[p1063]]
1004    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
PsA has a gradual onset and almost always occurs before the age of 
40. It is associated with morning stiffness and improves with movement. 
Spondylolisthesis may cause back pain that is typically aggravated by 
standing and walking. Occasionally, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperos-
tosis (DISH) can cause back pain, but this is not a prominent feature. 
Arachnoiditis is a rare cause of chronic severe low back pain. It is caused 
by chronic inammation of the nerve root sheaths in the spinal canal and 
can complicate meningitis, spinal surgery or myelography with oil-based 
contrast agents.
Investigations
Investigations are not required in patients with acute mechanical back 
pain. Those with persistent pain (> 6 weeks) or red ags (see Box 26.19) 
should undergo further investigation. MRI is the investigation of choice 
because it can demonstrate spinal stenosis, cord compression or nerve 
root compression, as well as inammatory changes in axSpA, malig-
nancy and sepsis. Plain X-rays can be of value in patients suspected of 
having vertebral compression fractures, OA and degenerative disc dis-
ease. If metastatic disease is suspected, bone scintigraphy or CT should 
be considered. Additional investigations that may be required include 
routine biochemistry and haematology, ESR and CRP (to screen for 
infection and inammatory disease), protein and urine electrophoresis 
(for myeloma), human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 for axSpA and pros-
tate-specic antigen for prostate carcinoma.
Management
Education is important in patients with mechanical back pain. It should 
emphasise the self-limiting nature of the condition and the fact that exer-
cise is helpful rather than damaging. Regular analgesia and/or NSAIDs 
may be required to improve mobility and facilitate exercise. Return to 
Back pain
Mechanical
Common
Acute onset
Self-limiting
Other
Prolapsed disc
Spinal stenosis
Paget’s disease
Fracture
Inflammatory
Axial spondyloarthritis
Psoriatic
spondyloarthritis
Clinical assessment
(Box 26.20)
Destructive
Malignancy
Infection
Persistent pain
Fever/weight loss
Inflammatory features
Cauda equina
syndrome
Nerve root pain
persisting > 4 weeks
Further investigation
and imaging
Urgent investigation
± neurosurgical referral
Fig. 26.11 Initial triage assessment of back pain.
26.18 Features of mechanical low back pain
 Pain varies with physical activity (improved with rest)
 Onset often sudden and precipitated by lifting or bending
 Recurrent episodes
 Pain limited to back or upper leg
 No clear-cut nerve root distribution
 No systemic features
 Self-limiting with recovery at 6 weeks in 90%
26.19 Red ags for possible spinal pathology
History
 Age < 20 years or > 55 years at presentation
 Character: constant, progressive pain unrelieved by rest
 Location: thoracic pain
 Past medical history: carcinoma, tuberculosis, HIV, systemic glucocorticoid use, 
osteoporosis
 Constitutional: systemic upset, sweats, weight loss
 Major trauma
Examination
 Painful spinal deformity
 Severe/symmetrical spinal deformity
 Saddle anaesthesia
 Progressive neurological signs/muscle-wasting
 Multiple levels of root signs
26.20 Clinical features of radicular pain
Nerve root pain
 Unilateral leg pain worse than low back pain
 Pain radiates beyond knee
 Paraesthesia in same distribution
 Nerve irritation signs (reduced straight leg raising that reproduces leg pain)
 Motor, sensory or reex signs (limited to one or adjacent nerve roots)
 Often self-limiting, with 50% recovery at 6 weeks
Cauda equina syndrome
 Difculty with micturition
 Loss of anal sphincter tone or faecal incontinence
 Saddle anaesthesia
 Gait disturbance
 Pain, numbness or weakness affecting one or both legs

[[p1064]]
Presenting problems in musculoskeletal disease    1005
26
work and normal activity should take place as soon as possible. Bed rest 
is not helpful and may increase the risk of chronic disability. Referral for 
physiotherapy should be considered if a return to normal activities has 
not been achieved by 6 weeks. Low-dose tricyclic antidepressant drugs 
may help pain, sleep and mood.
Other treatment modalities that are occasionally used include epi-
dural and facet joint injection, traction and lumbar supports, though 
there is limited randomised controlled trial evidence to support their use. 
Malignant disease, osteoporosis, Paget’s disease and SpAs require spe-
cic treatment of the underlying condition.
Surgery is required in less than 1% of patients with low back pain, but 
may be needed in progressive spinal stenosis, in spinal cord compres-
sion and in some patients with nerve root compression.
Neck pain
Neck pain is a common symptom that can occur following an injury or 
falling asleep in an awkward position, as a result of stress or in associ-
ation with OA of the spine. The causes are shown in Box 26.21. Most 
cases resolve spontaneously or with a short course of NSAIDs or analge-
sics and some exercise therapy. Patients with persistent pain that follows 
a nerve root distribution and those with upper or lower limb neurological 
signs should be investigated by MRI and, if necessary, referred for a neu-
rosurgical opinion.
Shoulder pain
Shoulder pain is a common complaint over the age of 40 (Box 26.22). 
Varying pain patterns associated with common lesions are shown in 
Figure 26.12. For most shoulder lesions, general management is with 
analgesics, NSAIDs, local glucocorticoid injections and physiotherapy 
aimed at restoring normal movement and function. Surgery may be 
required in patients who have debilitating or persistent symptoms in 
association with rotator cuff lesions or severe acromioclavicular joint 
arthritis. If there is subacromial impingement, without evidence of a 
rotator cuff tear on MRI, subacromial glucocorticoid injection and phys-
iotherapy constitute a reasonable rst step. Calcic supraspinatus 
tendonitis unresponsive to glucocorticoid injection can be treated with 
barbotage (needle disruption of deposit under ultrasound guidance). 
Complete rotator cuff tears in people under 40 years of age may 
respond well to full surgical repair, but results are less good in older 
people. Adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) presents with pain 
associated with marked restriction of elevation and external rotation. 
Adhesive capsulitis is commonly associated with diabetes mellitus and 
neck/radicular lesions. Treatment in the early stage is with analgesia, 
intra- and extracapsular glucocorticoid injection, and regular ‘pendu-
lum’ exercises of the arm to mobilise. Complete recovery sometimes 
takes up to 2 years. For severe or persistent symptoms, joint distension 
and manipulation under anaesthesia are surgical options.
Elbow pain
The most common causes are repetitive trauma causing lateral epi-
condylitis (tennis elbow) and medial epicondylitis (golfer’s elbow) 
(Box 26.23). SpAs, including psoriatic disease, can present with the 
same symptoms (tendon insertion enthesitis). Management is by rest, 
analgesics and topical or systemic NSAIDs. Local glucocorticoid injec-
tions may be required in resistant cases. Olecranon bursitis can also 
follow local repetitive trauma, but other causes include infections and 
gout.
Hand and wrist pain
Pain from hand or wrist joints is well localised to the affected joint, except 
for pain from the rst carpometacarpal (CMC) joint, commonly targeted 
by OA or PsA; although maximal at the thumb base, the pain often radi-
ates down the thumb and to the radial aspect of the wrist. Non-articular 
causes of hand pain include:
26.21 Causes of neck pain
Mechanical
 Postural
 Whiplash injury
 Cervical spondylosis
Inammatory
 Infections
 Axial spondyloarthritis
 Psoriatic arthritis
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Polymyalgia rheumatica
 Discitis
Metabolic
 Axial CPPD disease
 Fibrous dysplasia
 Paget’s disease
Neoplastic
 Metastases
 Myeloma
 Lymphoma
 Intrathecal tumours
Other
 Fibromyalgia
 Torticollis
Referred
 Pharynx
 Cervical lymph nodes
 Dental disease
 Angina pectoris
 Aortic aneurysm
 Pancoast tumour
 Diaphragm
(CPPD = calcium pyrophosphate deposition)
26.22 Clinical ndings in shoulder pain
Rotator cuff and subacromial lesions
 Pain reproduced by resisted active movement:
Abduction: supraspinatus
External rotation: infraspinatus, teres minor
Internal rotation: subscapularis
Acromioclavicular joint
 Pain on full abduction and adduction (at 90° of forward elevation)
Bicipital (long head) tendinitis
 Tenderness over bicipital groove
 Pain reproduced by resisted active wrist supination or elbow exion
Rotator cuff and
glenohumeral
arthritis
Acromioclavicular
joint disease
Bicipital
tendinitis
Fig. 26.12 Pain patterns around the shoulder. The dark shading indicates sites 
of maximum pain.

[[p1065]]
1006    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
 Tenosynovitis: affects exor or extensor digital tendons. Pain 
and tenderness are well localised to the tendon lesions. There is 
often early-morning ‘claw-like’ digit stiffness. De Quervain’s teno-
synovitis involves the tendon sheaths of abductor pollicis longus 
and extensor pollicis brevis. It produces pain maximal over the 
radial aspect of the distal forearm and wrist and marked pain on 
forced ulnar deviation of the wrist with the thumb held across the 
patient’s palm (Finkelstein’s sign). This test is not specic for this 
lesion alone.
 Raynaud’s phenomenon: digital vasospasm triggered mostly  
by cold.
 C6, C7 or C8 radiculopathy
 Carpal tunnel syndrome: hand position-dependent and/or nocturnal 
pain, numbness and paraesthesia of thumb and second to fourth 
digits.
Hip pain
Pain from the hip joint is usually felt deep in the groin, with variable 
radiation to the buttock, anterolateral thigh or knee (Fig. 26.13). A lay 
person’s description of their ‘hip pain’ will often locate the pain to the 
greater trochanter area. A common cause in older people is OA, which 
should be suspected if the pain is worse on weight bearing. Paget’s 
disease can also enter into the differential diagnosis. Occasionally, 
inammatory disease secondary to axSpA or PsA can present with 
groin, greater trochanter area or hip pain. Greater trochanter pain syn-
drome is usually due to either gluteus medius insertional tendonitis/
enthesitis, trochanteric bursitis or referred pain (Box26.24). Pain at 
this site may also be referred from the lumbosacral spine. Other less 
common causes of pain in the hip/groin area include inguinal hernia, 
adductor tendonitis and enthesitis of anterior superior/inferior iliac 
spines.
Knee pain
In middle and older age, the most common cause of knee pain is OA, the 
features of which are described later in this chapter. Pain that is associ-
ated with locking of the knee (sudden painful inability to extend fully) is 
usually due to a meniscal tear or osteochondritis dissecans. Referred 
pain from the hip may present at the knee and is reproduced by hip, not 
knee, movement. Pain from periarticular lesions is well localised to the 
involved structure (Box 26.25). Anterior knee pain may be due to patellar 
ligament or retinacular lesions (enthesitis, tendonitis, fat-pad syndrome) 
occurring typically from overuse and/or axSpA. Anterior knee pain is rel-
atively common in adolescents and may be the result of patellar articular 
cartilage or ligament insertion osteochondritis.
26.23 Common local causes of elbow pain
Lesion
Pain
Examination ndings
Lateral humeral 
epicondylitis
(traumatic ‘tennis 
elbow’ or SpA-related 
enthesitis)
Lateral epicondyle
Tenderness over 
epicondyle
Radiation to extensor 
forearm
Pain reproduced by 
resisted active wrist 
extension
Medial humeral 
epicondylitis
(traumatic ‘golfer’s 
elbow’ or SpA-related 
enthesitis)
Medial epicondyle
Tenderness over 
epicondyle
Radiation to exor 
forearm
Pain reproduced by 
resisted active wrist 
exion
Olecranon bursitis
(gout, rheumatoid 
arthritis or infection)
Olecranon
Tender swelling
(SpA = spondyloarthritis)
Trochanteric
bursitis
Hip
disease
Fig. 26.13 Pain patterns of hip disease and trochanteric pain syndrome. The 
dark shading indicates sites of maximum pain.
26.24 Local causes of hip pain
Lesion
Pain
Examination ndings
Osteoarthritis
Groin pain, worse on weight bearing
Limited range of movement and/or pain on 
examination of hip
Gluteus medius enthesitis
Upper lateral thigh, worse on lying on that side at night
Tenderness over greater trochanter
Trochanteric bursitis
As above
As above
Adductor tendinitis (SpA-related enthesitis or 
sports-related trauma)
Upper inner thigh
Tenderness over adductor origin/tendon/muscle
Pain reproduced by resisted active hip adduction
Ischiogluteal enthesitis/bursitis
Buttock, worse on sitting
Tenderness over ischial prominence
Pubic symphysitis (can mimic intra-articular 
hip lesions)
Medial groin pain, can radiate to inner or even outer 
upper thighs
Tenderness over symphysis joint
If pain is worse on trunk curl/rectus activation under 
symphysis-resting hand, it may be insertional rectus 
enthesitis (SpAs)
(SpA = spondyloarthritis)

[[p1066]]
Principles of management    1007
26
Ankle and foot pain
Pain from the ankle (tibiotalar) joint due to OA or osteochondral defect 
is felt between the malleoli and is worse on weight-bearing. Pain from 
the subtalar joint (from the same lesions) is also worse on weight-
bearing. Inammatory arthritis of either of these joints (RA, PsA, CPPD 
arthritis or gout) often worsens and swells with rest. These diagnoses 
can be associated with hindfoot tenosynovitis (peroneal or posterior 
tibial). Pain under the heel is typically due to plantar fasciitis. This can 
occur as the result of overuse, in which case it may respond to rest, 
padded footwear and local glucocorticoid injections, but can also arise 
in SpA as a manifestation of enthesitis. Pain affecting the back of the 
heel may be due to Achilles tendinitis or enthesitis. The MTP joints of 
the feet are commonly involved symmetrically in RA. The presentation 
is with pain on walking felt below the metatarsal heads, often described 
as ‘walking on marbles’. Patients with active inammation of the MTP 
joints have pain when the forefoot is squeezed. Involvement of the rst 
MTP joint is common in OA or PsA and is associated, respectively, with 
hallux valgus and dactylitis. The hallux is also a classical target in acute 
gout. Morton’s neuroma is a neuropathy of an interdigital nerve and is 
usually located between the third and fourth metatarsal heads. Women 
are most commonly affected (tight shoes can be to blame). Local sen-
sory loss and a palpable tender swelling between the metatarsal heads 
may be detected. Footwear adjustment often helps, with or without 
a local glucocorticoid injection, but surgical decompression may be 
required if symptoms persist.
Principles of management
The management of rheumatological disorders should be tailored to the 
underlying diagnosis. Certain aspects are common to many disorders, 
however, and the general principles are discussed here. The therapeutic 
aims are:
 to educate patients about their disease so as to enhance 
self-management
 to control pain, if it is present
 to optimise function
 to modify the disease process where this is possible
 to identify and treat comorbidity.
These aims are interrelated and success in one area often benets 
others. Successful management requires careful assessment of the 
person as a whole. The management plan should be individualised and 
patient-centred, should involve relevant members of the multidisciplinary 
team, and should be agreed and understood by both the patient and all 
the practitioners that are involved. It must also take into account:
 the patient’s activity requirements and occupational and recreational 
aspirations
 risk factors that may inuence the disease
 the patient’s perceptions and knowledge of the condition
 medications and coping strategies that have already been tried
 comorbid disease and its therapy
 the availability, costs and logistics of appropriate evidence-based 
interventions.
Generally, the simplest and safest interventions should be tried rst. 
Symptoms and signs may change with time, so the management plan 
for most patients requires regular review and re-adjustment.
Core interventions that should be considered for everyone with a pain-
ful musculoskeletal condition are listed in Box 26.26. There are also other 
non-pharmacological and drug options, the choice of which depends on 
the nature and severity of the diagnosis.
Education and lifestyle interventions
Education
Patients must always be informed about the nature of their condition 
and its investigation, treatment and prognosis, since education can 
improve outcome. Information and therapist contact can reduce pain 
and disability, improve self-efcacy and reduce the health-care costs 
of many musculoskeletal conditions, including OA and RA. The mech-
anisms are unclear, but in part may result from improved adherence. 
Benets are modest, but potentially long-lasting, safe and cost-effective. 
Education can be provided through one-to-one discussion, written lit-
erature, patient-led group education classes and interactive computer 
programs. Inclusion of the patient’s partner or carer is often appropriate; 
26.25  Local causes of knee pain
Lesion
Pain
Examination ndings
Osteoarthritis
Weight bearing or 
on ascending and 
descending starts
Enlargement of knee 
joint, tenderness at joint 
margins, crepitus on 
exion, small effusions, 
quadriceps wasting
Pre-patellar bursitis
Over patella
Tender uctuant 
swelling in front of 
patella
Supercial and 
deep infrapatellar 
bursitis and fat-pad 
syndrome
Anterior knee, inferior 
to patella
Tenderness in front of 
(supercial) or behind 
(deep) patellar tendon
Pain on full exion
Anserine bursitis/
enthesitis
Upper medial tibia
Tenderness (± swelling) 
over upper medial tibia
Medial collateral 
ligament lesions 
(injury or enthesitis)
Upper medial tibia
Localised tenderness of 
upper medial tibia
Pain reproduced by 
valgus stress on partly 
exed knee
Popliteal cyst 
(Baker’s cyst)
Popliteal fossa
Tender swelling of 
popliteal fossa
Patellar ligament 
enthesopathy
Anterior upper tibia
Tenderness over tibial 
tubercle
Osteochondritis of 
patellar ligament 
(Osgood–Schlatter 
disease)
Anterior upper tibia
Pain on resisted active 
knee extension
26.26 Interventions for patients with rheumatic diseases
Core interventions
 Education
 Aerobic conditioning
 Muscle strengthening
 Simple analgesics
 Disease-modifying therapy
 Reduction of adverse mechanical 
factors
 Pacing of activities
 Appropriate footwear
 Weight reduction if obese
Other options
 Other analgesic drugs:
Oral non-steroidal anti-
inammatory drugs
Topical agents
Opioid analgesics
Amitriptyline
Gabapentin/pregabalin
 Local glucocorticoid injections
 Physical treatments:
Heat, cold, aids, appliances
 Surgery
 Coping strategies (see Box 26.27)

[[p1067]]
1008    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
this is essential for childhood conditions but also helps in many chronic 
adult conditions.
For children and adolescents with chronic diseases such as JIA, edu-
cation and support of the whole family, schooling and psychological sup-
port is essential and best delivered through a multidisciplinary team.
Patient-run charitable organisations provide a wealth of information 
and support to patients (see ‘Further information’). The detail of the edu-
cational materials and services that organisations can provide should 
be known to the multidisciplinary team and organisation contact details 
should be made available to patients.
Exercise
Several types of exercise can be prescribed:
 Aerobic tness training can produce long-term reduction in pain and 
disability. It improves well-being, encourages restorative sleep and 
benets common comorbidity, such as obesity, diabetes, chronic 
heart failure and hypertension.
 Local strengthening exercise for muscles that act over compro-
mised joints also reduces pain and disability, with improvements 
in the reduced muscle strength, proprioception, coordination and 
balance that associate with chronic arthritis. ‘Small amounts often’ 
of strengthening exercise are better than protracted sessions per-
formed infrequently.
 Weight-bearing exercise is of value in osteoporosis, where it can 
result in modest increases in bone density and slow bone loss.
Joint protection
Excessive impact-loading and adverse repetitive use of a compromised 
joint or periarticular tissue can worsen symptoms in patients with arthri-
tis. This can be mitigated by cessation of contact sports and by pacing 
of activities by dividing physical tasks into shorter segments with brief 
breaks in between. Other strategies include adaptations to machinery or 
tools at the workplace; the use of shock-absorbing footwear with thick 
soft soles, which can reduce impact-loading through feet, knees, hips 
and back; and the use of a walking stick on the contralateral side to a 
painful hip, knee or foot.
Non-pharmacological interventions
Physical and occupational therapy
Local heat, ice packs, wax baths and other local external applications 
can induce muscle relaxation and provide temporary relief of symptoms 
in a range of rheumatic diseases.
Hydrotherapy and balneotherapy (immersion in a bath) induce muscle 
relaxation and facilitate movement in a warm, pain-relieving environment 
without the restraints of gravity and normal load-bearing. Various manip-
ulative techniques may also help improve restricted movement.
Splints can give temporary rest and support for painful joints and per-
iarticular tissues, and can prevent harmful involuntary postures during 
sleep. Prolonged rest must be avoided. Orthoses are more permanent 
appliances used to reduce instability and excessive abnormal movement 
and provide support and comfort. They include working wrist splints, 
knee braces, iron and T-straps to control ankle instability and a multi-
tude of (often custom made) foot insole supports to ofoad painful or 
deformed foot structures. Orthoses are particularly suited to severely dis-
abled patients in whom a surgical option is inappropriate and often need 
to be custom-made for the individual.
Aids and appliances can provide dignity and independence for 
patients with respect to activities of daily living. Common examples are 
a raised toilet seat, raised chair height, extended handles on taps, a 
shower instead of a bath, thick-handled cutlery and extended ‘hands’ to 
pull on tights and socks. Full assessment and advice from an occupa-
tional therapist maximise the benets of these aids.
Self-help and coping strategies
These plans help patients to cope better with, and adjust to, chronic 
pain and disability. They may be useful at any stage but are particularly 
benecial for patients with incurable problems who have tried all availa-
ble treatment options. The aim is to increase self-management through 
self-assessment and problem-solving, so that patients can recognise 
negative, but potentially remediable, aspects of their mood (stress, frus-
tration, anger or low self-esteem) and their situation (physical, social, 
nancial). These may then be addressed by changes in attitude and 
behaviour, as shown in Box 26.27
Involvement of the spouse or partner in mutual goal-setting can 
improve partnership adjustment. Such approaches are often an element 
of group education classes and pain clinics, but may require more formal 
clinical psychological input.
Tailored multidisciplinary approaches are required for patients with 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and other chronic childhood diseases, 
dependent on age and maturity. Adolescents and young adults have 
specic demands, different to those of young children and adults, which 
are inuenced by many issues in their lives impinging on the disease 
process, its impact and their ability to cope with it.
Weight control
Obesity aggravates pain at most sites through increased mechanical 
strain and is a risk factor for progression of joint damage in patients with 
OA and other types of arthritis. Obesity may contribute, through its met-
abolic and inammatory effects, to amplifying symptoms of rheumatic 
disease and in certain scenarios has been linked with poorer immuno-
therapy responses (e.g. anti-TNF-α in PsA). This should be explained to 
obese patients and strategies offered on how to lose and maintain an 
appropriate weight. By contrast, excessive weight loss is also detrimen-
tal and low weight (body mass index (BMI) < 20 kg/m2) is associated with 
an increased risk of fractures. Patients should therefore be advised to 
maintain BMI within the 20–25 kg/m2 range.
Surgery
A variety of surgical interventions can relieve pain and conserve or restore 
function in patients with bone, joint and periarticular disease (Box 26.28). 
Soft tissue release and tenosynovectomy can reduce inammatory symp-
toms, improve function and prevent or retard tendon damage for variable 
periods, sometimes indenitely. Synovectomy does not prevent disease 
progression, but may be indicated for pain relief when drugs, physical ther-
apy and intra-articular injections have provided insufcient relief. The main 
approaches for damaged joints are osteotomy (cutting bone to alter joint 
mechanics and load transmission), excision arthroplasty (removing part or 
all of the joint), joint replacement (insertion of prosthesis in place of the 
excised joint) and arthrodesis (joint fusion). Surgical xation of fractures is 
frequently required in patients with osteoporosis and other bone diseases.
The main aims of surgery are to provide pain relief and improve func-
tion and quality of life. If surgery is to be successful, the aims and conse-
quences of each operation should be considered as part of an integrated 
programme of management and rehabilitation by multidisciplinary teams 
of surgeons, allied health professionals and physicians, and carefully 
explained to the patient. Assessment of motivation, social support and 
26.27 Self-help and coping strategies
 Yoga, Pilates and relaxation techniques to reduce stress
 Avoidance of negative situations or activities that produce stress and increase in 
pleasant activities that give satisfaction
 Information and discussion to alter beliefs about and perspectives on disease
 Reduction or avoidance of catastrophising and maladaptive pain behaviour
 Imagery and distraction techniques for pain
 Expansion of social contact and better use of social services

[[p1068]]
Principles of management    1009
26
environment is no less important than careful consideration of patients’ 
general health, their risks for major surgery, the extent of disease in other 
joints, and their ability to mobilise following surgery. For some severely 
compromised people, pain relief and functional independence are bet-
ter served by provision of a suitable wheelchair, home adjustments and 
social services than by surgery that is technically successful, but following 
which the patient cannot mobilise.
Pharmacological treatment
Analgesics
Paracetamol (1 g up to 4 times daily) is the oral analgesic of rst choice 
for mild to moderate pain. It is thought to work by inhibiting prostaglandin 
synthesis in the brain while having little effect on peripheral prostaglandin 
production. It is well tolerated and has few adverse effects and drug 
interactions. An increased risk of gastrointestinal events and cardiovas-
cular disease has been reported with chronic usage in observational 
studies, but this may be due to channelling of patients at higher risk 
of these events for treatment with paracetamol rather than an NSAID. 
Paracetamol can be combined with codeine (co-codamol) or dihydroc-
odeine (co-dydramol). These compound analgesics are more effective 
than paracetamol, but have more side-effects, including constipation, 
headache and delirium (especially in older adults). The centrally acting 
opioid analgesics tramadol and meptazinol may be useful for temporary 
control of severe pain unresponsive to other measures, but can cause 
nausea, bowel upset, dizziness and somnolence, and withdrawal symp-
toms after chronic use. The non-opioid analgesic nefopam (30–90 mg 
three times daily) can help moderate pain, though side-effects (nausea, 
anxiety, dry mouth) often limit its use. Patients with severe or intracta-
ble pain may require strong opioid analgesics, such as oxycodone or 
morphine.
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
These are among the most widely prescribed drugs, but their use has 
declined over recent years because long-term prescription is associated 
with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Oral NSAIDs are useful 
in the treatment of a range of rheumatic diseases with an inammatory 
component. They inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase (COX) and prostaglandin H 
synthase enzymes, which convert arachidonic acid, derived from mem-
brane phospholipids, to prostaglandins and leukotrienes by the COX and 
5-lipoxygenase pathways, respectively (Fig. 26.14). There are two COX 
isoforms; COX-1 is constitutively expressed in gastric mucosa, platelets 
and kidneys, and production of prostaglandins at these sites protects 
against mucosal damage and regulates platelet aggregation and renal 
blood ow. The COX-2 enzyme is induced at sites of inammation, pro-
ducing prostaglandins that cause local pain and swelling. Inammation 
also up-regulates COX-2 in the spinal cord, where it modulates pain 
perception. Ibuprofen, diclofenac and naproxen are non-selective drugs 
that inhibit both COX enzymes, whereas celecoxib and etoricoxib are 
26.28  Surgical procedures in rheumatological and 
bone diseases
Procedure
Indication
Soft tissue release
Carpal tunnel
Median nerve compression
Tarsal tunnel
Posterior tibial nerve entrapment
Flexor tenosynovectomy
Relief of ‘trigger’ ngers
Ulnar nerve transposition
Ulnar nerve entrapment at elbow
Fasciotomy
Severe Dupuytren’s contracture
Tendon repairs and transfers
Hand extensor tendons
Extensor tendon rupture
Thumb and nger exor tendons
Flexor tendon rupture
Synovectomy
Wrist and extensor tendon  
sheath (+ excision of radial head)
Pain relief and prevention of 
extensor tendon rupture in RA, 
resistant inammatory synovitis
Knee synovectomy
Resistant inammatory synovitis
Osteotomy
Femoral osteotomy
Early OA of hip
Tibial osteotomy
Uni-compartmental knee OA
Deformed tibia in OA or Paget’s 
disease
Excision arthroplasty
First metatarsophalangeal joint (Keller’s 
procedure)
Painful hallux valgus
Radial head
Painful distal radio-ulnar joint
Lateral end of clavicle
Painful acromioclavicular joint
Metatarsal head
Painful subluxed 
metatarsophalangeal joints
Joint replacement arthroplasty
Knee, hip, shoulder, elbow
Painful damaged joints in OA 
and RA
Arthrodesis
Wrist
Damaged joint: pain relief, 
improvement of grip
Ankle/subtalar joints
Damaged joint: pain relief, 
stabilisation of hindfoot
Fracture repair
Hip arthroplasty
Fractured neck of femur
External xation
Multiple fractures, open fractures
Intramedullary nailing
Tibial and femur fractures
Screw, plating and wiring
Wrist and other fractures
Other procedures
Nerve root decompression
Spinal stenosis, nerve entrapment
Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty
Painful vertebral fracture 
(evidence base for efcacy poor)
(OA = osteoarthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis)
Membrane
phospholipid
Arachidonic
acid
Phospholipase A2
COX-2
(induced by
cytokines)
Prostaglandins
Non-selective
NSAID
COX-1
(constitutive
expression)
Prostaglandins
Pain
Inflammation
Mucosal integrity
Platelet aggregation
Renal blood flow
COX-2
selective
NSAID
Fig. 26.14 Mechanism of action of non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs). (COX = cyclo-oxygenase)

[[p1069]]
1010    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
selective inhibitors of COX-2. While NSAIDs have anti-inammatory 
activity, they are not thought to have a disease-modifying effect in either 
OA or inammatory rheumatic diseases.
Non-selective NSAIDs can damage the gastric and duodenal 
mucosal barrier and are associated with an increased risk of upper 
gastrointestinal ulceration, bleeding and perforation. The adjusted 
increased risk (odds ratio) of bleeding or perforation from non-se-
lective NSAIDs is 4–5, though differences exist between NSAIDs 
(Box 26.29). Dyspepsia is a poor guide to the presence of NSAID-
associated ulceration and bleeding, and the principal risk factors are 
shown in Box 26.30. Co-prescription of a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) 
or misoprostol (200 µg twice or 3 times daily) reduces the risk of 
NSAID-induced ulceration and bleeding, but H2-antagonists in stand-
ard doses are ineffective. The COX-2 selective NSAIDs are much less 
likely to cause gastrointestinal toxicity, but benet is attenuated in 
patients on low-dose aspirin. The UK National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines advise that a PPI should be 
co-prescribed with all NSAIDs, including COX-2-selective NSAIDs, 
even though the risk of gastrointestinal events with these is low. Since 
chronic PPI therapy is associated with an increased risk of hip frac-
ture, the merits of giving PPI therapy with a COX-2-selective drug 
need to be carefully considered.
Other side-effects of NSAIDs include uid retention and renal impair-
ment due to inhibition of renal prostaglandin production, non-ulcer-
associated dyspepsia, abdominal pain, altered bowel habit and rashes. 
Interstitial nephritis, asthma and anaphylaxis can also occur but are rare. 
Recommendations for NSAID prescribing are summarised in Box 26.31. 
Because of the risk of adverse effects, NSAIDs should be used with great 
care in older patients (Box 26.32).
Topical agents
Topical NSAID creams and gels and capsaicin cream can help in the 
treatment of OA and supercial periarticular lesions affecting hands, 
elbows and knees. They may be used as monotherapy or as an adjunct 
to oral analgesics. Topical NSAIDs can penetrate supercial tissues and 
even reach the joint capsule, though intrasynovial levels mainly reect 
blood-borne drug delivery. Capsaicin selectively binds to the protein 
transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1), which is a heat-ac-
tivated calcium channel on the surface of peripheral type C nociceptor 
bres. Initial application causes a burning sensation, but continued use 
depletes presynaptic substance P, with subsequent pain reduction that 
is optimal after a period of 1–2 weeks. Lidocaine 5% medicated patches 
are licensed for the treatment of post-herpetic neuropathic pain, but are 
also used off label for a variety of painful conditions including painful 
vertebral fractures, sometimes with good effects.
Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs
Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) comprise small-
molecule inhibitors of the immune response, glucocorticoids and 
biologic DMARDs. DMARDs not only improve symptoms but also 
favourably modify disease progression in a variety of inammatory rheu-
matic diseases. Small-molecule inhibitors are either classical DMARDs 
(cDMARDs), which have relatively non-specic inhibitory effects on the 
immune response (Box 26.33), or targeted synthetic DMARDs (tsD-
MARDs), which are designed to inhibit the effects of a specic target 
molecule (Box 26.34). Biologic DMARDs (‘biologics’) are monoclonal 
antibodies, fusion proteins or decoy receptors targeted towards spe-
cic cytokines, receptors and other cell-surface molecules regulating 
the immune response (Fig. 26.15). Most cDMARDs have the potential to 
cause bone marrow suppression or liver dysfunction and require regular 
blood monitoring, as summarised in Box 26.33. If toxicity occurs, treat-
ment may need to be stopped temporarily and resumed at a lower dose 
or withdrawn completely if toxicity is severe.
Classical DMARDs (cDMARDs)
Methotrexate (MTX) is the core cDMARD in RA, JIA and PsA. It inhibits 
folic acid reductase, preventing formation of tetrahydrofolate, which is 
necessary for DNA synthesis in leucocytes and other cells. It is given 
26.29 Commonly used NSAIDs and their risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation
Drug
Daily adult dose
Doses/day
Idiosyncratic side-
effects, comments
Low risk
Celecoxib
100–200 mg
1–2
Selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Etoricoxib
60–120 mg
1
Selective COX-2 
inhibitor
Medium risk
Ibuprofen
1600–2400 mg
3–4
Gastrointestinal 
adverse effects 
more likely than 
with COX-2 
inhibitors, even with 
PPI therapy
Naproxen
500–1000 mg
1–2
Diclofenac
75–150 mg
2–3
High risk
Indometacin
50–-200 mg
3–4
High incidence of 
dyspepsia and CNS 
side-effects
(CNS = central nervous system; COX = cyclo-oxygenase; PPI = proton pump inhibitor)
26.30 Risk factors for NSAID-induced peptic ulcers
 Age > 60 years*
 Past history of peptic ulcer*
 Past history of adverse event with NSAID
 Concomitant glucocorticoid use
 High-dose or multiple NSAIDs
 High-risk NSAIDs (see Box 26.29)
26.31 Recommendations for the use of NSAIDs
 Use the lowest dose for the shortest time possible to control symptoms
 Avoid NSAIDs in patients on warfarin
 Allow 2–3 weeks to assess efcacy. If response is inadequate, consider a trial 
of another NSAID
 Never prescribe more than one NSAID at a time
 Co-prescribe a proton pump inhibitor for patients with risk factors for 
gastrointestinal adverse effects (see Box 26.30)
 Avoid in patients with cardiovascular disease
26.32 Use of oral NSAIDs in old age
 Gastrointestinal complications: age is a strong risk factor for enteral bleeding 
and perforation, and for peptic ulceration. Older adults are more likely to die if 
they suffer NSAID-associated enteral bleeding or perforation.
 Cardiovascular disease: use NSAIDs with caution in patients with cardiovascular 
disease. Therapy with NSAIDs may exacerbate hypertension and heart failure.
 Renal disease: use of NSAIDs may cause or worsen renal impairment.
*The most important risk factors.

[[p1070]]
Principles of management    1011
26
26.34 Targeted synthetic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs
FBC
LFT
Other
Apremilast
30mg twice daily orally
–
–
–
PsA
Tofacitinib
5mg twice daily orally
✓
✓
Infection
RA. PsA
Baricitinib
2–4mg daily orally
–
–
Infection
RA
Upadacitinib
15–30 mg daily orally
–
–
Infection
RA, PsA, axSpA
Filgotinib
200 mg daily orally
–
–
Infection
RA
26.33  Classical disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
Drug
Maintenance dose
Monitoring*
Indications
FBC
LFTs
Other
Methotrexate (MTX)
15–25mg weekly orally or s/c
✓
✓
RA, PsA, JIA, axSpA, CPP 
disease
Sulfasalazine (SSZ)
2–4g daily orally
✓
✓
RA, PsA, axSpA,
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)
200–400mg daily orally
–
–
Visual function
RA, SLE, CPP disease
Leunomide (LEF)
10–20mg daily orally
✓
✓
BP
RA, PsA
Azathioprine (AZA)
1–2.5mg/kg daily orally
✓
✓
SLE, SV
Cyclophosphamide
2mg/kg daily orally or 15mg/kg IV
✓
✓
eGFR
SLE, SV
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
2–4g daily orally
✓
✓
–
SLE, SV
Ciclosporin A
3–5mg/kg daily orally
–
–
BP, eGFR
RA, PsA
*Monitoring tests are usually done every 2 weeks on initiation of treatment for 6 weeks, then monthly for 3 months, then 3-monthly.
(axSpA = axial spondyloarthritis; BP = blood pressure; CPP = calcium pyrophosphate; eGFR = estimated glomerular ltration rate; FBC = full blood count; IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous;  
JIA = juvenile idiopathic arthritis; LFTs = liver function tests; PsA = psoriatic arthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; SV = systemic vasculitis)
orally or subcutaneously using a variety of dose increment schedules, 
to a maximum of 25 mg weekly (in adults) and 15 mg/m2/week in JIA, 
until benet or toxicity occurs. Folic acid (5 mg/week) should be co-pre-
scribed to be taken the day after MTX since it reduces adverse effects 
without impairing efcacy. Benet is usually observed after 4–8 weeks, 
but treatment should continue for 3 months before reaching the conclu-
sion that MTX has been ineffective. The most common adverse effects 
are nausea, vomiting and malaise, which usually occur one 1–2 days 
after the weekly dose. Patients should be warned of drug interaction with 
sulphonamides and the importance of avoiding excess alcohol, which 
enhances MTX hepatotoxicity. Acute pulmonary toxicity (pneumonitis) is 
rare, but can occur at any time during treatment and patients should be 
warned to stop therapy and seek advice if they develop any new respira-
tory symptoms. If pneumonitis occurs, treatment should be withdrawn 
and high-dose glucocorticoids given. MTX must be co-prescribed with 
robust contraception in women of child-bearing potential and treatment 
must be stopped for 3 months in advance of planning a pregnancy.
Sulfasalazine (SSZ) can be used alone or in combination with other 
drugs in the treatment of RA and PsA. Its mechanism of action is incom-
pletely understood. Nausea and gastrointestinal intolerance are the main 
adverse effects but leucopenia, abnormal liver function tests (LFTs) and 
rashes may occur. The usual starting dose is 500 mg daily, escalating in 
500 mg increments every 2 weeks to a maintenance dose of 2–4 g daily 
until benet or toxicity occurs. Benet may be observed after 4–8 weeks, 
but treatment should be continued for 3 months before concluding that 
it has been ineffective. Orange staining of urine and contact lenses may 
occur. SSZ is generally considered to be safe during pregnancy.
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) can be used alone or in combination with 
other drugs in the treatment of RA and SLE in a dose of 200–400 mg daily. 
It acts by modulating lysosomal activity and autophagy causing inhibition 
of inammatory responses. While a wide range of side-effects can theo-
retically occur, it is generally well tolerated in practice. With long-term use 
(> 5 years) there is a risk of ocular toxicity due to accumulation in the retina, 
although this is uncommon. It is usual to check visual function before start-
ing treatment and to repeat this periodically while treatment is continued. 
HCQ is generally considered to be safe during pregnancy
Leunomide (LEF) can be used alone or in combination with other drugs 
for the treatment of RA and PsA in a dose of 10–20 mg/day. It works by 
inhibiting dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase, an enzyme used by activated 
lymphocytes to synthesise pyrimidines necessary for DNA synthesis. It has 
low marrow toxicity, but may cause liver dysfunction, hypertension and 
hirsutism. It must be co-prescribed with robust contraception in women of 
child-bearing potential. Treatment must be stopped for a period of 2 years 
in advance of planning a pregnancy or undergo a washout procedure with 
cholestyramine to remove the drug from the system.
Azathioprine (AZA) is most commonly used in vasculitis and SLE, often 
in combination with other drugs. It is metabolised to 6-mercaptopurine 
(6-MP), which blocks lymphocyte proliferation by inhibiting DNA synthesis. 
The typical starting dose is 1 mg/kg body weight per day, increasing to 
2.5 mg/kg until a response is observed or toxicity occurs. Bone marrow 
suppression is the most important side-effect, but nausea may also occur. 
Genetic polymorphisms in the enzyme thio purine S-methyltransferase 
(TPMT) inuence catabolism of 6-MP and sometimes genetic testing for 
TPMT variants is done to guide dosages. Allopurinol inhibits catabolism of 
azathioprine, necessitating a 75% reduction in azathioprine dose.
Cyclophosphamide is a cytotoxic alkylating agent that cross-links DNA 
and halts cell division, causing immunosuppression. It is mainly used to 
induce remission in life-threatening systemic vasculitis and SLE. It can be 
given orally in a dose of 2 mg/kg/day for 3–6 months or intravenously in 
a dose of 15 mg/kg every 3–4 weeks on 6–8 occasions. Adverse effects 
include nausea, anorexia, vomiting, bone marrow suppression, cardiac 
toxicity, alopecia and haemorrhagic cystitis. The risk of cystitis can be 
mitigated by co-administration of mesna (2-mercaptoethane sulfonate, 
which binds its urotoxic metabolites) and a high uid intake.

[[p1071]]
1012    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) works by inhibiting inosine monophos-
phate dehydrogenase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of guano-
sine nucleotides in lymphocytes. MMF is used in SLE and vasculitis in 
doses of 2–4 g daily orally. Haematological toxicity is the main adverse 
effect.
Ciclosporin A is a calcineurin inhibitor that inhibits lymphocyte activa-
tion. It is occasionally used in the treatment of RA and PsA at a dose of 
2.5–4 mg/kg/day orally.
Glucocorticoids have powerful anti-inammatory and immunosup-
pressive effects and have been shown to have disease-modifying effects 
in various inammatory rheumatic diseases. They promote apoptosis of 
many immune cells and activation of a wide range of pro-inammatory 
signalling pathways. They are used orally, intravenously, intramuscularly 
and by intra-articular injection in the treatment of a wide range of inam-
matory rheumatic diseases, as well as by local injection in patients with 
soft tissue rheumatism.
Systemic glucocorticoids are widely used in moderate to high doses 
to induce remission in early RA, systemic and polyarticular JIA, giant 
cell arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, vasculitis and SLE. Many patients 
with SLE require low dose maintenance therapy with glucocorticoids and 
this is sometimes also required in RA when other options are unsuitable. 
They are widely used in the short-term treatment of ares in many inam-
matory rheumatic diseases. Glucocorticoids should be used with caution 
in PsA because of a rebound increase in activity of psoriasis when the 
effects wear off.
Intra-articular glucocorticoids are employed in the treatment of a wide 
range of inammatory arthritides and are primarily indicated when there 
are one or two problem joints with persistent synovitis despite good gen-
eral control of the disease. Methylprednisolone is one of the most widely 
used, typically in doses of 40–80 mg.
Intramuscular methylprednisolone (80–120 mg) is a useful way of 
controlling inammatory arthritis while waiting for the effects of newly 
introduced drugs to take effect. It can also be helpful in patients with sta-
ble disease who have a disease are where a major change in DMARD 
strategy is not thought to be necessary.
Targeted synthetic DMARDs (tsDMARDs)
These are small molecules targeted at specic intracellular targets 
involved in regulating the immune response. Treatment costs are high 
and these drugs are generally used as second-line agents in patients 
who have responded inadequately to cDMARDs.
Janus-activated kinase (JAK) inhibitors work by inhibiting JAK 
enzymes, which are a family of intracellular signalling molecules that 
play a key role in transducing the effects of several pro-inammatory 
cytokines. The main adverse effects of JAK inhibitors are an increased 
risk of infections, and because of this, it is customary to screen patients 
for evidence of occult infection with HIV, hepatitis C, hepatitis B and pre-
vious TB before commencing therapy. Currently there are four drugs in 
this class. Tofacitinib (5 mg twice daily or 10 mg daily) is indicated for 
adults with RA and PsA. It is usually prescribed in combination with MTX, 
but can be used as monotherapy in patients where MTX is poorly tol-
erated or contraindicated. Baricitinib (2–4 mg once daily) and lgotinib 
(200 mg daily) are both indicated for RA. Upadacitinib (15 mg daily) is also 
indicated as monotherapy or in combination with MTX, for RA, PsA and 
AxSpA. Tofactinib requires long-term blood monitoring for marrow and 
liver toxicity, but this is not required with the other JAK inhibitors once the 
rst 3 months of therapy have been completed.
Apremilast is used in the treatment of PsA. It is a small molecule 
inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4, an enzyme that breaks down cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). This suppresses production of 
pro-inammatory cytokines, thereby reducing inammation. Apremilast 
is given orally in a dose of 30 mg twice daily. The main adverse 
effects are gastrointestinal upset, weight loss and an increased risk of 
depression.
T cell
B cell
Autoantibodies
Plasma
cell
TNF-α
IL-6
IL-1
Synovial
fibroblast
Dendritic
cell
CD80/CD86
IL-12/IL-23
IL-17
CD28
CD20
Activation
Proliferation
Proliferation
BAFF
Belimumab
Rituximab
Tocilizumab
Sarilumab
Anakinra
Canakinumab
TNFi
Secukinumab
Ixekizumab
Abatacept
Ustekinumab
IL-23
Guselkumab
Th17 cell
Macrophage
JAK
JAK inhibitors
Pro-inflammatory
genes
JAK
Cytokines
Apremilast
Cell wall
Cytokine receptor
P
P
P
P
STAT
STAT
P
P
STAT
STAT
DNA
PDE4
PKA
cAMP
AMP
IFN-γ
IL-6
IL-2
Fig. 26.15 Targets for biologic therapies in inammatory rheumatic diseases. Biologic treatments for inammatory rheumatic diseases work by targeting key cytokines 
and other molecules involved in regulating the immune response. (BAFF = B-cell-activating factor of the TNF family; AMP = adenosine monophosphate; cAMP = cyclic AMP; 
CD = cluster of differentiation; IL = interleukin; JAK = Janus activated kinase; P = phosphate; PDE = phosphodiesterase; PKA = protein kinase A; STAT = signal transducers 
and activators of transcription; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha; TNFi = inhibitor of tumour necrosis factor)

[[p1072]]
Principles of management    1013
26
Biologic DMARDs
‘Biologics’ (monoclonal antibodies, fusion proteins or decoy receptors) 
are given either as self-administered subcutaneous injections every 
1–4 weeks or as infusions every few weeks. The main adverse effect of 
biologics as a class is an increased risk of infections, and screening for 
occult infections is generally performed before commencing therapy as 
described for JAK inhibitors. Biologics are not carcinogenic, but patients 
who develop cancer while on treatment may exhibit accelerated progres-
sion of the tumour due to suppression of the immune response. Treatment 
costs are higher than with cDMARDs and tsDMARDs and many countries 
have set guidelines and funding restrictions that limit their use. Their mech-
anisms of action, dosages and indications are summarised in Box 26.35
TNF-α inhibitors. Most drugs in this class are monoclonal antibodies 
that bind to and neutralise TNF-α, but etanercept is a decoy receptor that 
prevents TNF-α binding to its receptor. Anti-TNF-α therapy is frequently 
used as the rst-line biologic in RA, JIA and PsA when cDMARD therapy 
has been incompletely effective and as rst line biologic in axSpA/AS in 
patients who have failed to respond adequately to NSAID therapy. Anti-
TNF-α is contraindicated in patients with active infections and those with 
indwelling catheters, due to the high risk of infection. Other contraindica-
tions are heart failure (New York Heart Association grade 3 or 4) and mul-
tiple sclerosis, both of which may be worsened by treatment. Anti-TNF-α
therapies can be used during pregnancy, but should be stopped in the 
third trimester since most cross the placenta and can cause immuno-
suppression in the neonate. An exception is certolizumab, which does 
not cross the placenta and can be used safely throughout pregnancy.
Rituximab is an antibody directed against the CD20 receptor, which 
is expressed on B lymphocytes and immature plasma cells. Rituximab 
causes profound B cell lymphopenia for several months due to comple-
ment-mediated lysis of cells that express CD20. Rituximab is indicated 
in RA patients where response to cDMARDs has been inadequate and 
to induce remission in adults and children with ANCA-associated vascu-
litis. In RA, treatment can be repeated when signs of improvement are 
wearing off (6 months to 1 year or longer). In ANCA-positive vasculitis, a 
single cycle of treatment may last for up to 18 months. Adverse effects 
include hypogammaglobulinaemia, infusion reactions, an increased risk 
of infections and, rarely, progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy 
(PML), a serious and potentially fatal infection of the central nervous 
system caused by reactivation of JC virus.
Belimumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the effects of the 
cytokine B cell-activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF), which is 
required for B cell survival and function. It is indicated in juvenile and adult 
patients with SLE who have had an inadequate response to cDMARDs. 
The main adverse effects are an increased risk of infection, leucopenia 
and hypersensitivity reactions following infusion.
Abatacept is a fusion protein in which the Fc domain of IgG has been 
combined with the extracellular domain of CTLA4, which blocks T-cell 
activation by acting as a decoy for CD28, a co-stimulatory molecule nec-
essary for T-cell activation. It is indicated for RA and PsA and polyarticular 
onset JIA where the response to cDMARDs is inadequate. The main 
adverse effect is an increased risk of infections.
IL-6 inhibitors. There are two drugs in this class. Tocilizumab is a mono-
clonal antibody that competes with IL-6 for binding to the IL-6 receptor, 
thereby inhibiting IL-6 signalling. It is indicated in RA with or without MTX 
after inadequate response to cDMARDs and in patients 12 years of age 
and older with systemic JIA, who have responded inadequately to ther-
apy with NSAIDs and systemic glucocorticoids. It is also indicated as a 
steroid-sparing agent in GCA. Sarilumab is a monoclonal antibody (IgG1) 
that works in a similar way to tocilizumab, which is licensed for treating 
adult RA (with concomitant MTX), where there has been an inadequate 
response to cDMARDs. Adverse effects of both agents include leuco-
penia, abnormal LFTs, hypercholesterolaemia and hypersensitivity reac-
tions. Both drugs should be avoided during pregnancy if possible.
Ustekinumab is an antibody to p40, which is a subunit shared by the 
cytokines IL-23 and IL-12. It acts as an inhibitor of both IL-12 and IL-23 
signalling and is indicated in adults with PsA who have not responded 
adequately to cDMARDs. It can be used as monotherapy or in combi-
nation with MTX. Adverse effects include an increased risk of infections, 
hypersensitivity reactions and an exfoliative dermatitis. Guselkumab is 
an antibody directed against the p19 protein of IL-23, which acts as a 
specic inhibitor of IL-23 signalling. It is effective in the treatment of PsA 
and can be used alone or in combination with MTX.
IL-17 inhibitors. There are two drugs in this class; secukinumab is 
a monoclonal antibody to IL-17A and ixekizumab, which binds both 
26.35 Biologic therapies for inammatory rheumatic disease
Drug
Maintenance dose
Mechanism of action
Indications
Etanercept
50 mg weekly SC
Decoy receptor for TNF-α
RA, PsA, AxSpA, JIA
Inixmab
3–5 mg/kg 8-weekly IV
Antibody to TNF-α
RA, PsA, AxSpA, JIA
Adalimumab
40 mg 2-weekly SC
Certolizumab
200 mg 2-weekly SC
Golimumab
50 mg 4-weekly SC
Rituximab
2×1 g 2 weeks apart IV
Antibody to CD20; destroys B cells
RA, vasculitis
Belimumab
200 mg weekly SC or 10 mg/kg 4-weekly IV
Antibody to BAFF; inhibits B-cell activation
SLE
Abatacept
125 mg weekly SC or 10 mg/kg 4-weekly IV
Inhibits T-cell activation
RA, PsA, JIA
Tocilizumab
162 mg weekly SC or 8 mg/kg 8-weekly IV
Antibody to IL-6 receptor
RA, JIA, GCA
Sarilumab
200 mg 2-weekly SC
Antibody to IL-6 receptor
RA
Ustekinumab
45 mg 12-weekly SC
Antibody to IL-12 and IL-23
PsA
Secukinumab
150 mg 4-weekly SC
Antibody to IL-17A
PsA, axSpA
Ixekizumab
80 mg 4-weekly SC.
Antibody to IL-17A/F
PsA and AxSpA
Anakinra
100 mg daily SC
Decoy receptor for IL-1
RA, CAPS, AOSD, gout
Canakinumab
150 mg or 2 mg/kg 8-weekly SC
Antibody to IL-1β
CAPS, sJIA, AOSD, gout
Guselkumab
100 mg 8-weekly SC
Antibody to IL-23
PsA
(AOSD = adult-onset Still’s disease; axSpA = axial spondyloarthritis; BAFF = B cell-activating factor of the TNF family; CAPS = cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes; CD = cluster of 
differentiation; GCA = giant cell arteritis; IL = interleukin; IV = intravenous; JIA = juvenile idiopathic arthritis; PsA = psoriatic arthritis; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; SC = subcutaneous;  
sJIA = systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha)

[[p1073]]
1014    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
IL-17A and IL-17A/F. These drugs are indicated in adults with PsA 
and axSpA who have not responded adequately to cDMARDs and/or 
anti-TNF-α. Adverse effects include an increased risk of triggering 
bouts of IBD, infections, nasopharyngitis and headache. Adverse 
effects include infections and exacerbation of IBD. Clinical experience 
indicates that these drugs are probably safe during pregnancy, but 
information is limited.
Interleukin-1 inhibitors. There are two drugs in this class. Anakinra is 
a human IL-1 receptor antagonist, which neutralises the effects of inter-
leukin-1α (IL-1α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) by inhibiting binding to inter-
leukin-1 type I receptor (IL-1RI). Its most frequent use is for the treatment 
of adult-onset Still’s disease and for periodic fever syndromes (p. 76). It 
has some efcacy in RA, but is seldom used since other drugs are more 
effective. Other indications include acute gout, although it is not licensed 
for this condition, and chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis (see p. 1062). 
Adverse effects include an increased risk of infections, hypersensitiv-
ity reactions and neutropenia. Canakinumab is a monoclonal antibody 
directed against IL-1β, which is indicated for the treatment of systemic 
JIA (Still’s disease), adult-onset Still’s disease and acute ares of gout 
resistant to other treatments. The usual maintenance dose in adults is 
150–300 mg every 8 weeks. Adverse effects include an increased risk of 
infections, hypersensitivity reactions and neutropenia.
Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis (OA) is by far the most common form of arthritis and is 
a major cause of pain and disability in older people. It is characterised 
by focal loss of articular cartilage, subchondral osteosclerosis, osteo-
phyte formation at the joint margin and remodelling of joint contour with 
enlargement of affected joints.
Epidemiology
The prevalence rises progressively with age and it has been estimated 
that 45% of all people develop knee OA and 25% hip OA at some point 
during life. Although some are asymptomatic, the lifetime risk of having a 
total hip or knee replacement for OA in someone aged 50 is about 11% 
for women and 8% for men in the UK. There are major ethnic differences 
in susceptibility: the prevalence of hip OA is lower in Africa, China, Japan 
and South Asia than in European countries, while that of knee OA is higher.
Pathophysiology
OA is a complex disorder, with both genetic and environmental compo-
nents (Box 26.36). Family-based studies have estimated that the herit-
ability of OA ranges from about 43% at the knee to between 60% and 
65% at the hip and hand, respectively. In most cases, the inheritance is 
polygenic and mediated by several genetic variants of small effect. OA 
can be a component of multiple epiphyseal dysplasias, which are caused 
by single gene mutations affecting components of cartilage matrix. 
Structural abnormalities, such as slipped femoral epiphysis and devel-
opmental dysplasia of the hip, are also associated with a high risk of OA, 
presumably due to abnormal load distribution across the joint. Similar 
mechanisms probably explain the increased risk of OA in patients with 
limb deformity secondary to Paget’s disease of bone. Biomechanical fac-
tors play an important role in OA related to certain occupations, such 
as farmers (hip OA), miners (knee OA) and elite or professional athletes 
(knee and ankle OA). It has been speculated that the higher prevalence 
of knee OA in South and East Asia might be accounted for by squatting. 
There is also a high risk of knee OA in people who have had destabi-
lising injuries, such as cruciate ligament rupture, and those who have 
had meniscectomy. For most individuals, however, participation in rec-
reational sport does not appear to increase the risk signicantly. There 
is a strong association between obesity and OA, particularly of the hip 
knee. This is thought to be due partly to biomechanical factors, but it has 
also been speculated that cytokines released from adipose tissue may 
play a role. Oestrogen appears important; lower rates of OA have been 
observed in women who use hormone replacement therapy (HRT), while 
women who receive aromatase inhibitor therapy for breast cancer often 
experience a are in symptoms of OA.
Degeneration of articular cartilage is the dening feature of OA. Under 
normal circumstances, chondrocytes are terminally differentiated cells, 
but in OA they start dividing to produce nests of metabolically active cells 
(Fig.26.16A). Initially, matrix components are produced by these cells at an 
increased rate, but at the same time there is accelerated degradation of the 
major structural components of cartilage matrix, including aggrecan and 
type II collagen (see Fig. 26.5). Eventually, the concentration of aggrecan 
in cartilage matrix falls and makes the cartilage vulnerable to load-bearing 
injury. Fissuring of the cartilage surface (‘brillation’) then occurs, leading to 
the development of deep vertical clefts (Fig. 26.16B), localised chondro-
cyte death and decreased cartilage thickness. This is initially focal, mainly 
targeting the maximum load-bearing part of the joint, but eventually large 
parts of the cartilage surface are damaged. CPP and basic calcium phos-
phate crystals often become deposited in the abnormal cartilage.
OA is also accompanied by abnormalities in subchondral bone, which 
becomes sclerotic and the site of subchondral cysts (Fig. 26.16C). 
Fibrocartilage is produced at the joint margin, which undergoes endo-
chondral ossication to form osteophytes. Bone remodelling and carti-
lage thinning slowly alter the shape of the OA joint, increasing its surface 
area. It is almost as though there is a homeostatic mechanism operative in 
26.36 Risk factors for osteoarthritis
Genetics
 Skeletal dysplasias
 Polygenic inheritance
Developmental abnormalities
 Developmental dysplasia of the hip
 Slipped femoral epiphysis
Repetitive loading
 Farmers
 Miners
 Elite athletes
Adverse biomechanics
 Meniscectomy
 Ligament rupture
 Paget’s disease
Obesity
Trauma
Hormonal
 Oestrogen deciency
 Aromatase inhibitors
A
C
B
Fig. 26.16 Pathological changes in osteoarthritis.
proliferating chondrocytes (arrows) interspersed with matrix devoid of normal 
affected by OA, showing osteophytes at joint margin (white arrows), subchondral 
sclerosis (black arrows) and a subchondral cyst (open arrow).

[[p1074]]
Osteoarthritis    1015
26
OA that causes enlargement of the failing joint to spread the mechanical 
load over a greater surface area.
Patients with OA also have higher BMD values at sites distant from 
the joint and this is particularly associated with osteophyte formation. 
This is in keeping with observations made in epidemiological studies 
that show that patients with OA are partially protected from developing 
osteoporosis and vice versa. This is likely to be due to the fact that the 
genetic factors that predispose to osteoporosis might be protective 
for OA.
The synovium in OA is often hyperplastic and may be the site of inam-
matory change, but to a much lesser extent than in RA and other inam-
matory arthropathies. Osteochondral bodies commonly occur within 
the synovium, reecting chondroid metaplasia or secondary uptake and 
growth of damaged cartilage fragments. The outer capsule also thickens 
and contracts, usually retaining the stability of the remodelling joint. The 
muscles surrounding affected joints commonly show evidence of wast-
ing and non-specic type II bre atrophy.
Clinical features
Osteoarthritis has a characteristic distribution, mainly targeting the hips, 
knees, PIP and DIP joints of the hands, neck and lumbar spine (see 
Fig. 26.10). The main presenting symptoms are pain and functional 
restriction. The causes of pain in OA are not completely understood, but 
may relate to increased pressure in subchondral bone (mainly causing 
night pain), trabecular microfractures, capsular distension and low-grade 
synovitis. Pain may also result from bursitis and enthesopathy secondary 
to altered joint mechanics. Typical OA pain has the characteristics listed 
in Box 26.37. For many people, functional restriction of the hands, knees 
or hips is an equal, if not greater, problem than pain. The clinical ndings 
vary according to severity, but are principally those of joint damage.
The correlation between the presence of structural change, as 
assessed by imaging, and symptoms such as pain and disability varies 
markedly according to site. It is stronger at the hip than at the knee and 
weak at most small joints. This suggests that the risk factors for pain 
and disability may differ from those for structural change. At the knee, 
for example, reduced quadriceps muscle strength and adverse psycho-
social factors (anxiety, depression) correlate more strongly with pain and 
disability than the degree of radiographic change.
Radiological evidence of OA is very common in middle-aged and older 
people, and the disease may coexist with other conditions, so it is impor-
tant to remember that pain in a patient with OA may be due to another 
cause.
Generalised nodal OA
Characteristics of this common form of OA are shown in Box 26.38. 
Some patients are asymptomatic whereas others develop pain, stiffness 
and swelling of one or more PIP and DIP joints of the hands from the 
age of about 40 years onwards. Gradually, these develop posterolateral 
swellings on each side of the extensor tendon, which slowly enlarge 
and harden to become Heberden’s (DIP) and Bouchard’s (PIP) nodes 
(Fig. 26.17). Typically, each joint goes through a phase of episodic symp-
toms (1–5 years) while the node evolves and OA develops. Once OA is 
fully established, symptoms may subside and hand function often remains 
good. Affected joints are enlarged as a result of osteophyte formation and 
often show characteristic lateral deviation, reecting the asymmetric focal 
cartilage loss of OA (Fig. 26.18). Involvement of the rst carpometacarpal 
(CMC) joint is also common, leading to pain on trying to open bottles and 
jars, and functional impairment. Clinically, it may be detected by the pres-
ence of crepitus on joint movement and squaring of the thumb base.
Generalised nodal OA has a very strong genetic component: the 
daughter of an affected mother has a 1 in 3 chance of developing nodal 
OA herself. People with nodal OA are also at increased risk of OA at other 
sites, especially the knee.
Knee OA
At the knee, OA principally targets the patello-femoral and medial tibio-
femoral compartments, but eventually spreads to affect the whole of the 
joint (Fig. 26.19). It may be isolated or occur as part of generalised nodal 
OA. Most patients have bilateral and symmetrical involvement. In men, 
trauma is often a more important risk factor and may result in unilateral OA.
The pain is usually localised to the anterior or medial aspect of the 
knee and upper tibia. Patello-femoral pain is usually worse going up and 
down stairs or inclines. Posterior knee pain suggests the presence of a 
complicating popliteal cyst (Baker’s cyst). Prolonged walking, rising from 
a chair, getting in or out of a car, or bending to put on shoes and socks 
may be difcult. Local examination ndings may include:
 a jerky, asymmetric (antalgic) gait with less time weight-bearing on 
the painful side
 a varus (Fig. 26.20) or, less commonly, valgus and/or a xed exion 
deformity
 joint-line and/or periarticular tenderness (secondary anserine bursitis 
and medial ligament enthesopathy (see Box 26.25), causing tenderness 
of the upper medial tibia)
26.37 Symptoms and signs of osteoarthritis
Pain
 Insidious onset over months or years
 Variable or intermittent nature over time (‘good days, bad days’)
 Mainly related to movement and weight-bearing, relieved by rest
 Mild morning stiffness (< 15mins) and inactivity gelling (< 5 mins) after rest
 Usually only one or a few joints painful
Clinical signs
 Restricted movement due to capsular thickening or blocking by osteophyte
 Palpable, sometimes audible, coarse crepitus due to rough articular surfaces
 Bony swelling around joint margins
 Deformity, usually without instability
 Joint-line or periarticular tenderness
 Muscle weakness and wasting
 Mild or absent synovitis
26.38 Characteristics of generalised nodal osteoarthritis
 Polyarticular nger interphalangeal joint osteoarthritis
 Heberden’s (± Bouchard’s) nodes
 Marked female preponderance
 Peak onset in middle age
 Good functional outcome for hands
 Predisposition to osteoarthritis at other joints, especially knees
 Strong genetic predisposition
Fig. 26.17 Nodal osteoarthritis. Heberden’s nodes and lateral (radial to ulnar) 
deviation of distal interphalangeal joints, with mild Bouchard’s nodes at the proximal 
interphalangeal joints.

[[p1075]]
1016    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
 weakness and wasting of the quadriceps muscle
 restricted exion and extension with crepitus
 bony swelling around the joint line.
CPP crystal deposition in association with OA is common at the knee. 
This may result in a more overt inammatory component (stiffness, effu-
sions) and super-added acute attacks of synovitis (acute CPP crystal 
arthritis), which may be associated with more rapid radiographic and 
clinical progression.
Hip OA
Hip OA most commonly targets the superior aspect of the joint (Fig. 26.21). 
It is often unilateral at presentation, frequently progresses with superolateral 
migration of the femoral head and has a poor prognosis. The less common 
central (medial) OA shows more central cartilage loss and is largely con-
ned to women. It is often bilateral at presentation and can be associated 
with generalised nodal OA. It has a better prognosis than superior hip OA 
and progression to axial migration of the femoral head is uncommon.
The hip shows the best correlation between symptoms and radio-
graphic change. Hip pain is usually maximal deep in the anterior groin, 
with variable radiation to the buttock, anterolateral thigh, knee or shin. 
Lateral hip pain, worse on lying on that side with tenderness over the 
greater trochanter, suggests secondary trochanteric bursitis. Common 
functional difculties are the same as for knee OA; in addition, restricted 
hip abduction in women may cause pain during sexual intercourse. 
Examination may reveal:
 an antalgic gait
 weakness and wasting of quadriceps and gluteal muscles
Fig. 26.18 X-ray appearances in hand osteoarthritis. There is joint space narrowing 
affecting the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints in both 
hands. There are typical articular subchondral and ‘gull wing’ appearances to some 
osteoarthritis-affected joints, as well as osteophyte formation that is most marked at the 
second DIP joints bilaterally and the rst PIP joint on the right hand (arrows).
Fig. 26.19 X-ray appearances in knee osteoarthritis. 
showing almost complete loss of joint space affecting both compartments and 
patient with severe patello-femoral osteoarthritis. There is almost complete loss of 
joint space and lateral displacement of the patella.
A
B
Fig. 26.20 Typical varus knee deformity resulting from marked medial 
tibio-femoral osteoarthritis.
O
C
N
S
O
Fig. 26.21 X-ray of hip showing changes of osteoarthritis. Note the superior 
joint space narrowing (N), subchondral sclerosis (S), marginal osteophytes (O) and 
cysts (C).

[[p1076]]
Osteoarthritis    1017
26
 pain and restriction of internal rotation with the hip exed – the earli-
est and most sensitive sign of hip OA; other movements may subse-
quently be restricted and painful
 anterior groin tenderness just lateral to the femoral pulse
 xed exion, external rotation deformity of the hip
 ipsilateral leg shortening with severe joint attrition and superior femoral 
migration.
Obesity is associated with more rapid progression of hip OA.
Spine OA
The cervical and lumbar spine are the sites most often targeted by OA, 
where it is referred to as cervical spondylosis and lumbar spondylosis, 
respectively (Fig. 26.22). Spine OA may occur in isolation or as part of 
generalised OA. The typical presentation is with pain localised to the low 
back region or the neck, although radiation of pain to the arms, buttocks 
and legs may also occur due to nerve root compression. The pain is 
typically relieved by rest and worse on movement. On physical examina-
tion, the range of movement may be limited and loss of lumbar lordosis 
is typical. The straight leg-raising test or femoral stretch test may be 
positive and neurological signs may be seen in the legs where there is 
complicating spinal stenosis or nerve root compression.
Early-onset OA
Rarely, OA may present before the age of 45. In most cases, a single 
joint is affected and there is a clear history of previous trauma. However, 
specic causes of OA need to be considered in people with early-onset 
disease affecting several joints, especially those not normally targeted 
by OA, in which case rare causes need to be considered (Box 26.39). 
Kashin–Beck disease is a rare form of OA that occurs in children, typi-
cally between the ages of 7 and 13, in some regions of China. The cause 
is unknown, but suggested predisposing factors are selenium deciency 
and contamination of cereals with mycotoxin-producing fungi.
Erosive OA
This term is used to describe an unusual group of patients with hand 
OA who have a more prolonged symptom phase, more overt inam-
mation, more disability and worse outcome than those with nodal 
OA. Distinguishing features include preferential targeting of PIP joints, 
subchondral erosions on X-rays, occasional ankylosis of affected joints 
and lack of association with OA elsewhere. It is unclear whether erosive 
OA is part of the spectrum of hand OA or a discrete subset.
Investigations
A plain X-ray of the affected joints should be performed and often will 
show one or more of the typical features of OA (see Fig. 26.16 and Figs. 
26.18–26.22). In addition to providing diagnostic information, X-rays are 
of value in assessing the severity of structural change, which is help-
ful if joint replacement surgery is being considered. Non-weight-bearing 
postero-anterior views of the pelvis are adequate for assessing hip OA. 
Patients with suspected knee OA should have standing anteroposterior 
X-rays taken to assess tibio-femoral cartilage loss and a exed skyline 
view to assess patello-femoral involvement. Spine OA can often be diag-
nosed on a plain X-ray, which typically shows evidence of disc space 
narrowing and osteophytes. If nerve root compression or spinal stenosis 
is suspected, MRI should be performed.
Routine biochemistry, haematology and autoantibody tests are usually 
normal, though inammatory OA can be associated with a mild acute 
phase response. Synovial uid aspirated from an affected joint is viscous, 
with a low cell count.
Unexplained early-onset OA requires additional investigation, guided 
by the suspected underlying condition. X-rays may show typical features 
of dysplasia or osteonecrosis, widening of joint spaces in acromegaly, 
multiple cysts, chondrocalcinosis and MCP joint involvement in haemo-
chromatosis or disorganised architecture in neuropathic joints.
Management
Treatment follows the general principles outlined earlier this chapter. 
Measures that are pertinent in older people are summarised in Box 26.40
Education
It is important to explain the nature of the condition fully, outlining the role 
of relevant risk factors such as obesity, heredity and trauma. The patient 
should be informed that established structural changes are permanent 
and that, although a cure is not possible, pain and function can often be 
improved. The prognosis should also be discussed, mentioning that it is 
generally good for nodal hand OA and better for knee than hip OA.
C6
C7
Fig. 26.22 X-ray of spine showing typical changes of osteoarthritis. Cervical 
spondylosis showing disc space narrowing between C6 and C7, osteophytes at the 
anterior vertebral body margins (thin arrows) and osteosclerosis at the apophyseal 
joints (thick arrow).
26.39 Causes of early-onset osteoarthritis
Monoarticular
 Previous trauma, localised instability
Pauciarticular or polyarticular
 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
 Metabolic or endocrine disease:
Haemochromatosis
Ochronosis
Acromegaly
Alkaptonuria
 Spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia
 Late osteonecrosis
 Neuropathic joint
 Kashin–Beck disease
26.40 Osteoarthritis in old age
 Pain and disability: osteoarthritis is the principal cause in old age.
 Calcium phosphate deposition disease: may cause acute attacks of synovitis 
(pseudogout) on a background of chronic osteoarthritis.
 Falls: reduced muscle strength and pain associated with lower limb 
osteoarthritis increase the risk.
 Muscle-strengthening exercises: safely reduce the pain and disability of 
knee osteoarthritis with accompanying improvements in balance and reduced 
tendency to fall.
 Oral paracetamol and topical non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs: safe 
in older people, with no important drug interactions or contraindications.
 Intra-articular injection of glucocorticoid: a very safe and often effective 
treatment, particularly useful for tiding a patient over a special event.
 Total joint replacement: an excellent cost-effective treatment for severe 
disabling knee or hip osteoarthritis in older people. There is no age limit for joint 
replacement surgery.

[[p1077]]
1018    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Lifestyle advice
Weight loss has a substantial benecial effect on symptoms if the patient 
is obese and is probably one of the most effective treatments availa-
ble for OA of the lower limbs. Strengthening and aerobic exercises also 
have benecial effects in OA and should be advised, preferably with 
re inforcement by a physiotherapist. Quadriceps strengthening exercises 
are particularly benecial in knee OA. Shock-absorbing footwear, pacing 
of activities, use of a walking stick for painful knee or hip OA, and provi-
sion of built-up shoes to equalise leg lengths can all improve symptoms.
Non-pharmacological therapy
Acupuncture and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) can 
be effective in knee OA. Local physical therapies, such as heat or cold, 
can sometimes give temporary relief.
Pharmacological therapy
If symptoms do not respond to non-pharmacological measures, para-
cetamol should be tried. Addition of a topical NSAID and then capsai-
cin for knee and hand OA can also be helpful. Oral NSAIDs should be 
considered in patients who remain symptomatic. These drugs are signif-
icantly more effective than paracetamol and can be successfully com-
bined with paracetamol or compound analgesics if the pain is severe. 
Strong opiates may occasionally be required. Antineuropathic drugs, 
such as amitriptyline, gabapentin and pregabalin, are sometimes used 
in patients with symptoms that are difcult to control, but the evidence 
base for their use is poor. Neutralising antibodies to nerve growth factor 
have been developed and are an effective treatment for pain in OA, but 
they are not yet licensed for routine clinical use.
Intra-articular injections
Intra-articular glucocorticoid injections are effective in the treatment of 
knee OA and are also used for symptomatic relief in the treatment of OA 
at the rst CMC joint. The duration of effect is usually short, but trials of 
serial glucocorticoid injections every 3 months in knee OA have shown 
efcacy for up to 1 year. Intra-articular injections of hyaluronic acid can 
help to an extent in knee OA, but the treatment is expensive and the 
effect short-lived. In the UK they have not been considered to be cost-
effective by NICE.
Neutraceuticals
Chondroitin sulphate and glucosamine sulphate have been used alone 
and in combination for the treatment of knee OA. There is evidence from 
randomised controlled trials that these agents can improve knee pain to 
a small extent (3%–5%) compared with placebo.
Surgery
Surgery should be considered for patients with OA whose symp-
toms and functional impairment impact signicantly on their quality 
of life despite optimal medical therapy and lifestyle advice. Total joint 
replacement surgery is by far the most common surgical procedure 
for patients with OA. It can transform the quality of life for people with 
severe knee or hip OA and is indicated when there is signicant struc-
tural damage on X-ray. Although surgery should not be undertaken at 
an early stage during the development of OA, it is important to con-
sider it before functional limitation has become advanced since this may 
compromise outcome. Patient-specic factors, such as age, gender, 
smoking and presence of obesity, should not be barriers to referral for 
joint replacement.
Only a small proportion of patients with OA progress to the extent that 
total joint replacement is required, but OA is by far the most frequent indi-
cation for this. Over 95% of joint replacements continue to function well 
into the second decade after surgery and most provide life-long, pain-
free function. Up to 20% of patients are not satised with the outcome, 
however, and a few experience little or no improvement in pain. Other 
surgical procedures are performed much less frequently. Resurfacing of 
the femoral head can be considered for younger patients with hip OA 
(age < 60) as an alternative to total joint replacement. Tibial osteotomy 
represents an alternative to total joint replacement in younger patients 
with knee OA and can be effective at improving pain by altering alignment 
of the lower leg. Cartilage repair is sometimes performed to treat focal 
cartilage defects resulting from joint injury.
Crystal-induced arthritis
A variety of crystals can deposit in and around joints and structures in 
the spine and cause an acute inammatory or even chronic inammatory 
arthritis or disease (Box 26.41). Several factors inuence crystal forma-
tion (Fig. 26.23). There must be sufcient concentration of the chemical 
components (ionic product), but whether a crystal then forms depends 
on the balance of tissue factors that promote and inhibit crystal nucle-
ation and growth. The inammatory potential of crystals resides in their 
physical irregularity and high negative surface charge, which can induce 
inammation and damage cell membranes. Crystals may also cause 
mechanical damage to tissues and act as wear particles at the joint sur-
face. They can reside in cartilage or tendon for years without causing 
inammation or symptoms and it is only when they are released that they 
trigger inammation. This may occur spontaneously but can also result 
from local trauma, rapid changes in the concentration of the components 
that form crystals, or in association with an acute phase response trig-
gered by intercurrent illness or surgery. In the longer term, a reduction 
in concentrations of the solutes that form crystals causes dissolution of 
crystals and remission of the arthritis.
Gout
Gout is the most common inammatory arthritis in men and in older 
women though robust epidemiological data on the prevalence of CPPD 
are lacking. Gout is caused by deposition of monosodium urate mono-
hydrate crystals in and around synovial joints.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of gout is approximately 1%–2%, with a greater than 
5:1 male preponderance. Gout has become progressively more com-
mon over recent years in afuent societies due to the increased prev-
alence of obesity and metabolic syndrome, of which hyperuricaemia is 
26.41  Crystal-associated arthritis and deposition in 
connective tissue
Crystal
Disease
Common
Monosodium urate monohydrate
Acute gout
Chronic tophaceous gout
Calcium pyrophosphate (CPP)
Acute CPP crystal arthritis
Chronic CPP crystal arthritis
Chondrocalcinosis
Axial disease (e.g. crowned dens 
syndrome)
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP)
Calcic periarthritis
Calcinosis
Uncommon
Cholesterol
Chronic effusions in rheumatoid arthritis
Calcium oxalate
Acute arthritis in dialysis patients
Extrinsic crystals/semi-crystalline 
particles:
 Synthetic crystals
Acute synovitis
 Plant thorns/sea urchin spines
Chronic monoarthritis, tenosynovitis

[[p1078]]
Crystal-induced arthritis    1019
26
an integral component. The risk of developing gout increases with age 
and with serum uric acid (SUA) levels. These are normally distributed 
in the general population and hyperuricaemia is dened as an SUA of 
more than 2 standard deviations above the mean for the population. 
SUA levels are higher in men, increase with age and are positively asso-
ciated with body weight. Levels are higher in some ethnic groups (such 
as Maoris and Pacic islanders). Although hyperuricaemia is a strong 
risk factor for gout, only a minority of hyperuricaemic individuals actually 
develop gout.
Pathophysiology
About one-third of the body uric acid pool is derived from dietary sources 
and two-thirds from endogenous purine metabolism (Fig. 26.24). The 
concentration of uric acid in body uids depends on the balance between 
endogenous synthesis and elimination by the kidneys (two-thirds) and 
gut (one-third). Purine nucleotide synthesis and degradation are regu-
lated by a network of enzyme pathways, but xanthine oxidase plays a 
pivotal role in catalysing the conversion of hypoxanthine to xanthine and 
xanthine to uric acid.
The causes of hyperuricaemia are shown in Box 26.42. In over 90% 
of patients, the main abnormality is reduced uric acid excretion by the 
kidney, which is genetically determined. Impaired renal excretion of 
urate also accounts for the occurrence of hyperuricaemia in chronic 
renal failure and for hyperuricaemia associated with thiazide diuretic 
therapy.
Other risk factors for gout include metabolic syndrome, high alcohol 
intake (predominantly beer, which contains guanosine), generalised OA 
and a diet relatively high in game, offal, seafood, red meat and fructose, 
or low in vitamin C. Lead poisoning may cause gout (saturnine gout). The 
association between OA and gout is thought to be due to a reduction in 
levels of proteoglycan and other inhibitors of crystal formation in osteoar-
thritic cartilage, predisposing to crystal formation.
Some patients develop gout because they over-produce uric acid. 
The mechanisms are poorly understood, except in the case of a few 
single gene disorders where there are mutations in genes that regu-
late purine metabolism (see Box 26.42). Lesch–Nyhan syndrome is an 
X-linked recessive form of gout that is also associated with mental retar-
dation, self-mutilation and choreoathetosis. An inherited cause should 
be suspected if other clinical features are present or there is an early 
age at onset with a positive family history. Severe hyperuricaemia can 
also occur in patients with haematological and other cancers who are 
undergoing chemotherapy due to increased purine turnover (tumour lysis 
Solute excess
pH
Temperature
Pressure
[Na+
] + [Urate]
[Ca
2+] + [PO4]
Nucleating
factors
Growth-promoting
factors
Crystals
Inflammation
Trauma
Rapidly reduced 
solute levels
Reduced solute levels
Inhibitors of
crystal growth
Shedding
Dissolution
Bone
Cartilage
Fig. 26.23 Mechanisms of crystal formation.
Endogenous purines
(~800mg/24 hrs)
Renal excretion acid
(~800mg/24 hrs)
Intestinal excretion acid
(~400mg/24 hrs)
Purine salvage
pathway
Game, seafood,
oily fish, offal
De novo
synthesis
Inosine
Inhibition
of pathway
Stimulation
of pathway
Hypoxanthine
Xanthine oxidase
Xanthine
Allantoin
Uricosuric
drugs
Pegloticase
Allopurinol
Febuxostat
Xanthine oxidase
Uric acid
(~1200mg)
Dietary purines
(~400mg/24 hrs)
Fig. 26.24 Uric acid metabolism. The main pathways for uric acid production and 
elimination are shown, along with the site of action for urate-lowering therapies.
26.42 The main causes of hyperuricaemia and gout
Diminished renal excretion
 Increased renal tubular 
reabsorption*
 Renal failure
 Lead toxicity
 Lactic acidosis
 Alcohol
 Drugs:
Thiazide and loop diuretics
Low-dose aspirin
Ciclosporin
 Pyrazinamide
 Cancer chemotherapy
 ACE inhibitors
Increased intake
 Game
 Shellsh
 Offal
 Red meat
Increased production
 Myeloproliferative and 
lymphoproliferative disease
 Psoriasis
 High fructose intake
 Glycogen storage disease
 Inherited disorders:
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome (HPRT 
mutations)
Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate 
synthetase 1 mutations
*Usually genetically determined (see text).
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; HPRT = hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl 
transferase)

[[p1079]]
1020    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
syndrome). This acute rise in urate seldom, if ever, causes gout but can 
cause acute kidney injury.
Clinical features
The classical presentation is with an acute monoarthritis, which affects 
the rst MTP joint in over 50% of cases (Fig. 26.25). Other common 
sites are the ankle, midfoot, knee, small joints of hands, wrist and elbow. 
The axial skeleton and large proximal joints are rarely involved. Typical 
features include:
 rapid onset, reaching maximum severity in 2–6 hours, worse in the 
early morning
 severe pain, often described as the ‘worst pain ever’
 extreme tenderness, so the patient is unable to wear a sock or to let 
bedding rest on the joint
 marked swelling with overlying red, shiny skin
 self-limiting over 5–14 days, with complete resolution.
During the attack, the joint shows signs of marked synovitis, swell-
ing and erythema. There may be accompanying fever, malaise and 
even delirium, especially if a large joint such as the knee is involved. 
As the attack subsides, pruritus and desquamation of overlying skin 
are common. The main differential diagnosis is septic arthritis, celluli-
tis and reactive arthritis. Acute attacks may also manifest as bursitis, 
or tenosynovitis. Sometimes an acute attack will be followed by fur-
ther attacks in other joints a few days later (cluster attacks), the rst 
possibly acting as a trigger. Simultaneous polyarticular attacks are 
unusual.
Some people never have a second episode and in others several 
years may elapse before a second attack occurs. Patients with repeated 
attacks may progress to chronic gout, with chronic pain, joint damage, 
deformity and functional impairment. Patients with uncontrolled hyper-
uricaemia who suffer multiple attacks of acute gout may also progress 
to chronic gout.
The presentation of gout in old age may be atypical, with chronic 
symptoms rather than acute attacks (Box 26.43).
Crystals may be deposited in the joints and soft tissues to produce irreg-
ular rm nodules called tophi. These have a predilection for the extensor 
surfaces of ngers, hands, forearm, elbows, Achilles tendons and some-
times the helix of the ear. Tophi have a white colour (Fig. 26.26), differentiat-
ing them from rheumatoid nodules. Tophi can ulcerate, discharging white 
gritty material, become infected or induce a local inammatory response, 
with erythema and pus in the absence of secondary infection. They are 
usually a feature of long-standing gout, but can sometimes develop within 
12 months in patients with chronic renal failure. Occasionally, tophi may 
develop in the absence of previous acute attacks, especially in patients on 
thiazide therapy who have coexisting OA.
In addition to causing musculoskeletal disease, chronic hyperuricae-
mia may be complicated by renal stone formation and, if severe, renal 
impairment due to the development of interstitial nephritis as a result of 
urate deposition in the kidney. This is particularly common in patients 
with chronic tophaceous gout who are on diuretic therapy.
Investigations
The diagnosis of gout can be conrmed by the identication of urate 
crystals in the aspirate from a joint, bursa or tophus (see Fig. 26.6A). In 
acute gout, the synovial uid may be turbid due to an elevated neutrophil 
count. In chronic gout, the appearance is more variable, but occasionally 
the uid appears white due to the presence of urate crystals. Between 
attacks, aspiration of an asymptomatic rst MTP joint or knee may still 
reveal crystals.
A biochemical screen, including renal function, uric acid, glucose and 
lipid prole, should be performed because of the association with met-
abolic syndrome. Hyperuricaemia is usually present in gout, but levels 
may be normal during an attack because serum urate falls during inam-
mation. Acute gout is characterised by an elevated ESR and CRP and 
with a neutrophilia, all of which return to normal as the attack subsides. 
Tophaceous gout may be accompanied by a modest but chronic eleva-
tion in ESR and CRP.
X-rays are usually normal in acute gout, but well-demarcated erosions 
may be seen in patients with chronic or tophaceous gout (Fig. 26.27). 
Tophi may also be visible on X-rays as soft tissue swellings. In late dis-
ease, destructive changes may occur that are similar to those in other 
forms of advanced inammatory arthritis.
Management
Management should focus on rst dealing with the acute attack and then 
giving prophylaxis to lower SUA and prevent further attacks.
Fig. 26.25 Podagra. Acute gout causing swelling, erythema, and extreme pain 
and tenderness of the rst metatarsophalangeal joint. From Goldman L, Shafer AI. 
Goldman-Cecil medicine, 26th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020
26.43 Gout in old age
 Aetiology: a higher proportion of older patients have gout secondary to  
diuretic use and chronic kidney disease. Gout is often associated with 
osteoarthritis.
 Presentation: may be atypical, with painful tophi and chronic symptoms,  
rather than acute attacks. Joints of the upper limbs are more frequently 
affected.
 Management: acute attacks are best treated by aspiration and intra-articular 
injection of glucocorticoids, followed by early mobilisation. Non-steroidal anti-
inammatory drugs and colchicine should be used with caution because of 
increased risk of toxicity. Low doses of allopurinol (50mg/day) should be given 
and increased gradually to avoid toxicity.
Fig. 26.26 Tophi over the proximal interphalangeal joints of the hands. From 
Goldman L, Shafer AI. Goldman-Cecil medicine, 25th edn. Elsevier; 2016.

[[p1080]]
Crystal-induced arthritis    1021
26
Acute gout
Oral colchicine given in doses of 0.5 mg 2–4 times daily is the treat-
ment of rst choice in acute gout. It works by inhibiting the inamma-
some (see Fig. 4.2), which reduces IL-1β production by macrophages. 
The most common adverse effects are nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. 
Oral NSAIDs are also effective, but are used less commonly since many 
patients affected by acute gout have coexisting cardiovascular, cerebro-
vascular or chronic kidney disease. Oral prednisolone (15–20 mg daily 
for 2–3 days) or intramuscular methylprednisolone (80–120 mg daily) are 
highly effective and are a good choice in older patients where there is an 
increased risk of toxicity with colchicine and NSAID (see Box 26.43). IL-1 
inhibition with anakinra or canakinumab (see Box 26.35) is effective but 
both treatments are expensive and so are seldom given. Local ice packs 
can also be used for symptomatic relief. Patients with recurrent episodes 
can keep a supply of an NSAID, colchicine or prednisolone and take it 
as soon as the rst symptoms occur, continuing until the attack resolves. 
Joint aspiration can give pain relief, particularly if a large joint is affected, 
and may be combined with an intra-articular glucocorticoid injection if 
the diagnosis is clear and infection can be excluded.
Prophylaxis
Patients who have had a single attack of gout do not necessarily need 
to be given urate-lowering therapy, but it should be offered to individu-
als who have more than one acute attack within 12 months and those 
with complications such as tophi or erosions (Box 26.44). The long-term 
therapeutic aim is to prevent attacks occurring by bringing SUA below 
the level at which monosodium urate monohydrate crystals form. A ther-
apeutic target of < 300 µmol/L (5 mg/dL) is recommended in the British 
Society of Rheumatology guidelines, whereas the European League 
Against Rheumatism guidelines recommend a threshold of < 360 µmol/L 
(6 mg/dL) or <300 µmol/L (5  mg/dL) in those with severe gout.
Allopurinol is the drug of rst choice. It inhibits xanthine oxidase, 
which reduces the conversion of hypoxanthine and xanthine to uric 
acid. The recommended starting dose is 100 mg daily, or 50 mg in 
older patients and in renal impairment. The dose of allopurinol should 
be increased by 100 mg every 4 weeks (50 mg in older patients and 
those with renal impairment) until the target uric acid level is achieved, 
side-effects occur or the maximum recommended dose is reached (900 
mg/day). Acute ares of gout often follow initiation of urate-lowering 
therapy. The patient should be warned about this and told to continue 
therapy, even if an attack occurs. The risk of ares can be reduced 
by prophylaxis with oral colchicine (0.5–1 mg daily) or an NSAID for 
the rst few months. Alternatively, patients can be given a supply of 
colchicine, an NSAID or prednisolone to be taken at the rst sign of an 
acute attack. In the longer term, annual monitoring of uric acid levels 
is recommended. In most patients, urate-lowering therapy needs to be 
continued indenitely.
Febuxostat also inhibits xanthine oxidase. It is typically used in patients 
with an inadequate response to allopurinol and when allopurinol is con-
traindicated or causes adverse effects. Febuxostat undergoes hepatic 
metabolism and no dose adjustment is required for renal impairment. It 
is more effective than allopurinol, but commonly provokes acute attacks 
when therapy is initiated. The usual starting dose is 40–80 mg daily, 
increasing to 120 mg daily in patients with an inadequate response. 
Prophylaxis against acute attacks should be given on initiating therapy, 
as described for allopurinol.
Uricosuric drugs, such as probenecid, sulnpyrazone and benzbro-
marone, lower urate levels but are seldom used in routine clinical prac-
tice. They are contraindicated in urate over-producers and those with 
renal impairment or urolithiasis and require patients to maintain a high 
uid intake to avoid uric acid crystallisation in the renal tubules.
Pegloticase is a biologic treatment comprised of the enzyme uricase 
conjugated to monomethoxypolyethylene glycol. It breaks down uric acid 
and is indicated for the treatment of tophaceous gout resistant to stand-
ard therapy and is administered as an intravenous infusion every 2 weeks 
for up to 6 months. It is highly effective at controlling hyperuricaemia 
and can cause regression of tophi. The main adverse effects are infusion 
reactions (which can be treated with antihistamines or glucocorticoids) 
and ares of gout during the rst 3 months of therapy. A limiting factor for 
longer-term treatment is the development of antibodies to pegloticase, 
which occur in a high proportion of cases and are associated with an 
impaired therapeutic response.
Lifestyle measures are as important as drug therapy in treatment of 
gout. Patients should be advised to lose weight if appropriate and reduce 
excessive alcohol intake, especially beer. Several antihypertensive drugs, 
including thiazides, β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) and angioten-
sin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, increase uric acid levels, whereas 
losartan has a uricosuric effect and should be substituted for other drugs if 
possible. Patients should avoid large amounts of seafood and offal, which 
have a high purine content, but a highly restrictive diet is not necessary.
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition 
(CPPD) disease
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) disease encompasses a 
range of clinical presentations. Crystals can deposit in articular carti-
lage, synovium, entheses, tendons and ligaments – both axial and peri-
pheral skeletal sites. The acute form of CPPD disease is acute calcium 
pyro phosphate (CPP) crystal arthritis (‘pseudogout’). Acute CPP crystal 
arthritis is rare under the age of 55 years, but occurs in 10%–15% of 
people between 65 and 75 years and 30%–60% of those over 85 years 
old. It typically involves the knee, wrist, ankle, shoulder and hip. Acute 
CPP inammation can also affect axial skeletal structures. Risk factors 
for CPPD disease are shown in Box 26.45. Frequently, patients with 
CPPD disease have multiple joint chondrocalcinosis and a proportion 
present with chronic CPP crystal arthritis without a history of previous 
acute CPP crystal arthritis. The picture is typically an inammatory pol-
yarthritis superimposed on a background of OA – typically of the wrist, 
shoulder or knee (Fig. 26.28). Chronic CPP crystal arthritis can be mis-
taken for RA by the unwary, as MCP joints can be affected (usually just 
2nd and 3rd, sparing the 4th and 5th) and low titre RF is a common 
incidental nding in old age. The prevalence of CPPD disease affecting 
the axial skeletal is unknown.
Fig. 26.27 Erosive arthritis in chronic gout. Punched-out (‘Lulworth Cove’) 
erosions (arrows) in association with a destructive arthritis affecting the rst 
metatarsophalangeal joint.
26.44 Indications for urate-lowering drugs
 Recurrent attacks of acute gout
 Evidence of bone or joint  
damage
 Tophi
 Renal impairment
 Nephrolithiasis
 Chemotherapy-related  
hyperuricemia

[[p1081]]
1022    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Pathophysiology
The underlying mechanisms of crystal deposition are poorly understood. 
Clinical studies have shown that CPP levels are raised in patients with 
CPPD disease, possibly due to over-production, but why this happens 
is unclear. In hypophosphatasia (see Box 26.75), the predisposing factor 
is thought to be impaired degradation of CPP due to deciency of ALP. 
In OA, it is thought that a reduction in the amounts of proteoglycan and 
other natural inhibitors of crystal formation in the abnormal cartilage also 
predispose to crystal deposition (see Fig. 26.23).
Clinical features
The typical acute CPP crystal arthritis presentation is with a swollen ten-
der joint that is warm and erythematous with a large effusion. Fever is 
common and the patient may appear confused and ill. The knee is most 
commonly affected, followed by the wrist, shoulder, ankle and elbow. 
Trigger factors include trauma, intercurrent illness, dehydration and sur-
gery. Septic arthritis and gout are the main differential diagnoses.
Chronic CPP crystal arthritis can mimic RA, though joint involvement 
patterns are generally different (in chronic CPP crystal arthritis: wrists, 
MCP joints 2 and 3, ankles, shoulders). Affected joints usually show fea-
tures of OA, with varying degrees of synovitis. Effusion and synovial thick-
ening are usually most apparent at knees and wrists. Wrist involvement 
may result in carpal tunnel syndrome. Inammatory changes can occur 
at entheses such as the gluteal tendon insertions at the greater trochan-
ters and may involve tendons and the ligamentum avum. Inammation 
around the odontoid may occur secondary to CPP crystal deposition, 
leading to crowned dens syndrome; this presents clinically with neck and 
occipital neck pain (with neck rotation being the most severely affected 
movement). Severe damage and instability of knees, hips or shoulders 
can mimic a neuropathic joint.
Investigations
The pivotal investigation in diagnosing acute CPP crystal arthritis is joint 
aspiration, followed by examination of synovial uid using compensated 
polarised microscopy to demonstrate CPP crystals (see Fig. 26.6B). 
The aspirated uid is often turbid and may be uniformly blood-stained, 
reecting the severity of inammation. Since sepsis and acute CPP crys-
tal arthritis can coexist, Gram stain and culture of the uid should be 
performed to exclude sepsis, even if CPP crystals are identied in syn-
ovial uid.
For diagnosing chronic CPP crystal arthritis and CPP axial skeletal 
disease, X-rays of the affected joints, carefully reviewed, may show evi-
dence of calcication in hyaline cartilage and/or brocartilage or at peri-
articular entheses. Reviewing CT images if available (and windowed for 
bone), are often helpful in revealing CPP deposition in pelvic and spine 
structures. Screening for secondary causes (see Box 26.45) and meta-
bolic risk factors should be undertaken in all cases of CPPD disease and 
abnormalities treated.
Management
In acute CPP crystal arthritis, ice packs, joint elevation and joint aspiration 
provides symptomatic relief. Once infection is excluded, intra-articular 
glucocorticoid can be injected. NSAIDs and colchicine (0.5–2 mg daily) 
are helpful, but must be used with caution in older patients. Chronic CPP 
crystal arthritis can respond to low-dose oral glucocorticoids, metho-
trexate and hydroxychloroquine. Colchicine long-term (0.5–1 mg daily) 
may play a role in preventing acute CPP inammatory are-ups. Little is 
known about the optimum drug management of chronic CPPD disease 
in the axial skeletal.
Basic calcium phosphate deposition disease
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) deposition disease is caused by the 
deposition of hydroxyapatite or apatite crystals and other basic calcium 
phosphate salts (octacalcium phosphate, tricalcium phosphate) in soft 
tissues. The main affected sites are tendons, ligaments and hyaline carti-
lage in patients with degenerative disease, and skeletal muscle and sub-
cutaneous tissues in connective tissue diseases.
Pathophysiology
Under normal circumstances, inhibitors of mineralisation, such as 
pyrophosphate and proteoglycans, prevent calcication of soft tissues. 
When these protective mechanisms break down, abnormal calcication 
occurs. There are many causes (Box 26.46). In most situations, calcica-
tion is of no consequence, but when the crystals are released an inam-
matory reaction may be initiated, causing local pain and inammation.
Calcic periarthritis
This occurs as the result of deposition of BCP in tendons, which pro-
vokes an acute inammatory response. Commonly the supraspinatus 
tendon is affected (Fig. 26.29), but other sites may also be involved, 
including the tendons around the hip, feet and hands. The presentation 
is with acute pain, swelling and local tenderness that develops rapidly 
over 4–6 hours. The overlying skin may be hot and red, raising the possi-
bility of infection. Attacks sometimes occur spontaneously, but can also 
be triggered by trauma. Modest systemic upset and fever are common. 
Tendon calcication may be seen on X-ray. If the affected joint or bursa 
is aspirated, inammatory uid containing many calcium-staining (alizarin 
red S) aggregates may be obtained. During an acute attack, there may 
be a neutrophilia with an elevation in ESR and CRP. Routine biochemistry 
26.45 The main risk factors for calcium pyrophosphate 
deposition disease
Common
 Older age
 Osteoarthritis*
 Hyperparathyroidism (both primary and secondary)
 Hypovitaminosis-D (by causing secondary hyperparathyroidism)
Rare
 Familial factors*
 Haemochromatosis*
 Hypophosphatasia
 Hypomagnesaemia
 Hypoparathyroidism
 Wilson’s disease
*May be associated with structural damage to affected joints.
H
M
N
O
Fig. 26.28 Chondrocalcinosis of the knee. The X-ray shows calcication of 
the brocartilaginous menisci (M) and articular hyaline cartilage (H). There is also 
narrowing (N) of the medial tibio-femoral compartment and osteophyte (O) formation.

[[p1082]]
Fibromyalgia    1023
26
is normal. Treatment is with analgesics and NSAIDs. Attacks may also 
respond to a local injection of glucocorticoid. The condition usually 
resolves spontaneously over 1–3 weeks and this is often accompanied 
by dispersal and disappearance of calcic deposits on X-ray. Large 
deposits sometimes accumulate, causing limitation of joint movement, 
and may require surgical removal.
Acute inammatory arthritis
Deposition of BCP occurs commonly in OA, both alone and in combi-
nation with CPP crystals, in which case it is referred to as mixed crystal 
deposition disease. An acute crystal-induced arthritis can occur, identical 
to pure acute CPP crystal arthritis.
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome
This is a rare syndrome, in which extensive deposition of BCP crys-
tals in large joints is associated with progressive joint destruction. It 
is more common in women than in men. The onset is gradual, with 
joint pain, sometimes precipitated by injury or overuse. The disease 
progresses over a few months to cause severe pain and disability, 
associated with joint destruction. X-rays show joint space narrowing, 
osteophytes and calcication. Aspiration yields large volumes of rel-
atively non-inammatory uid containing abundant BCP aggregates 
and often cartilage fragments. The differential diagnosis is end-stage 
osteonecrosis, chronic sepsis or neuropathic joint. There is no acute 
phase response and synovial uid cultures are negative.
Treatment is with analgesics, intra-articular injection of glucocorti-
coids, local physical treatments and physiotherapy. The clinical outcome 
is poor, however, and most patients require joint replacement. The cause 
is incompletely understood, but it has been speculated that deposition of 
BCP crystals activates collagenase and other proteases in articular cells, 
which are responsible for the tissue damage.
Autoimmune connective tissue disease
Deposition of BCP may occur in the subcutaneous tissues and muscle 
of patients with systemic sclerosis and other autoimmune connective 
tissue diseases. Usually, the deposits are asymptomatic, but they may 
be associated with pain and local ulceration. The mechanism by which 
this occurs is unclear and there is no specic treatment.
Fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a condition of generalised pain and consequent dis-
ability. It is frequently associated with medically unexplained symptoms 
in other systems. The prevalence in the UK and United States is about 
2%–3%. Although FM can occur at any age, including adolescence, it 
increases in prevalence with age, to reach a peak of 7% in women aged 
over 70. There is a strong female predominance of around 10:1. Risk 
factors include life events that cause (unresolved) psychosocial distress 
relating to previous abuse, marital disharmony, alcoholism or illness in 
the family, poor sleep health, previous injury or assault and low income. 
FM arises in a variety of races and cultures. FM may co-exist with other 
inammatory rheumatic diseases, including axSpA and SLE.
Pathophysiology
The cause of FM is poorly understood, but two abnormalities that may 
be interrelated (Fig. 26.30), and have been consistently reported in 
affected patients, are disturbed, non-restorative sleep and pain sensiti-
sation, probably caused by abnormal central pain processing.
Clinical features
The main presenting feature is widespread pain, which is often worst in 
the neck and back (Box 26.47). It is characteristically diffuse and unre-
sponsive to analgesics and NSAIDs. Physiotherapy often makes FM pain 
worse. Fatiguability, most prominent in the morning, is another major 
problem and disability is often marked. Although people can usually 
undertake self-care (such as eating, washing and dressing), they may 
be unable to perform tasks such as shopping or housework. They may 
26.46 Rheumatic diseases associated with basic calcium 
phosphate deposition
Disease
Site of calcication
Calcic periarthritis
Tendons and ligaments
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
Subcutaneous tissue
Systemic sclerosis (lcSScl)
Subcutaneous tissue
Mixed connective tissue disease
Subcutaneous tissue
Paget’s disease of bone
Blood vessels
Ankylosing spondylitis
Ligaments
Fibrodysplasia ossicans progressiva
Subcutaneous tissues 
and muscle
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome
Tendons and ligaments
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy 
Muscle
(lcSScl = localised cutaneous systemic sclerosis)
Fig. 26.29 Shoulder X-ray showing supraspinatus tendon calcication (arrow).
Disease
Illness
Regional pain
syndrome
Anxiety
Life crisis
Sleep disturbance
Non-restorative sleep
Reduced activity
Poor aerobic
fitness
Pain
Fatigue
Functional
disturbance
Fig. 26.30 Possible causative mechanisms in bromyalgia.

[[p1083]]
1024    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
experience major performance difculties at work, and may even stop 
working, because of pain and fatigue.
Examination is unremarkable, apart from the presence of hyperalgesia 
on moderate digital pressure (enough just to whiten the nail of the exam-
iner) over multiple sites (Fig. 26.31).
Investigations and management
There are no abnormalities on routine blood tests or imaging, but it is 
important to screen for other conditions that could account for all or 
some of the patient’s symptoms (Box 26.48). Imaging is not generally 
recommended except to exclude other causes of pain if these are sus-
pected clinically.
The aims of management are to educate the patient about the con-
dition, address unresolved psychological issues, achieve pain control 
and improve sleep. Wherever possible, education should include the 
spouse, family or carer. It is conventional to acknowledge that the cause 
of FM is not fully understood, but the widespread pain does not reect 
inammation, tissue damage or disease. The model of a self-perpetuat-
ing cycle of poor sleep and pain (see Fig. 26.30) is a useful framework 
for problem-based management. Understanding the diagnosis can often 
help the patient come to terms with the symptoms. Repeat or drawn-out 
investigation may reinforce beliefs in occult serious pathology and should 
be avoided.
Low-dose amitriptyline (10–75 mg at night), with or without uoxetine, 
may help by encouraging delta sleep and reducing spinal cord wind-up. 
Many people with FM, however, are intolerant of even small doses of 
amitriptyline. There is limited evidence for the use of tramadol, seroto-
nin–noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake inhibitors (SNRIs) such as 
duloxetine, and the anticonvulsants pregabalin and gabapentin. A graded 
increase in aerobic exercise can improve well-being and sleep quality. 
26.47 The spectrum of symptoms in bromyalgia
Usual symptoms
 Widespread pain
 Fatiguability
 Disability
 Broken, non-restorative sleep
 Low affect, irritability, poor concentration
Variable locomotor symptoms
 Early-morning stiffness
 Feeling of swelling in hands
 Distal nger tingling
Additional, variable, non-locomotor symptoms
 Non-throbbing bifrontal headache (tension headache)
 Colicky abdominal pain, bloating, variable bowel habit (irritable bowel syndrome)
 Bladder fullness, nocturnal frequency (irritable bladder)
 Hyperacusis, dyspareunia, discomfort when touched (allodynia)
 Frequent side-effects with drugs (chemical sensitivity)
Interspinous
ligaments C5–7
Mid-supraspinatus
Interspinous
ligaments L4/5
Mid-gluteal
Second/third
costochondral
junctions
1 cm distal to
lateral epicondyle
Medial fat pad
(upper medial tibia)
Skin-fold rolling
of mid-trapezius
Fig. 26.31 Typical tender points in bromyalgia.
26.48 Laboratory investigations recommended before 
nalising a diagnosis of bromyalgia
Test
Condition screened for
Full blood count, liver and renal function 
tests
General disease indicators
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive 
protein, serum amyloid A, immunoglobulins, 
faecal calprotectin
Inammatory disease,  
Inammatory bowel disease
Thyroid function
Hypo-/hyperthyroidism
Calcium, albumin, phosphate, alkaline 
phosphatase, parathyroid hormone, 25 
hydroxy-vitamin D, serum angiotensin-
converting enzyme
Hyperparathyroidism,  
osteomalacia, sarcoid
Antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear 
antigens, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide antibodies, complement 
C3 and C4, lupus anticoagulant, anti-
cardiolipin antibodies
Autoinammatory and  
autoimmune diseases

[[p1084]]
Bone and joint infections    1025
26
The use of self-help strategies and a cognitive behavioural approach with 
relaxation techniques should be encouraged. Sublimated anxiety relating 
to distressing life events should be specically explored with appropriate 
counselling. There are patient organisations that provide additional infor-
mation and support. Although treatment may improve quality of life and 
ability to cope, most people remain symptomatic for many years.
Bone and joint infections
Septic arthritis
Septic arthritis is the most rapid and destructive joint disease. The inci-
dence is 2–10 per 100 000 in the general population and 30–70 per 
100 000 in those with pre-existing joint disease or joint replacement. 
Septic arthritis is associated with signicant morbidity and still has a mor-
tality of about 10% despite advances in antimicrobial therapy. The most 
important risk factor for mortality is increasing age.
Pathogenesis
Septic arthritis usually occurs as a result of haematogenous spread from 
infections of the skin or upper respiratory tract; infection from direct 
puncture wounds or secondary to joint aspiration is uncommon. Risk 
factors include increasing age, pre-existing joint disease (principally 
RA), diabetes mellitus, advanced renal disease, immunosuppression (by 
drugs or disease) and intravenous drug misuse. In RA, the skin is a fre-
quent portal of entry because of maceration of skin between the toes 
due to joint deformity and difculties with foot hygiene caused by hand 
deformity. Box 26.49 describes the particular considerations in old age.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with acute or subacute monoarthritis and fever. 
The joint is usually swollen, hot and red, with pain at rest and on move-
ment. Although any joint can be affected, lower limb joints, such as the 
knee and hip, are most commonly targeted. Patients with pre-existing 
arthritis may present with multiple joint involvement.
The most common organism in adults is Staphylococcus aureus, par-
ticularly in patients with RA and diabetes, but infections with ß-haemolytic 
streptococci and Gram-negative bacilli are also frequent. Tuberculosis 
should always be considered where local population infection prevalence 
is high. Gonococcal infection can present with a migratory arthralgia, 
low-grade fever and tenosynovitis, which may precede the development 
of an oligo- or monoarthritis. Painful pustular skin lesions may also be 
present. Gram-negative bacilli or group B, C and G streptococci are 
important causes among older adults and intravenous drug users. Less 
commonly, septic arthritis may be caused by group A streptococci, 
pneumococci, meningococci and Haemophilus inuenzae. Arthritis may 
be a feature of Lyme disease caused by members of the Borrelia spe-
cies of microorganisms. It is generally a late manifestation, which usually 
affects large joints. Brucellosis presents with an acute febrile illness, fol-
lowed in some cases by the development of localised infection, which 
can result in arthritis, bursitis, osteomyelitis, sacroiliitis and paravertebral 
or psoas abscesses.
Investigations
The pivotal investigation is joint aspiration, but blood cultures should 
also be taken. The synovial uid is usually turbid or blood-stained but 
may appear normal. If the joint is not readily accessible, aspiration 
should be performed under imaging guidance or in theatre. Prosthetic 
joints should only be aspirated in theatre to minimise the risk of intro-
ducing infection.
Synovial uid should be sent for Gram stain and culture; cultures are 
positive in around 90% of cases, but the Gram stain is positive in only 
50%. In contrast, synovial uid culture is positive in only 30% of gono-
coccal infections, making it important to obtain concurrent cultures from 
the genital tract (positive in 70%–90% of cases).
There is a leucocytosis with raised CRP in most patients, but these 
features may be absent in older or immunocompromised patients, or 
early in the disease course. Serial measurements of CRP are useful in 
following the response to treatment.
Management
The principles of management are summarised in Box 26.50. The patient 
should be admitted to hospital for pain relief and administration of par-
enteral antibiotics. Flucloxacillin (2 g IV 4 times daily) is the antibiotic 
of rst choice pending the results of cultures, since it will cover most 
staphylococcal and streptococcal infections. If there is reason to sus-
pect meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (such as a known car-
rier), vancomycin should be used instead while awaiting cultures. If a 
Gram-negative infection is suspected, initial antibiotic treatment should 
cover Gram-negative bacilli as well as staphylococci and streptococci. 
Cephalosporins are a reasonable choice in this situation, but carry a high 
risk of Clostridioides difcile infection in those aged over 65; gentamicin 
is a good alternative.
26.49 Joint and bone infection in old age
 Vertebral infection: more common. Recognition may be delayed, as symptoms 
may be attributed to compression fractures caused by osteoporosis.
 Peripheral vascular disease: leads to more frequent involvement of the 
bones of the feet, and diabetic foot ulcers are also commonly complicated by 
osteomyelitis.
 Prosthetic joint infections: now more common because of the increased 
frequency of prosthetic joint insertion in older people.
 Gram-negative bacilli: more frequent pathogens than in younger people.
 Cephalosporins: contraindicated due to the high risk of Clostridioides difcile
 Septic arthritis: mortality is high in older patients.
26.50 Emergency management of suspected septic arthritis
Admit patient to hospital
Perform urgent investigations
 Aspirate joint (use imaging guidance as needed). Send synovial uid for Gram 
stain and culture
 Send blood for culture, routine biochemistry and haematology, including 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
 Consider sending other samples (sputum, urine, wound swab) for culture, 
depending on patient history, to determine primary source of infection
 Consider sending serum sample (and later a paired sample) for Neisseria and 
Brucella serology
Commence intravenous antibiotic*
 Flucloxacillin (2g four times daily) to cover Staph. aureus
 If penicillin-allergic:
Clindamycin (450–600mg four times daily in younger patients)
Intravenous vancomycin (1g twice daily if age > 65years)
 If high risk of Gram-negative infection, in the immunocompromised and in IV 
drug users, add a 3rd generation cephalosporin
 When treating empirically before culture results are available, always seek local 
microbiology advice
Relieve pain
 Oral and/or intravenous analgesics or NSAID (caution in older patients)
 Consider local ice-packs
Aspirate joint
 Perform serial needle aspiration to dryness (1–3 times daily or as required)
 Consider arthroscopic drainage if needle aspiration difcult
 Consider synovial biopsy at arthroscopy for tissue for PCR analysis for TB
Arrange physiotherapy
 Early regular passive movement, progressing to active movements once pain 
controlled and effusion not re-accumulating
*Antibiotic choice should take local epidemiology and patient risk factors into account and be 
supported by local guidelines where available.

[[p1085]]
1026    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
to be considered as a cause in high prevalence areas. Osteomyelitis 
secondary to pyogenic organisms often results in a orid inammatory 
response, with a greatly increased intraosseous pressure. If untreated, 
the condition may cause localised areas of osteonecrosis, leading to the 
development of a fragment of necrotic bone that is called a sequestrum. 
Eventual perforation of the cortex by pus stimulates local new bone for-
mation (involucrum) in the periosteum, often leading to the development 
of sinuses that discharge through the skin.
Clinical features
The presentation is usually with localised bone pain and tenderness, 
often accompanied by malaise, night sweats and pyrexia. The adja-
cent joint may be painful to move and may develop a sterile effusion or 
secondary septic arthritis. Where the osteomyelitis is due to contiguous 
spread, there will be an overlying skin ulcer or wound, which often has 
necrotic tissue, purulent discharge and an offensive smell. In diabetic 
foot osteomyelitis, there may be no pain due to co-existent peripheral 
neuropathy.
Investigations
Patients suspected of having osteomyelitis should have an MRI, which is 
more sensitive than X-ray for detecting early changes. Where possible, 
cultures should be obtained by open or imaging-guided biopsy of the 
lesion. If tuberculosis is suspected, PCR-based analysis of synovial uid 
or biopsy material should be considered. Evidence of osteopenia, local-
ised osteolysis and osteonecrosis may be seen on X-ray. Blood cultures 
should be taken, which may also reveal the causative organism. Routine 
bloods typically show evidence of an acute phase response with a neu-
trophilia and raised ESR and CRP.
Management
Early recognition is critical as once osteomyelitis becomes established 
and chronic, it may prove very hard to eradicate with antibiotics alone. 
Ideally, antibiotics should not be started until the microbiological cause 
has been established. The principles are those followed for septic arthri-
tis. An exception is in localised osteomyelitis of the toes and ngers, 
which can often be treated successfully with a prolonged course of oral 
antibiotics. Resection of the infected bone and subsequent reconstruc-
tion may be required. Complications of chronic osteomyelitis include 
secondary amyloidosis and skin malignancy at the margin of a discharg-
ing sinus (Marjolin’s ulcer).
Discitis
Discitis is an unusual condition in which there is infection of the interver-
tebral disc, often extending into the epidural space or paravertebral 
soft tissues. Staph. aureus is the most common pathogen. Risk fac-
tors include diabetes mellitus, immunodeciency or immunosuppressive 
therapy, and intravenous drug use. The presentation is with back pain 
accompanied by fever, and an acute phase response with high ESR and 
CRP and a neutrophilia. If the diagnosis is suspected, an MRI should be 
performed and blood cultures taken. If blood cultures are negative, open 
or imaging-guided biopsy of the lesion should be performed to try to 
identify the organism responsible. Management is with supportive care 
and parenteral antibiotics followed by oral antibiotics, as described for 
osteomyelitis.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) of the musculoskeletal system is now rare in Europe 
and the United States, but remains common in sub-Saharan Africa and 
South Asia. It has been estimated to occur in about 1%–3% of patients 
with TB overall. In about 50% of cases, the spine is affected (Pott’s 
disease). Tuberculous osteomyelitis can also occur. Osteoarticular TB 
is thought to occur as the result of haematogenous spread from the site 
of primary infection, but a reactive arthritis (Poncet’s disease) can also 
occur in TB in the absence of direct infection. Peripheral arthritis tends 
26.51 Musculoskeletal manifestations of HIV
Condition
Comment
Non-specic arthralgia and 
mechanical low back pain
Most common
Reactive arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Idiopathic inammatory arthritis
Especially in men who have sex with 
men. Idiopathic arthritis is usually of 
lower limb joints and may be of SpA 
aetiology
Osteonecrosis
Myositis or vasculitis
Osteoporosis
Sjögren-like disease
May be either related to HIV, to its 
treatment or intercurrent disease
Whatever antimicrobial regimen is chosen; changes may be required 
depending on the organism that is isolated. Microbiology advice should 
always be sought in complicated situations, such as when treating intra-
venous drug users, patients in intensive care and those who might be 
colonised by resistant organisms. It is traditional to continue intravenous 
antibiotics for 2 weeks and to follow this with oral treatment for another 
4 weeks, but there is no evidence to support the optimal duration of 
treatment. Joint aspiration should be performed using a large-bore nee-
dle once or twice daily. If this is not possible, arthroscopic or open sur-
gical drainage may be needed. Regular passive movement should be 
undertaken from the outset and active movements encouraged once the 
condition has stabilised. Infected prosthetic joints require management 
by the orthopaedic team, but prolonged antibiotic treatment on its own 
is often ineffective and removal of the prosthesis may be required for 
eradication of the infection.
Viral arthritis
The usual presentation is with acute polyarthritis following a febrile 
illness, which may be accompanied by a rash. Most cases of viral arthri-
tis are self-limiting and settle down within 4–6 weeks. Human parvovirus 
arthropathy (mainly B19) is the most common in Europe; adults may 
not have the characteristic ‘slapped cheek’ facial rash seen in children. 
The diagnosis can be conrmed by a rise in specic IgM. Polyarthritis 
may also occur rarely with hepatitis B and C, rubella (including rubella 
vaccination) and HIV infection. A variety of mosquito-borne viruses may 
cause epidemics of acute polyarthritis, including Ross River (Australia, 
Pacic), Chikungunya and O’nyong-nyong (Asia, Africa) and Mayaro 
viruses (South America). A wide variety of articular symptoms have been 
associated with HIV, mainly in the later stages of infection (Box 26.51). 
Management is symptomatic, with NSAIDs and analgesics.
Osteomyelitis
In osteomyelitis, the primary sites of infection are bone and bone marrow. 
Any part of a bone may be involved, but there is preferential targeting of 
the juxta-epiphyseal regions of long bones adjacent to joints. The risk 
of osteomyelitis increases with age; the incidence is about 9 cases per 
100 000 person-years in those under 18, rising to 41 cases in those aged 
60–69 and 88 cases in those above the age of 80.
Pathogenesis
Haematogenous spread is the most common cause in children. In 
adults, contiguous spread of infection from adjacent soft tissues is 
more common, usually in patients with infected skin ulcers (pressure 
sores, neuropathic or ischaemic ulcers) or following surgery. Diabetes 
is a particularly important risk factor, accounting for about 30% of cases 
in recent series. Other risk factors include immunosuppressive therapy, 
HIV infection and sickle-cell disease, which particularly increases the risk 
of Salmonella infection. The organisms most frequently implicated are 
Staph. aureus and ß-haemolytic streptococci. Tuberculosis also needs 

[[p1086]]
Rheumatoid arthritis    1027
26
to affect weight-bearing joints such as the hip, knee and ankle, and 
presents with pain, swelling and restriction of movement on examina-
tion. The initial presentation of spinal TB is with back pain, progressing 
to cause deformity and spinal cord compression if untreated. Systemic 
symptoms such as fever and weight loss may or may not be present. 
Radiological changes develop slowly and are relatively non-specic, 
consisting of periarticular osteoporosis, bone erosions and joint space 
narrowing. In the spine, X-rays may show evidence of bone destruc-
tion and disc narrowing but appearances may be normal in early dis-
ease. Imaging with MRI is more sensitive than X-rays at detecting the 
features of osteoarticular TB and is the imaging investigation of rst 
choice, although the appearances are non-specic (Fig. 26.32). The 
gold standard for diagnosis is synovial or tissue biopsy, which yields 
positive results in about 80% of cases in showing the characteris-
tic histological features of TB. Culture of synovial uid is positive in 
between 20% and 40% of cases, but examination of synovial uid or 
synovial tissue by PCR can yield the diagnosis more rapidly, with pos-
itive results in more than 95% of culture-positive cases and 50%–60% 
of culture-negative cases. The key to treatment is to initiate appropri-
ate anti-tuberculous therapy. According to WHO guidelines, quadruple 
therapy with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol should 
be given as rst-line therapy for 2 months and followed by 4 months 
of isoniazid and rifampicin. Treatment may be required for extended 
periods of 12–18 months in some cases depending on the extent of 
disease and clinical response. Alternative agents may be required in 
patients with resistant organisms, as discussed in Chapter 17. In some 
cases, surgical débridement may be required for extensive peripheral 
joint disease and surgical decompression and stabilisation for patients 
with severe spinal disease.
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common form of inammatory arthritis, 
occurring throughout the world and in all ethnic groups. The prevalence 
of RA is approximately 0.8%–1.0% in Europe and South Asia, with a 
female-to-male ratio of 3:1. The prevalence is lower in South-east Asia 
(0.4%). The highest prevalence in the world is in Pima Indians (5%). It is 
a chronic disease characterised by a clinical course of exacerbations 
and remissions.
Pathophysiology
RA is a complex disease with both genetic and environmental 
components. The importance of genetic factors is demonstrated by 
higher concordance of RA in monozygotic (12%–15%) compared with 
dizygotic twins (3%) and an increased frequency of disease in rst-degree 
relatives of patients. Genome-wide association studies have detected 
nearly 100 loci that are associated with the risk of developing RA. The 
strongest association is with variants in the HLA region and is determined 
by variations in three amino acids in the HLA-DRβ1 molecule (positions 
11, 71 and 74) and single variants in HLA-B (at position 9) and HLA-DPβ1 
(at position 9). The non-HLA loci generally lie within or close to genes 
involved in regulating the immune response. It is believed that RA occurs 
when an environmental stimulus, such as infection, triggers autoimmun-
ity in a genetically susceptible host by modifying host proteins, through 
processes like citrullination, so that they become immunogenic. However, 
no single specic pathogen has been identied as a cause. An important 
environmental risk factor is cigarette smoking, which is also associated 
with more severe disease and reduced responsiveness to treatment. 
Remission may occur during pregnancy and sometimes RA rst pre-
sents post partum. This is likely to be due to suppression of the immune 
response during pregnancy, but hormonal changes may also play a role.
The disease is characterised by inltration of synovium with lympho-
cytes, plasma cells, dendritic cells and macrophages. There is evidence 
that CD4+ T and B cells play important roles in the pathogenesis of RA 
by interacting with other cells in the synovium, as illustrated in Figure 26.33. 
Lymphoid follicles form within the synovium in which T- and B-cell inter-
actions occur, causing activation of T cells to produce cytokines and 
activation of B cells to produce autoantibodies, including RF and ACPA. 
Synovial macrophages are activated by TNF-α and interferon-gamma 
(IFN-γ), produced by T cells. The macrophages produce several pro-in-
ammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6, which act on 
synovial broblasts to produce further cytokines, setting up a positive 
feedback loop. The synovial broblasts proliferate, causing synovial 
hypertrophy and producing matrix metalloproteinases and the proteinase 
ADAMTS-5, which degrade soft tissues and cartilage. Prostaglandins 
and nitric oxide produced within inamed synovium cause vasodila-
tation, resulting in swelling and pain. Systemic release of IL-6 triggers 
production of acute phase proteins by the liver. At the joint margin, the 
inamed synovium (pannus) directly invades bone and cartilage to cause 
joint erosions. A key pathogenic factor in bone erosions and periarticu-
lar osteoporosis is osteoclast activation, stimulated by the production of 
M-CSF by synovial cells and RANKL by activated T cells (see Fig. 26.33). 
New blood-vessel formation (angiogenesis) occurs, causing the inamed 
synovium to become highly vascular. Within these blood vessels, pro-
inammatory cytokines activate endothelial cells, which support recruit-
ment of yet more leucocytes to perpetuate the inammatory process.
Later, brous or bony ankylosis may occur. Muscles adjacent to 
inamed joints atrophy and may be inltrated with lymphocytes. This 
leads to progressive biomechanical joint dysfunction, which may further 
amplify joint destruction.
Rheumatoid nodules occur in patients who are RF- or ACPA-positive 
and primarily affect extensor tendons. They consist of a central area of bri-
noid material surrounded by a palisade of proliferating mononuclear cells. 
Granulomatous lesions may occur in the pleura, lung, pericardium and sclera.
Clinical features
The typical presentation is with pain, joint swelling and stiffness affecting 
the small joints of the hands, feet and wrists in a symmetrical fashion. Large 
joint involvement, systemic symptoms and extra-articular features may also 
occur. Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of RA are shown in Box 26.52
Sometimes RA has an acute onset, with severe early morning stiff-
ness, polyarthritis and pitting oedema. This occurs more commonly in 
old age. Another presentation is with proximal muscle stiffness mimick-
ing polymyalgia rheumatica. Occasionally, the onset is palindromic, with 
relapsing and remitting episodes of pain, stiffness and swelling that last 
for only a few hours or days.
Fig. 26.32 Tuberculosis of the spine. MRI scan of a patient with tuberculosis of 
the spine, showing destruction of vertebrae T7 and T8 (arrows) with a soft tissue 
mass encroaching on the spinal cord posteriorly. A plain X-ray of the thoracic spine 
taken at the same time (not shown) was normal.

[[p1087]]
1028    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Examination typically reveals swelling and tenderness of the affected 
joints. Erythema is unusual and its presence suggests coexistent infection. 
Characteristic deformities may develop with long-standing uncontrolled 
disease, although these have become less common over recent years 
with more aggressive management. They include ulnar deviation of the 
ngers, ‘swan neck’ deformity, the boutonnière or ‘button hole’ deformity 
and a Z deformity of the thumb (Fig. 26.34). Dorsal subluxation of the ulna 
at the distal radio-ulnar joint may occur and contribute to rupture of the 
fourth and fth extensor tendons. Triggering of ngers may occur because 
of nodules in the exor tendon sheaths. Subluxation of the MTP joints of 
the feet may result in ‘cock-up’ toe deformities, causing pain on weight-
bearing on the exposed MTP heads and the development of secondary 
adventitious bursae and callosities. In the hindfoot, a valgus deformity of 
the calcaneus may be observed as the result of damage to the posterior 
tibial tendon, then ankle and subtalar joints. This is often associated with 
loss of the longitudinal arch (at foot) due to rupture of the tibialis posterior 
tendon. Popliteal (Baker’s) cysts may occur in patients with knee synovitis, 
in which synovial uid communicates with the cyst, but is prevented from 
returning to the joint by a valve-like mechanism; this is not specic to RA. 
Rupture may be induced by knee exion, leading to calf pain and swelling 
that may mimic a deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
Systemic features
Anorexia, weight loss and fatigue may occur throughout the disease 
course. Osteoporosis is a common complication and muscle-wasting 
may occur as the result of systemic inammation and reduced activity. 
Extra-articular features are most common in patients with long-standing 
seropositive erosive disease, but may occasionally occur at presentation, 
Autoantibodies
B cell
T cell
TNF-α
RANKL
M-CSF
MMP
ADAMTS-5
TNF-α
IL-1
IL-6
TNF-α
IFN-γ
TNF-α
IL-1
IL-6
Activated
B cells
Immune
complexes
Osteoclast
precursors
Activated
T cells
Synovial
fibroblasts
Prostaglandins
Nitric oxide
Pain
Vasodilatation
Cartilage
breakdown
Acute phase
proteins
Bone
erosions
Vasculitis
Plasma
cells
Host
protein
Protein
becomes
immunogenic
Protein
modified
Immunogenic
protein processed
and presented to
T cells by dendritic
cells and B cells
Peptide
presented to T cell
with HLA
T cell
activates
B cell
Dendritic
cell
Environmental
       trigger
   Smoking
   Infection
       Genetic
  predisposition
 HLA-DR
 Other immune
   response genes
Macrophage
Fig. 26.33 Pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis. Some of the cytokines and cellular interactions that are important in rheumatoid arthritis are shown. 
(ADAMTS5 = aggrecanase; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; M-CSF = macrophage colony-stimulating factor; MMP = matrix 
metalloproteinase; RANKL = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)
26.52 Criteria for diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis*
Criterion
Score
Joints affected
1 large joint
0
2–10 large joints
1
1–3 small joints
2
4–10 small joints
3
> 10 joints (at least 1 small joint)
5
Serology
Negative RF and ACPA
0
Low positive RF or ACPA
2
High positive RF or ACPA
3
Duration of symptoms
< 6 weeks
0
> 6 weeks
1
Acute phase reactants
Normal CRP and ESR
0
Abnormal CRP or ESR
1
Patients with a score ≥ 6 are considered to have denite RA.
*European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology 2010 criteria.
(ACPA = anti-citrullinated peptide antibody; CRP = C-reactive protein; ESR = erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate; RF = rheumatoid factor)

[[p1088]]
Rheumatoid arthritis    1029
26
especially in men. Most are due to serositis, granuloma and nodule for-
mation or vasculitis (Box 26.53).
Nodules
Rheumatoid nodules occur almost exclusively in RF or ACPA-positive 
patients, usually in extensor tendons (Fig. 26.35). They are frequently 
asymptomatic, but some may be complicated by ulceration and second-
ary infection. Nodules are more common in smokers.
Vasculitis
This is uncommon, but may occur in seropositive patients. The pres-
entation is with systemic symptoms, such as fatigue and fever and nail-
fold infarcts. Rarely, cutaneous ulceration, skin necrosis and mesenteric, 
renal or coronary artery occlusion may occur.
Ocular involvement
The most common symptom is dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) due 
to secondary Sjögren syndrome. Scleritis and peripheral ulcerative ker-
atitis are uncommon, but are more serious and potentially sight-threat-
ening complications that usually present with pain and redness. Clinical 
features and management are discussed in more detail in Chapter 30.
Serositis
Serositis is usually asymptomatic, but may present with pleural or peri-
cardial pain and breathlessness. Pericardial effusion and constrictive per-
icarditis may rarely occur.
Cardiac involvement
Heart block, cardiomyopathy, coronary artery occlusion and aor-
tic regurgitation have all been reported, but are rare. The risk of car-
diovascular disease is increased due to a combination of conventional 
risk factors, such as high cholesterol, smoking, hypertension, reduced 
physical activity, NSAIDs, glucocorticoids and the effects of inammatory 
cytokines on vascular endothelium.
Pulmonary involvement
Pulmonary brosis may occur, but is often asymptomatic. There is some 
evidence that the risk of pulmonary brosis is increased by anti-TNF-α
therapy, although it is uncertain whether this is causal or a marker of 
more severe disease in patients who require anti-TNF-α treatment.
A
B
Fig. 26.34 The hand in rheumatoid arthritis.
with wasting of the small muscles of the hands and synovial swelling at the wrists, 
the extensor tendon sheaths, the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal 
26.53 Extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid disease
Systemic
 Fever
 Fatigue
 Weight loss
 Susceptibility to infection
Musculoskeletal
 Muscle-wasting
 Bursitis
 Tenosynovitis
 Osteoporosis
Haematological
 Anaemia
 Eosinophilia
 Thrombocytosis
Lymphatic
 Felty syndrome (Box 26.54)
 Splenomegaly
Nodules
 Sinuses
 Fistulae
Ocular
 Episcleritis
 Scleromalacia
 Scleritis
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Vasculitis
 Digital arteritis
 Mononeuritis multiplex
 Ulcers
 Visceral arteritis
 Pyoderma gangrenosum
Cardiac
 Pericarditis
 Conduction defects
 Myocarditis
 Coronary vasculitis
 Endocarditis
 Granulomatous aortitis
Pulmonary
 Nodules
 Caplan syndrome
 Pleural effusions
 Bronchiectasis
 Pulmonary brosis
 Pneumothorax
 Obliterative bronchiolitis
Neurological
 Cervical cord compression
 Peripheral neuropathy
 Compression neuropathies
 Mononeuritis multiplex
Amyloidosis
Fig. 26.35 Rheumatoid nodules and olecranon bursitis. Nodules were palpable 
within, as well as outside, the bursa.

[[p1089]]
1030    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Peripheral neuropathy
Entrapment neuropathies may result from compression by hypertrophied 
synovium or by joint subluxation. Median nerve compression is the most 
common and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome can occur as a presenting 
feature of RA. Other syndromes include ulnar nerve compression at the 
elbow or wrist, compression of the lateral popliteal nerve at the head of the 
bula, and tarsal tunnel syndrome (entrapment of the posterior tibial nerve 
in the exor retinaculum), which causes burning, tingling and numbness 
in the distal sole and toes. Diffuse symmetrical peripheral neuropathy and 
mononeuritis multiplex may occur in patients with rheumatoid vasculitis.
Spinal cord compression
This rare complication is caused by compression of the spinal cord from 
subluxation of the cervical spine at the atlanto-axial joint or at a subaxial level 
(Fig. 26.36). Atlanto-axial subluxation is due to erosion of the transverse liga-
ment posterior to the odontoid peg. It can lead to cord compression or sud-
den death following minor trauma or manipulation. It should be suspected 
in any RA patient who describes new onset of occipital headache, particu-
larly if symptoms of paraesthesia or electric shock are present in the arms. 
The onset is often insidious, with subtle loss of function that may initially be 
attributed to active disease. Reexes and power can be difcult to assess in 
patients with extensive joint disease and therefore sensory or upper motor 
signs are most important. Patients with evidence of spinal cord compression 
require urgent neurosurgical referral for stabilisation and xation.
Other complications
Amyloidosis is a rare complication of long-standing disease that usually 
presents with nephrotic syndrome. Microcytic anaemia can occur due 
to iron deciency resulting from NSAID-induced gastrointestinal blood 
loss, whereas normochromic, normocytic anaemia with thrombocytosis 
occurs in patients with active disease. Felty syndrome is a rare com-
plication of seropositive RA in which splenomegaly occurs in combina-
tion with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia (Box 26.54). Localised or 
generalised lymphadenopathy can occur in patients with active disease, 
but persistent lymphadenopathy may indicate the development of lym-
phoma, which is more common in patients with long-standing RA.
Investigations
The diagnosis of RA is essentially clinical, but investigations are useful 
in conrming the diagnosis and assessing disease activity (Box 26.55). 
The ESR and CRP are usually raised, but normal results do not exclude 
the diagnosis, especially if only a few joints are involved. Tests for ACPA 
are positive in about 70% of cases and are highly specic for RA, occur-
ring in many patients before clinical onset of the disease. Similarly, RF is 
also positive in about 70% of cases, most of whom also test positive for 
ACPA. RF is less specic than ACPA, however, and positive tests can 
occur in other diseases (see Box 26.7).
Ultrasound examination and MRI are not routinely required, but can be 
of value in patients with symptoms suggestive of RA where there is clinical 
uncertainty about the presence of synovitis. Plain X-rays of the hands, wrist 
and feet are usually normal in early RA, but periarticular osteopor osis and 
marginal joint erosions may be observed with more advanced disease. The 
main indication for an X-ray is in the assessment of patients with painful 
joints to determine whether signicant structural damage has occurred. 
Patients who are suspected of having atlanto-axial disease should have 
lateral X-rays taken in exion and extension, and an MRI. In those with sus-
pected Baker’s cyst, ultrasound may be required to establish the diagnosis.
The Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28) is widely used to 
assess disease activity, response to treatment and need for biologic 
therapy. It involves counting the number of swollen and tender joints in 
the upper limbs and knees, and combining this with the ESR and the 
patient’s assessment of the activity of their arthritis on a visual analogue 
scale, where 0 indicates no symptoms and 100 the worst symptoms 
possible. Data are entered into a calculator to generate a numerical 
score. The higher the value, the more active the disease (Fig. 26.37).
Management
The treatment goal is to suppress inammation, control symptoms, pre-
vent joint damage and maintain function. This involves a combination of 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies. When RA occurs 
in women of child-bearing age, additional considerations need to be 
taken into account and these are summarised in Box 26.56
Pharmacological therapy
Prompt initiation of cDMARD therapy is indicated in all patients as this 
improves outcome. A variety of therapeutic regimens exist. A typical 
A
B
Fig. 26.36 Subluxation of cervical spine.
space (arrow) between the odontoid peg of the axis (behind) and the anterior arch of 
26.54 Felty syndrome
Risk factors
 Age of onset 50–70 years
 Deforming, but inactive disease
 Female > male
 Seropositive for rheumatoid factor
 European > African ancestry
 Long-standing rheumatoid arthritis
Common clinical features
 Splenomegaly
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Lymphadenopathy
 Vasculitis, leg ulcers
 Weight loss
 Recurrent infections
 Skin pigmentation
 Nodules
Laboratory ndings
 Normochromic, normocytic anaemia
 Thrombocytopenia
 Neutropenia
 Impaired T- and B-cell immunity
 Abnormal liver function
26.55 Investigations and monitoring of rheumatoid arthritis
To establish diagnosis
 Clinical criteria
 Rheumatoid factor and 
anti-citrullinated peptide 
antibodies
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and 
C-reactive protein
 Ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging
To monitor disease activity and drug efcacy
 Pain (visual analogue scale)
 Joint swelling
 Early morning stiffness (minutes)
 DAS28 (Fig. 26.37)
 Joint tenderness
 Erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate and C-reactive protein
To monitor disease damage
 X-rays
 Functional assessment
To monitor drug safety
 Urinalysis
 Urea and creatinine
 Full blood count
 Liver function tests
 Chest X-ray

[[p1090]]
Rheumatoid arthritis    1031
26
algorithm is shown in Figure 26.38. For example: on rst diagnosis, pred-
nisolone can be started in a dose of 30 mg daily gradually reducing in 5 
mg increments every 2 weeks until therapy is withdrawn after about 12 
weeks. At the same time, methotrexate (MTX) should be started in an 
initial dose of 15 mg weekly, along with folic acid 5 mg weekly, and esca-
lated up to a maximum of 25 mg weekly, depending on the response. If 
the patient fails to respond adequately or dose-limiting toxicity occurs, 
then an additional cDMARD should be commenced in combination with 
MTX. A common combination is triple therapy, in which MTX, SSZ and 
HCQ are combined (see Fig. 26.38). Other cDMARD can be substituted 
or added, or subcutaneous MTX substituted for oral therapy, if the patient 
fails to respond fully. If disease activity remains high despite these meas-
ures, it is usual to progress to biologic or tsDMARD therapy. The most 
commonly used rst-line biologic in RA is anti-TNF-α therapy, although 
several other options are available both in terms of tsDMARD (see Box 
26.34) and other biologics (see Box 26.35). A reduction in biologic dose 
can be considered in patients who have been stable for 12 months or 
more on therapy, since it is possible to reduce the dose in up to 50% of 
patients without loss of therapeutic effect. Studies show that efcacy and 
durability of response to biologics is enhanced by co-treatment with MTX.
Disease ares can occur from time to time even in patients who are 
established on DMARD and biologic therapy. Transient ares can be 
dealt with by local joint or deep IM ‘depot’ steroid injections or a short 
course of oral prednisolone, but if a sustained are occurs, a change in 
DMARD and/or biologic should be considered.
Non-pharmacological therapy
Physiotherapy, occupational therapy and psychologist support are all 
important for RA patients. Liaison with social services may be appropri-
ate and enhance the holistic support of patients whose lives are changed 
by the chronic disease. Patient-run charitable organisations can offer a 
wealth of education and support to RA patients and their families.
Surgery
Synovectomy can be helpful in joints that have failed to respond ade-
quately to systemic therapy and intra-articular injections. Joint arthro-
plasty may be required where secondary OA evolves, but the need 
for this has diminished as the result of more aggressive medical man-
agement. Other surgical procedures that can be helpful are metatarsal 
osteotomies, ulna head excision with wrist synovectomy (and to pre-
vent overlying extensor tendon rupture) and upper cervical spine xa-
tion where there is progressive atlanto-axial subluxation. Joint fusion 
(wrist or triple hindfoot) can reduce pain where joint changes are severe/
advanced (see Box 26.28).
Calculation
 Count swollen joints
 Count tender joints
 Measure erythrocyte
   sedimentation rate*
 Note patient global health
   assessment (1–100)
 Enter data into calculator:
   www.4s-dawn.com/das28
Interpretation
 >5.1 
High activity
 ≥3.2–5.1 Moderate activity
 2.6–3.2   Low disease activity
   < 2.6        Remission
Fig. 26.37 Calculation of the Disease Activity Score 28 (DAS28).
*Erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein can be used for the calculation.
26.56 Rheumatoid arthritis in pregnancy
 Immunological changes in pregnancy: many patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis go into remission during pregnancy.
 Conception: methotrexate should be discontinued for ≥ 3 months and 
leunomide discontinued for ≥ 24 months before trying to conceive.
 Paracetamol: the oral analgesic of choice during pregnancy.
 Oral non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs and selective cyclo-oxygenase 
2 (COX-2) inhibitors: can be used from implantation to 20 weeks’ gestation.
 Glucocorticoids: may be used to control disease ares; the main maternal 
risks are hypertension, glucose intolerance and infection.
 DMARDs that may be used: sulfasalazine, azathioprine and 
hydroxychloroquine if required to control inammation.
 DMARDs that must be avoided: methotrexate, leunomide, cyclophosphamide 
and mycophenolate.
 Biologic therapy experience is limited but anti-TNF-α therapy appears to be safe 
during pregnancy. The main risk is immunosuppression in the neonate, except for 
certolizumab, which does not cross the placenta in appreciable amounts.
 Breastfeeding: methotrexate, leunomide and cyclophosphamide are 
contraindicated.
Reduce dose by
5mg/2 weeks and stop
Escalate dose to
25 mg if necessary
+
New diagnosis of
rheumatoid arthritis
Prednisolone
30 mg daily
MTX
15 mg weekly
Continue 
MTX, SSZ,
HCQ
Add
biologic
or
tsDMARD
Consider change to different
biologic or tsDMARD
Consider
SC MTX
or different
cDMARD 
DAS28
≥3.2
DAS28
<3.2
DAS28
≥3.2
DAS28
<3.2
Continue
therapy
Continue
therapy
DAS28
>5.1
DAS28
3.2–5.1
DAS28
≥3.2
DAS28
<3.2
Add SSZ
and HCQ
DAS28
<3.2
Continue
MTX alone
Maintain low disease activity (months–years)
Fig. 26.38 Algorithm for the management of rheumatoid arthritis.
(DAS28 = Disease Activity Score 28; DMARD = disease-modifying antirheumatic 
drug; HCQ = hydroxychloroquine; MTX = methotrexate; SSZ = sulfasalazine;  
ts = targeted synthetic; SC = subcutaneous)

[[p1091]]
1032    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the term accepted by the interna-
tional community for several forms of arthritis dened by the International 
League of Associations for Rheumatology 2001 criteria (Box 26.57). This 
includes juvenile forms of psoriatic arthritis (JPsA), rheumatoid arthri-
tis (JRA) and more undifferentiated forms of inammatory arthritis. The 
majority of patients with JIA have a phenotype that is distinct from adult 
inammatory arthritis and includes a strong association with uveitis. JIA 
affects about 1:1000 children and young people up to 16 years of age – 
similar to the prevalence of diabetes (1:700). The annual incidence is 
approximately 1 per 10 000 children and young people.
Whereas joint restriction is attributed to damage in adults, in children 
it indicates inammatory activity. Arthritis in children affects limb growth 
and has a negative effect on height and weight attainment. In young chil-
dren, effective disease control can repair joint damage before puberty.
Oligoarthritis is the most common form of JIA, accounting for about 
60% of cases. It is more common in females and tends to affect large 
joints in an asymmetrical pattern. There is an association with uveitis 
and many patients are ANA-positive. Polyarticular JIA is heterogeneous: 
some patients are RF and/or ACPA-positive, while others are negative 
for autoantibodies.
Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA, formerly known as Still’s 
disease) is characterised by fever, rash, arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly 
and serositis in association with anaemia and a raised ESR and CRP. 
Autoantibody tests are negative. This form of JIA is associated with 
haem ophagocytic syndrome (p. 939).
Many cases of enthesitis-related arthritis (ERA) are likely to be self-
limiting forms of SpA. ERA can progress over time into a more obviously 
dened SpA.
Investigations
The ESR and CRP do not correlate well with the extent or severity of 
inammation and may be normal. A very high ESR may indicate the 
presence of inammatory bowel disease or (very rarely) leukaemia. Low 
haemoglobin is likely to be due to anaemia of chronic disease rather 
than iron deciency. A positive ANA occurs in 40%–75% of cases of JIA 
and indicates an increased risk of eye disease. Ultrasound is the radio-
logical investigation of choice to conrm synovitis or tenosynovitis. The 
false-negative rate is higher in foot and ankle disease than in other joints. 
Arthroscopy should be avoided unless a biopsy is required. Synovial uid 
aspiration is essential if there is suspicion of infection.
Management
The key approach is to gain early rapid control of inammation, minimise 
the adverse effects of treatment and support the general physical and 
mental health of the patient, and family, which requires full multidisciplinary 
team input. Standard therapy is MTX (subcutaneous MTX is typically used 
in the young child). Alternative treatment includes LEF, SSZ and HCQ. AZA 
and ciclosporin can be used to treat JIA with uveitis. MMF and tacroli-
mus are considered to have a specic role in treating uveitis alone. Drug 
combinations are not well studied in JIA. Where DMARDs fail, biologics 
(see Box 26.35), including anti-TNF-α, abatacept and tocilizumab, are 
effective in JIA, though precise indications and licensed use alone or with 
MTX do vary in parts of the world and according to local protocols and 
guidelines. Anakinra and canakinumab can be used to treat sJIA.
Prognosis
Suboptimal outcomes are associated with delayed diagnosis and referral 
to the specialist multidisciplinary team, inadequate disease control, pres-
entation with uveitis, sJIA in males and poor engagement with services. 
Psychological support of affected children and their families is associated 
with improved outcome. Oligo-JIA often resolves at puberty. Polyarticular 
disease and sJIA remain active into adulthood in about 50% of cases. 
Common issues around the transition of adolescent patients into adult-
hood are shown in Box 26.58
Spondyloarthritides
The spondyloarthritides comprise a group of related inammatory dis-
eases that show overlap in their clinical features and have a shared 
immunogenetic association with HLA-B27 (Box 26.59). The spectrum of 
spondyloarthritis (SpA) includes:
 axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) comprising:
 non-radiographic SpA (nr-axSpA)
 radiographic axSpA (ankylosing spondylitis [AS])
 reactive SpA
 psoriatic arthritis
 arthritis with inammatory bowel disease (enteropathic SpA).
In axSpA the axial skeleton is predominantly affected. In contrast to 
RA, in SpAs there are frequent and notable non-synovial musculoskel-
etal lesions – mainly inammatory in nature – of ligaments, tendons, 
26.57 The main clinical features of juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Subtype
Frequency
Clinical features
Immunology
Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis
5%
Fever, rash, arthralgia, hepatosplenomegaly
Autoantibody-negative
Oligoarthritis (≤4 joints)
60%
Large-joint arthritis, uveitis
ANA-positive
Polyarthritis (≥5 joints)
20%
Polyarthritis; may be extended form of oligoarthritis
ANA-positive
Enthesis-related
5%
Sacroiliitis, enthesopathy
HLA-B27-positive
RF-positive
5%
Polyarthritis, similar to RA
RF-positive, ACPA-positive
Psoriatic arthritis
5%
Same as adult disease
Autoantibody-negative
(ACPA = anti-citrullinated peptide antibody; ANA = antinuclear antibody; HLA = human leucocyte antigen; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; RF = rheumatoid factor)
26.58  Juvenile idiopathic arthritis in adolescence
 Uveitis: may be clinically silent and persist into adulthood. All (not just those 
who are ANA-positive) need ophthalmic screening for eye involvement.
 Persistence into adulthood: occurs in 50% of cases, especially in systemic 
disease. Specic supportive management through transition from adolescence 
to adulthood should be planned.
 Reduced peak bone mass: common in polyarthritis and systemic juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis but there are few data on fracture risk and the evidence base 
for treatment is poor.
 Therapy: methotrexate is standard treatment, used after NSAIDs alone are 
insufcient. Anti-TNF therapy is effective in all forms of juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis, but long-term safety remains unclear.
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs; TNF-α = tumour 
necrosis factor alpha)

[[p1092]]
Spondyloarthritides    1033
26
periosteum and other bone lesions. A hallmark lesion of SpAs is enthesi-
tis, which is inammation at the site of a ligament or tendon insertion into 
bone. Dactylitis, inammation of a whole nger or toe, may also occur 
(see Fig. 26.44).
It has been estimated that about 1% of the adult population in the United 
States may have a SpA (about 2.7 million). There is a striking association 
with HLA-B27, particularly for AS (> 95%). For AS there is a male-to-fe-
male ratio of about 3:1. In Europe, more than 90% of those affected are 
HLA-B27-positive (HLA-B27 population prevalence in those of European 
origin is 9%). The overall prevalence of AS is below 0.5% in most popu-
lations. Additionally, SpAs are thought to arise as the result of an aberrant 
host response to infection and abnormal mucosal immunity primarily medi-
ated through increased production of IL-23, which in turn causes activation 
of Th17 lymphocytes that produce IL-17, TNF-α and other inammatory 
cytokines. In some situations, a triggering organism can be identied, as 
in reactive arthritis following bacterial dysentery or chlamydial urethritis, but 
in others the environmental trigger remains obscure. Familial clustering not 
only is common to the specic condition occurring in the proband, but also 
may extend to other diseases in the SpA group.
Axial spondyloarthritis
Axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) is the diagnostic term that includes 
patients with non-radiographic axial SpA (nr-axSpA) and ankylos-
ing spondylitis (AS; also termed radiographic axSpA, Box 26.60). 
Inammatory changes in the axial skeleton (such as sacroiliitis, see 
Fig. 26.40) are characteristic of axSpA and are visualised by MRI. 
Radiographic alterations, such as new bone formation with syndesmo-
phytes and ankylosis, develop later in the course of the disease and, by 
denition, are not present in patients with nr-axSpA. A diagnosis of AS 
(radiographic axSpA), which requires evidence of these radiographic 
changes on X-ray, may only be applied many years after a patient’s 
symptoms started. It is important to recognise that not all patients with 
nr-axSpA will go on to develop AS.
Pathophysiology
Axial SpA arises from an interaction between environmental pathogens 
and the host immune system in genetically susceptible individuals. 
Increased faecal carriage of Klebsiella aerogenes has been reported in 
patients with AS and may relate to exacerbation of both joint and eye 
disease. There is increasing evidence that axSpA is due to an abnormal 
host response to the intestinal microbiota with involvement of Th17 cells, 
which have a key role in mucosal immunity. This leads to production of 
various inammatory cytokines, including IL-23, IL-17 and TNF-α, which 
play vital roles in the pathogenesis of enthesitis and other inammatory 
lesions (Fig. 26.39).
There a strong association between axSpA and carriage of the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecule HLA-B27. This is 
particularly striking in patients dened as having AS, more than 95% of 
whom are positive for HLA-B27. Other susceptibility genes also impli-
cated in susceptibility to AS include ERAP-1 (an endoplasmic reticu-
lum protein with a role facilitating intracellular antigen processing and 
binding with its presenting MHC molecule HLA-B27), the IL-23 recep-
tor and downstream signalling molecules involved in directing Th17 cell 
responses, such as STAT3 (see Fig. 4.3). The HLA-B27 molecule itself 
is implicated through its antigen-presenting function or because of its 
propensity to form homodimers that activate leucocytes. HLA-B27 mole-
cules may also misfold, causing increased endoplasmic reticulum stress. 
This could lead to inammatory cytokine release by macrophages and 
dendritic cells, thus triggering inammatory disease.
Clinical features
The cardinal feature of axSpA is inammatory back pain and early morn-
ing stiffness, with low back pain radiating to the buttocks or posterior 
thighs if the sacroiliac joints are involved. Symptoms are exacerbated by 
inactivity and relieved by movement. Musculoskeletal symptoms may be 
prominent at entheses, may be episodic and, if persistent, can present 
as widespread pain and be mistaken for bromyalgia. Fatigue is com-
mon. A history of psoriasis (current, previous or in a rst-degree relative) 
and inammatory bowel symptoms (current or previous) are important 
clues. Physical signs include a reduced range of lumbar spine move-
ments in all directions, pain on sacroiliac stressing and a high enthes-
itis index. Entheses that are typically affected include Achilles’ insertion, 
plantar fascia origin, patellar ligament entheses, gluteus medius insertion 
at the greater trochanter and tendon attachments at humeral epicon-
dyles. Acute anterior uveitis is the most common extra-articular feature, 
which occasionally precedes joint disease. The extent of extra-articular 
features are shown in Box 26.61
A number of validated clinical questionnaires, such as the Bath 
Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI), Bath Ankylosing 
Spondylitis Functional Index (BASFI) and Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease 
Activity Score (ASDAS-CRP), can be used to assess disease activity and 
functional status.
Spinal fusion can develop as AS progresses, but it does so over many 
years, varies in its extent and in most cases does not cause a gross 
exion deformity. However, a few patients develop marked kyphosis of 
the dorsal and cervical spine that may interfere with forward vision. This 
may prove incapacitating, especially when associated with xed exion 
contractures of hips or knees. Osteoporosis is a common complication, 
particularly of the spine, leading to an increased risk of vertebral fracture.
Investigations
The diagnosis of axSpA is aided by ultrasound or MRI of entheses, or 
by MRI of the sacroiliac joints and spine (Fig. 26.40). Other ndings may 
include raised ESR and CRP (although these can be normal), anaemia 
26.59 Features common to all spondyloarthritides
 Asymmetrical inammatory oligoarthritis (lower > upper limb)
 History of inammatory back pain
 Sacroiliitis
 Osteitis (bone marrow oedema on MRI)
 Enthesitis (Achilles’ tendonitis, plantar fasciitis)
 Dactylitis
 Family history common
 HLA-B27 association
 Psoriasis (of skin and/or nails)
 Uveitis
 Sterile urethritis and/or prostatitis
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Aortic root lesions (aortic incompetence, conduction defects)
(HLA = human leucocyte antigen; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)
26.60  Classication criteria for axial spondyloarthritis (ASAS)
In patients with > 3 months’ back pain and age at onset < 45 years, either A 
or B is present:
A: Sacroiliitis on imaging* plus  
≥ 1 SpA feature
B: HLA-B27 plus ≥ 2 SpA features
SpA features are:
 Inammatory back pain
 Crohn’s/colitis
 Arthritis
 Good response to NSAIDs
 Enthesitis (heel)
 SpA family history
 Uveitis
 HLA-B27
 Dactylitis
 Elevated CRP
 Psoriasis
*‘Sacroiliitis on imaging’ here is dened as either active (acute) inammation on MRI highly 
suggestive of sacroiliitis associated with SpA, or denite radiographic sacroiliitis according to 
the modied New York criteria.
(ASAS = Assessment of Spondylitis International Society; CRP = C-reactive protein;  
HLA = human leucocyte antigen; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; NSAID = non-steroidal 
anti-inammatory drug)

[[p1093]]
1034    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
and positive HLA-B27. Faecal calprotectin is a useful screening test for 
associated inammatory bowel disease.
By denition, abnormalities are not seen in X-rays in nr-axSpA. In AS, 
X-rays of the sacroiliac joint show irregularity and loss of cortical mar-
gins, widening of the joint space and subsequently sclerosis, joint space 
narrowing and fusion. Lateral thoracolumbar spine X-rays may show 
anterior ‘squaring’ of vertebrae due to erosion and sclerosis of the ante-
rior corners and periostitis of the waist. Bridging syndesmophytes may 
also be seen. These are areas of calcication that follow the outermost 
bres of the annulus (Fig. 26.41). In advanced disease, ossication of the 
anterior longitudinal ligament and facet joint fusion may also be visible. 
The combination of these features may result in the typical ‘bamboo’ 
spine (Fig. 26.42). Erosive changes may be seen in the symphysis pubis, 
ischial tuberosities and peripheral joints. Osteoporosis is common and 
vertebral fractures may occur. Atlanto-axial dislocation can arise as a late 
feature. MRI is more sensitive for detection of early sacroiliitis than X-rays 
(see Fig. 26.40) and can also detect inammatory changes in the lumbar 
spine. DXA scanning or vertebral quantitative CT is important as part of 
a fragility fracture assessment.
Management
Patient education, NSAID use (optimally, once daily or slow release taken 
at bedtime) and physical therapy are key interventions at the outset. For 
severe and/or persistent peripheral joint involvement, both SSZ and MTX 
are reasonable therapy choices. These medications have no impact on 
spinal symptoms or disease progression. In patients who fail to respond 
adequately or who cannot tolerate NSAIDs, progression to biologic 
therapy with either TNF-α, or IL-17A inhibitors should be considered. 
Anti-TNFα therapy is effective for both the axial and peripheral lesions of 
axSpA, but it is as yet unclear whether anti-TNF-α therapy modies the 
natural history of the disease.
Local glucocorticoid injections can be useful for persistent plantar 
fasciitis, other enthesopathies and peripheral arthritis. Oral glucocorti-
coids may be required for acute uveitis, but do not help spinal disease. 
Severe hip, knee or shoulder arthritis with secondary OA may require 
Th17 cell
New bone formation
Bone erosions
IL-17
RANKL
IL-22
TNF-α
IL-23
Dendritic
cell
Macrophage
Macrophage
Osteoclasts
Inflammation
Osteoblasts
Activation of
immune cells in
gut submucosa
Gut
epithelium
Gut flora
Microbial
products
Environmental
trigger
       Genetic
  predisposition
 HLA-B27
 ERAP-1
 STAT3, IL23R
Sacroiliitis
Fig. 26.39 Pathophysiology of axial spondyloarthropathy. In genetically susceptible individuals, it is thought that bacterial components penetrate the mucosal barrier 
to activate macrophages and dendritic cells in the intestinal submucosa. These cells produce increased amounts of interleukin (IL)-23, which activate Th17 cells resulting 
in production of IL-17, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α and other inammatory mediators. IL-17 has a pivotal role in driving inammation, causing sacroiliitis and enthesitis. 
Production of IL-22 by T cells is thought to be involved in causing the new bone formation that occurs in of axial spondyloarthropathy. (RANKL = receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa B ligand)
Fig. 26.40 Magnetic resonance imaging appearances in sacroiliitis. Coronal 
MRI short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) sequence showing bilateral sacroiliitis in axial 
spondyloarthritis. Bone marrow oedema (circles) is present around both sacroiliac 
joints, which show irregularities due to erosions (arrows).
26.61 Extra-articular features of axial spondyloarthritis
 Fatigue, anaemia
 Anterior uveitis (25%)
 Prostatitis (80% of men) and sterile urethritis
 Inammatory bowel disease (in up to 50%)
 Osteoporosis
 Osteoproliferation and osteosclerosis
 Cardiovascular disease (aortic valve disease 20%)
 Amyloidosis (rare)
 Atypical upper lobe pulmonary brosis (very rare)

[[p1094]]
Spondyloarthritides    1035
26
arthroplasty. In AS, spinal osteotomy, to correct stoop and make eyeline/
posture ‘more normal’, can make a signicant difference to patients with 
severe ankylosed kyphotic spines.
Prognosis
With such a recent denition of disease, the markers of prognosis in 
patients diagnosed with nr-axSpA are not fully understood. It is clear that 
axSpA can remain mild and/or episodic in many patients for many years 
but persistently high inammatory markers and functional incapacity are 
markers of a poor outcome. Nonetheless, over 75% of patients with AS 
are able to remain in employment and enjoy a good quality of life. Even 
if severe ankylosis develops, functional limitation may not be marked, as 
long as the spine is fused in an erect posture.
Reactive arthritis
Reactive (spondylo)arthritis (ReA) is a ‘reaction’ to a number of bacter-
ial triggers with clinical features in keeping with all SpA conditions. The 
known triggers are Chlamydia, Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella
and Yersinia. Notably, non-SpA-related reactive arthritis can occur fol-
lowing infection with many viruses, Mycoplasma, Borrelia, streptococci 
and mycobacteria, including M. leprae, which causes leprosy (Hansen’s 
disease); however, the ‘reaction’ in these instances consists typically 
of myoarthralgias, is not associated with HLA-B27 and is generally not 
chronic. The arthritis associated with rheumatic fever is also an example 
of a reactive arthritis that is not associated with HLA-B27.
Sexually acquired reactive arthritis (SARA) is predominantly a disease 
of young men, with a male preponderance of 15:1. This may reect a 
difculty in diagnosing the condition in young women, in whom Chlamydia
infection is often asymptomatic and hard to detect in practical terms. 
Between 1% and 2% of patients with non-specic urethritis seen at gen-
itourinary medicine clinics have SARA. The syndrome of chlamydial ure-
thritis, conjunctivitis and reactive arthritis was formerly known as Reiter’s 
disease.
With enteric triggering infections (enteropathic ReA), HLA-B27 may 
predict the reactive arthritis and its severity, though the condition occurs 
in HLA-B27-negative people. The incidence of specic triggering infec-
tions causing ReA around the world varies, depending on the epidemiol-
ogy of the infection and prevalence of HLA-B27 in the local population.
Clinical features
The onset is typically acute, with an inammatory enthesitis, oligoarthritis, 
sacroiliitis and/or spinal inammation. Lower limb joints and entheses 
are predominantly affected. In all types of ReA, there may be considera-
ble systemic disturbance, with fever and weight loss. Achilles insertional 
enthesitis/tendonitis or plantar fasciitis may also be present. The rst 
attack of arthritis is usually self-limiting, but recurrent or chronic arthri-
tis can develop and about 10% of patients will still have active disease 
20 years after the initial presentation. Low back pain and stiffness due to 
enthesitis and osteitis are common and 15%–20% of patients develop 
sacroiliitis. Many extra-articular features in ReA involve the skin, espe-
cially in SARA:
 circinate balanitis, which starts as vesicles on the coronal margin of 
the prepuce and glans penis, later rupturing to form supercial ero-
sions with minimal surrounding erythema, some coalescing to give a 
circular pattern
Fig. 26.41 Radiographic changes in spondyloarthritis. 
non-marginal syndesmophytes typical of psoriatic spondylitis (arrow).
B
A
Fig. 26.42 ‘Bamboo’ spine of advanced ankylosing spondylitis. Note 
the symmetrical marginal syndesmophytes (arrows), sacroiliac joint fusion and 
generalised osteopenia.

[[p1095]]
1036    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
 keratoderma blennorrhagica, which begins as discrete waxy,  
yellow–brown vesico-papules with desquamating margins, occa-
sionally coalescing to form large crusty plaques on the palms and 
soles of the feet
 pustular psoriasis
 nail dystrophy with subungual hyperkeratosis
 mouth ulcers
 conjunctivitis
 uveitis, which is rare with the rst attack, but arises in 30% of 
patients with recurring or chronic arthritis.
Other complications in ReA are very rare but include aortic incom-
petence, conduction defects, pleuro-pericarditis, peripheral neuropathy, 
seizures and meningoencephalitis.
Investigations
The diagnosis is usually made clinically, but joint aspiration may be 
required to exclude crystal arthritis and articular infection. ESR and CRP 
are raised. High vaginal swabs may reveal Chlamydia on culture. Except 
for post-Salmonella arthritis, stool cultures are usually negative by the 
time the arthritis presents, but serology may help conrm previous dys-
entery. RF, ACPA and ANA are negative.
In chronic or recurrent disease, X-rays show periarticular osteoporosis; 
proliferative erosions, notably at entheses; periostitis, especially of 
metatarsals, phalanges and pelvis; and large, ‘uffy’ calcaneal spurs. 
In contrast to AS, radiographic sacroiliitis is often asymmetrical and 
sometimes unilateral, and syndesmophytes are predominantly coarse 
and asymmetrical, often extending beyond the contours of the annulus 
(‘non-marginal’) (see Fig. 26.41B). Radiographic changes in the periph-
eral joints and spine are identical to those seen in psoriasis.
Management
Acute ReA should be treated with rest, NSAIDs and analgesics. Intra-
articular or systemic glucocorticoids may be required in patients with 
severe monarticular synovitis or polyarticular disease, respectively. There 
is no convincing evidence for the use of antibiotics unless a triggering 
infection is identied. If chlamydial urethritis is diagnosed, it should be 
treated empirically with a short course of doxycycline or a single dose 
of azithromycin. Treatment with DMARDs (usually SSZ or MTX) should 
be considered for patients with persistent marked symptoms, recurrent 
arthritis or severe keratoderma blennorrhagica. Anterior uveitis is a med-
ical emergency requiring topical, subconjunctival or systemic glucocor-
ticoids. For DMARD-recalcitrant cases, anti-TNF-α therapy should be 
considered.
Psoriatic arthritis
Based on data from the UK and Denmark, the estimated population 
prevalence of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) from registry and coding data is 
approximately 0.2%. It is likely the true prevalence is considerably higher, 
but this has not been extensively studied. The prevalence of PsA in psor-
iasis patients is variable, based on clinical assessment, but may be up to 
40%. Early PsA may present as axSpA. The onset is usually between 25 
and 40 years of age, but juvenile forms exist. Occasionally, the arthritis 
and psoriasis develop synchronously, but the onset of musculoskeletal 
and skin disease is frequently separated by many years. Classication 
of PsA requires key assessments of family history and screening for 
enthesitis (Box 26.62).
Pathophysiology
Genetic factors have an important role in PsA and family studies have 
suggested that heritability may exceed 80%. Variants in the HLA-B and 
HLA-C genes are the strongest genetic risk factors, but more than 30 
other variants also play a part. Carriage of the HLA B27 allele in those 
with PsA of European descent is about 20% as compared with the back-
ground rate of 9%. Many of these variants overlap with those implicated 
in psoriasis, where there are more than 40 susceptibility loci. These lie 
within or close to genes in the IL-12, IL-23 and nuclear factor kappa B 
(NFκB) signalling pathways. It is thought that an environmental factor, 
probably infectious in nature, triggers the disease in genetically suscepti-
ble individuals, leading to immune activation involving dendritic cells and 
T cells. CD8+ T cells (which recognise antigen presented in the context of 
HLA class I) are more abundant than CD4+ T cells within the joint, which 
is in keeping with the genetic association between PsA and HLA-C and 
B variants. There is increasing evidence that the IL-23/IL-17 pathway 
plays a pivotal role in PsA. It is thought that the triggering stimulus causes 
over-production of IL-23 by dendritic cells, which in turn promotes differ-
entiation and activation of Th17 cells that produce the pro-inammatory 
cytokine IL-17. This, along with Th1 cytokines like IFN-γ and TNF-α, acts 
on macrophages and tissue-resident stromal cells at entheses, in bone 
and within the joint to produce additional pro-inammatory cytokines and 
other mediators, which contribute to inammation and tissue damage, 
as shown in Figure 26.43
Clinical features
The presentation is with pain and stiffness affecting joints, tendons, spine 
and entheses. Joints are typically not swollen; however, several patterns 
of joint involvement are recognised (see below), including an oligoarticular 
form. These patterns are not mutually exclusive. Marked variation in disease 
patterns exists, including a disease course of intermittent exacerbation and 
remission. Destructive arthritis and disability are uncommon, except in the 
case of arthritis mutilans. Though both psoriasis and PsA are associated 
with obesity, it is not clear if the latter plays a role in aetiopathogenesis.
Asymmetrical inammatory mono-/oligoarthritis
This often presents abruptly with a combination of synovitis and adjacent 
periarticular inammation. It occurs most characteristically in the hands 
and feet, when synovitis of a nger or toe is coupled with tenosynovitis, 
enthesitis and inammation of intervening tissue to give a ‘sausage digit’ 
or dactylitis (Fig. 26.44A). Large joints, such as the knee and ankle, may 
also be involved, sometimes with very large effusions.
Symmetrical polyarthritis
This accounts for about 25% of cases. It predominates in women and 
may resemble RA, with symmetrical involvement of small and large joints 
in both upper and lower limbs. Nodules and other extra-articular features 
of RA are absent and arthritis is generally less extensive and more benign.
Distal interphalangeal joint arthritis
This is quite a common pattern. It can be difcult to distinguish from 
inammatory generalised OA, but in PsA psoriatic nail disease is usually 
present (Fig. 26.44B).
Psoriatic spondylitis
This type presents with inammatory back or neck pain and stiffness. 
Any structure in the spine can be involved, including intervertebral discs, 
entheses and facet joints. It may occur alone or with any of the other 
clinical patterns and is typically unilateral or asymmetric in severity.
26.62 The CASPAR criteria for psoriatic arthritis
Inammatory articular disease (joint, spine or enthesis) with ≥ 3 points from the 
following (1 point each unless stated):
 Current psoriasis (scores 2 points)
 History of psoriasis in rst- or second-degree relative
 Psoriatic nail dystrophy
 Negative IgM rheumatoid factor1
 Current dactylitis
 History of dactylitis
 Juxta-articular new bone2
(CASPAR = ClASsication for Psoriatic ARthritis)
1Established by any method except latex. 2Ill-dened ossication near joint margins  
(excluding osteophytes) on X-rays of hands or feet.

[[p1096]]
Spondyloarthritides    1037
26
Arthritis mutilans
This is a deforming erosive arthritis targeting the ngers and toes; it 
occurs in 5% of cases of PsA. Prominent cartilage and bone destruction 
results in marked digital instability. The encasing skin appears invagi-
nated and ‘telescoped’ (‘main en lorgnette’) and the nger can be pulled 
back to its original length.
Enthesitis-predominant
This form of disease presents with pain and stiffness at the insertion sites 
of tendons and ligaments into bone (enthesitis). Symptoms can be exten-
sive or localised. Patients often report muscle stiffness or aches. Typically 
affected entheses include Achilles tendon insertions, plantar fascia ori-
gins, patellar ligament attachments, hip abductor complex insertion at 
lateral femoral condyle, gluteus medius insertion at greater trochanter, 
humeral epicondyle tendon attachments, deltoid origin at acromial edge, 
intercostal muscle attachments at ribs, and pelvic ligament attachments. 
This form of PsA can be mistaken for bromyalgia by the unwary.
Nail changes
Nail changes include pitting, onycholysis, subungual hyperkeratosis and 
horizontal ridging, which are found in 85% of patients with PsA and can 
occur in the absence of skin disease. The characteristic rash of psoria-
sis may be widespread, or conned to the scalp, natal cleft, umbilicus 
and genitals, or in areas where there are frictional skin effects (e.g. from 
clothing) where it is easily overlooked. Obtaining a history of psoriasis in 
a rst-degree relative can be tricky but is important, given that a positive 
response contributes to making a diagnosis. Psoriasis and PsA may be 
discordant in the same individual, with onset of features sometimes years 
apart. The absence of psoriasis, or history of it, does not preclude a 
diagnosis of PsA (see Box 26.62).
IL-12
Th1
Th17
Th1
Th17
IL-23
IL-17
IL-17
IL-17
RANKL
M-CSF
Osteoclast
precursors
MMP
ADAMTS-5
TNF-α
IL-1
IL-6
TNF-α
IFN-γ
TNF-α
IL-1
IL-6
Dysregulation of
immune response
in mucosa or skin
Synovial
fibroblasts
Prostaglandins
Nitric oxide
Pain
Vasodilatation
Cartilage
breakdown
Enthesitis at
tendon insertions
Acute phase
proteins
Bone
erosions
Dendritic
cell
Environmental
       trigger
   Infection
   Trauma
       Genetic
  predisposition
 HLA-C  HLA-B
 Other immune
   response genes
Macrophage
IL-6
Fig. 26.43 Pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis. As in the case of axSpA, the IL-23/IL-17 axis is thought to play a key role in PsA. Some of the cytokines and cellular 
interactions important in psoriatic arthritis are also shown. (ADAMTS-5 = aggrecanase; IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; M-CSF = macrophage colony-stimulating factor; 
MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; TNF = tumour necrosis factor; RANKL = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand)
B
A
Fig. 26.44 Psoriatic arthropathy. 
pattern with accompanying nail dystrophy (pitting and onycholysis).

[[p1097]]
1038    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Investigations
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds. Autoantibodies are usually 
negative, though low-dose RF, ACPA and ANA can be detected, and 
acute phase reactants, such as ESR and CRP, are raised in only a pro-
portion of patients with active disease. X-rays may be normal or show 
juxta-articular osteoproliferation or erosive change with joint space nar-
rowing. Features that favour PsA over RA include the characteristic dis-
tribution (see Fig. 26.10) of erosions with osteoproliferation, absence of 
periarticular osteoporosis and osteosclerosis. Imaging of the axial skele-
ton, in advanced disease, can show coarse, asymmetrical, non-marginal 
syndesmophytes, juxta-facet joint osteoproliferation and sacroiliitis. MRI 
and ultrasound with power Doppler are increasingly employed to detect 
synovial inammation and inammation at the entheses.
Management
Patient education to understand the breadth, episodic nature and var-
iability of disease is important. Weight loss may play a therapeutic role 
to limit clinical impact. Therapy with NSAIDs and analgesics may be suf-
cient to manage symptoms in mild disease. Intra-articular glucocorti-
coid injections can control isolated synovitis or enthesitis. Splints and 
prolonged rest should be avoided because of the tendency to brous 
and bony ankylosis. Patients with spondylitis should be prescribed the 
same exercise and posture regime as in axSpA. Therapy with cDMARDs 
should be considered for polyenthesitis or synovitis unresponsive to con-
servative treatment. MTX is the drug of rst choice and is also effective 
for skin disease. Other cDMARDs may also be helpful, including SSZ, 
ciclosporin and LEF. Particular attention should be paid to monitoring 
liver function in patients treated with cDMARDs, since abnormalities are 
common in PsA. HCQ is not generally used in PsA, but can be tried if 
other options are unsuitable. Anti-TNF-α should be considered for indi-
viduals with active synovitis who respond inadequately to cDMARDs, 
and treatment is effective for both PsA and psoriasis. Ustekinumab, a 
monoclonal antibody that binds to and neutralises the p40 subunit of 
IL-12 and IL-23, improves joint, dactylitis and enthesitis lesions in PsA, 
as does guselkumab which is a specic inhibitor of IL-23. Secukinumab 
and ixekizumab, monoclonal antibodies that target IL-17, have similar or 
even greater efcacy than TNF-α inhibitors in PsA. Apremilast is effective 
in PsA when cDMARD therapy fails, but is less efcacious than biologic 
treatments.
Enteropathic (spondylo)arthritis
The overall prevalence of inammatory musculoskeletal disease in inam-
matory bowel diseases (IBDs: Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis) is 
not well known, as studies have not adequately assessed enthesitis and 
osteitis lesions, but the musculoskeletal manifestations are in keeping 
with a SpA phenotype. Involvement of the peripheral joints is seen in 
about 20% of IBD patients. Oligoarticular disease predominantly affects 
the large lower limb joints (knees, ankles and hips). Evidence of sacro-
iliitis can also be detected by imaging in a proportion of patients with 
IBD. Imaging evidence of sacroiliitis is present in about 15%–20% of IBD 
patients. Osteitis pubis is also a typical lesion. In Crohn’s disease, more 
than in colitis, the arthritis usually coincides with exacerbations of the 
underlying bowel disease and the arthritis improves with effective treat-
ment of the bowel disease. There is some suggestion that the severity 
and onset of inammatory musculoskeletal symptoms can vary in asso-
ciation with changes in the integrity of the ileocaecal valve, raising the 
possibility that changes in gut ora may act as triggers for the associated 
SpA.
NSAIDs are best avoided, since they can exacerbate IBD. Instead, 
judicious use of glucocorticoids, SSZ and MTX may be considered. 
Liaison is necessary between gastroenterologist and rheumatologist with 
regard to choice of therapy. Anti-TNF-α therapy is effective in entero-
pathic arthritis, but etanercept should be avoided as it has no efcacy 
in IBD. Anti-IL-17A therapy should be avoided as it can trigger ares of 
IBD. Tofacitinib, while not specically licensed for enteropathic arthritis, 
is efcacious in ulcerative colitis and might be a further treatment option. 
When musculoskeletal symptoms worsen despite anti-TNF-α therapy, 
it is wise to exclude small intestinal bacterial overgrowth as a triggering 
cause.
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases (AICTDs) share many clinical 
features and are characterised by dysregulation of immune responses, 
with autoantibody production that is often directed at components of the 
cell nucleus, and tissue damage.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a rare disease with a prevalence 
that ranges from about 0.03% in people of European descent to 0.2% in 
people of African Caribbean origin. Some 90% of affected patients are 
female and the peak age at onset is between 20 and 30 years. SLE is 
associated with considerable morbidity and a vefold increase in mortal-
ity compared to age- and gender-matched controls, mainly because of 
an increased risk of premature cardiovascular disease.
Pathophysiology
The cause of SLE is incompletely understood. Genetic factors play a role 
and the strongest region of association lies with alleles in the HLA-DR 
and DQ regions. However, approximately 100 other susceptibility loci, 
which lie within or close to genes involved in the immune response, have 
also been identied by genome-wide association studies. The overall 
heritability of SLE has been estimated to be about 40%–60%, illustrat-
ing the importance of environmental inuences, although the nature of 
these are unclear. In a few instances, SLE is associated with inherited 
mutations in complement components C1q, C2 and C4, in the immuno-
globulin receptor FcγRIIIb and in the DNA exonuclease TREX. From an 
immunological standpoint, the characteristic feature of SLE is autoanti-
body production. These autoantibodies have specicity for a wide range 
of targets, but many are directed against antigens present within the cell 
or within the nucleus. This has led to the hypothesis that SLE may occur 
because of defects in apoptosis or in the clearance of apoptotic cells, 
which causes inappropriate exposure of intracellular antigens on the cell 
surface, leading to polyclonal B- and T-cell activation, and autoantibody 
production. In support of this, environmental factors that cause ares 
of SLE, such as ultraviolet light and infections, increase oxidative stress 
and cause cell damage. Whatever the underlying cause, autoantibody 
production and immune complex formation are thought to be important 
mechanisms of tissue damage in active SLE, leading to vasculitis and 
organ damage.
Clinical features
Symptoms such as fever, weight loss and mild lymphadenopathy may 
occur during ares of disease activity, whereas others such as fatigue 
and low-grade joint pains can be constant and not particularly associ-
ated with active inammatory disease.
Arthritis
Arthralgia is a common symptom, occurring in 90% of patients, and is 
often associated with early morning stiffness. Tenosynovitis may also 
occur, but clinically apparent synovitis with joint swelling is unusual. Joint 
deformities may arise (Jaccoud’s arthropathy) as the result of tendon 
damage, but joint erosions are not a feature.
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Raynaud’s phenomenon (RP) is characterised by vasoconstriction of 
the small vessels of the hand and feet in response to cold, leading to 
pallor followed by cyanosis of the affected digits followed by vasodilata-
tion causing the affected digits to turn red. This is a common feature of 
SLE and may antedate other symptoms by months or years. Raynaud’s 

[[p1098]]
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases    1039
26
phenomenon associated with SLE and other AICTDs (secondary RP) 
needs to be differentiated from primary RP, which is a benign disorder 
that is common in the general population (up to 5%). Features of second-
ary RP include age at onset of over 25 years, other features of AICTD, 
absence of a family history of RP, severity of symptoms, presence of 
digital ulceration (Fig. 26.45) and male gender. Examination of capillary 
nail-fold loops using an ophthalmoscope (with oil placed on the skin) can 
show loss of the normal loop pattern, with capillary ‘fallout’ and dilatation 
and branching of loops; these features support a diagnosis of secondary 
RP, but can be observed in severe primary RP.
Skin
The skin is commonly involved in SLE and many eruptions are precipitated 
by exposure to ultraviolet light. The main types of skin involvement are:
 The classic malar facial rash (up to 20% of patients). This is erythe-
matous, raised and painful or itchy, and occurs over the cheeks with 
sparing of the nasolabial folds (Fig. 26.46). Rosacea may mimic this 
rash.
 A discoid rash characterised by hyperkeratosis and follicular plug-
ging, with scarring alopecia if it occurs on the scalp.
 Diffuse, usually non-scarring alopecia, which may also occur with 
active disease.
 Urticarial eruptions.
 Livedo reticularis (Fig. 26.47), which is also a feature of antiphospho-
lipid syndrome and can become frankly vasculitic, if severe.
Kidney
Renal involvement is one of the main determinants of prognosis and reg-
ular monitoring of urinalysis and blood pressure is essential. The typical 
renal lesion is a proliferative glomerulonephritis, characterised by heavy 
haematuria, proteinuria and casts on urine microscopy.
Cardiovascular
The most common manifestation is pericarditis. Myocarditis and 
Libman–Sacks endocarditis can also occur. The endocarditis is due to 
accumulation on the heart valves of sterile brin-containing vegetations, 
which is thought to be a manifestation of hypercoagulability associated 
with antiphospholipid antibodies. The risk of atherosclerosis is greatly 
increased, as is the risk of stroke and myocardial infarction. This is 
thought to be multifactorial due to the adverse effects of inammation on 
the endothelium, chronic glucocorticoid therapy and the procoagulant 
effects of antiphospholipid antibodies.
Lung
Lung involvement is common and most frequently manifests as pleuritic 
pain (serositis) or pleural effusion. Other features include pneumonitis, 
atelectasis, reduced lung volume and pulmonary brosis. The risk of 
thromboembolism is increased, especially in patients with antiphospho-
lipid antibodies.
Neurological
Fatigue, headache and poor concentration are common and often occur 
in the absence of laboratory evidence of active disease. More specic 
features of cerebral SLE include visual hallucinations, chorea, organic 
psychosis, transverse myelitis and lymphocytic meningitis.
Haematological
Neutropenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and haemolytic anae-
mia may occur, due to antibody-mediated destruction of peripheral 
blood cells. The degree of lymphopenia can be a guide to disease 
activity.
Gastrointestinal
Mouth ulcers may occur and can be painful. Peritoneal serositis can 
cause acute pain. Mesenteric vasculitis is a serious complication, 
which can present with abdominal pain, bowel infarction or perforation. 
Hepatitis is a recognised, though rare, feature.
Paediatric disease
Renal disease and cutaneous manifestations are more frequent in 
juvenile-onset SLE compared to disease in adults. Similarly, there is 
Fig. 26.45 Severe secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon leading to ischaemic 
digital ulceration.
Fig. 26.46 Malar rash of systemic lupus erythematosus, sparing the 
nasolabial folds. The rash, when mild, can be notably similar to rosacea, which may 
itself be associated with inammatory joint diseases that are associated with enteral 
diseases.
Fig. 26.47 Livedo reticularis (as typically occurs in systemic lupus 
erythematosus and antiphospholipid syndrome).

[[p1099]]
1040    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
subsequently a higher incidence of renal disease, malar rash, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon, cutaneous vasculitis and neuropsychiatric manifestations 
than in adults.
Investigations
The diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical features and labor-
atory abnormalities. To full the classication criteria for SLE, at least 4 
of the 11 factors shown in Box 26.63 must be present or have occurred 
in the past. Checking of ANAs, antibodies to ENAs and complement, 
routine haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis are mandatory. Patients 
with active SLE are almost always positive for ANA. ANA-negative SLE 
can occur, but this is rare and in such cases antibodies to the ENA Ro 
or antiphospholipid antibodies are present. Anti-dsDNA antibodies are 
positive in most patients and are quite specic for SLE. Serum levels of 
C3 may be low in active SLE due to complement consumption, but in 
some people low C3 and C4 can also be caused by inherited decien-
cies in C1, C2 or C4, all of which predispose to SLE. Studies of other 
family members can help to differentiate inherited deciencies from com-
plement consumption. A raised ESR, leucopenia and lymphopenia are 
typical of active SLE, and this may be accompanied by anaemia, haemo-
lytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia. CRP is often normal in active SLE 
and presence of an elevated CRP in SLE raises the possibility of either 
serositis, or co-existing infection.
Management
The therapeutic goals are to educate the patient about the nature of 
the illness, to control symptoms and to prevent organ damage and 
maintain normal function. Patients should be advised to avoid sun and 
ultraviolet light exposure and to employ sun blocks (sun protection 
factor 25–50).
Mild to moderate disease
Patients with mild disease restricted to skin and joints can sometimes 
be managed with analgesics, NSAIDs and HCQ. Frequently, however, 
glucocorticoids are also necessary (prednisolone 5–20 mg/day), often 
in combination with immunosuppressants such as MTX, azathioprine or 
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). Increased doses of glucocorticoids may 
be required for ares in activity or complications such as pleurisy or per-
icarditis. The monoclonal antibody belimumab has been shown to be 
effective in patients with active SLE who have responded inadequately 
to standard therapy. Fatigue may be problematic, but there is some evi-
dence that low intensity regular aerobic exercise can be helpful. Poor 
sleep hygiene should be addressed to try to combat this symptom.
Severe and life-threatening disease
High-dose glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants are required for the 
treatment of renal, CNS and cardiac involvement. A commonly used reg-
imen is pulsed methylprednisolone (10 mg/kg IV) plus cyclophosphamide 
(15 mg/kg IV), repeated at 2–3-weekly intervals for six cycles. Cyclophos-
phamide may cause haemorrhagic cystitis, but the risk can be minimised 
by good hydration and co-prescription of mesna (2-mercaptoethane 
sulfonate), which binds its urotoxic metabolites. Because of the risk of 
azoospermia and premature menopause, sperm or oocyte collection and 
storage need to be considered prior to treatment with cyclophosphamide.
MMF has been used successfully with high-dose glucocorticoids for 
renal involvement with results similar to those of pulsed cyclophospha-
mide, but fewer adverse effects. Belimumab in combination with stand-
ard therapy signicantly decreases disease activity in SLE patients and 
is safe and well tolerated. Its role in patients with renal and neurological 
disease is still under investigation.
Rituximab has been reported as being effective in case reports and case 
series, but randomised placebo-controlled trials have not shown benet.
Maintenance therapy
Following control of acute disease, oral prednisolone can be commenced 
in a dose of 40–60 mg daily, gradually reducing to 10–15 mg/day or less 
by 3 months. Azathioprine (2–2.5 mg/kg/day), MTX (10–25 mg/week) 
or MMF (2–3 g/day) may also be prescribed as steroid-sparing agents. 
The long-term aim is to try to maintain remission with the lowest dose 
of glucocorticoid and immunosuppressant possible. Cardiovascular risk 
factors, such as obesity, hypertension and hyperlipidaemia, should be 
controlled and patients should be advised to stop smoking and reduce 
excess alcohol intake.
Patients with SLE and the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, who 
have had previous thrombosis, require life-long warfarin therapy. Patients 
with SLE are at risk of osteoporosis and hypovitaminosis D, and accord-
ingly should be screened with biochemistry and DXA scanning.
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis (SScl) is an autoimmune disorder of connective tis-
sue, which results in brosis affecting the skin, internal organs and vas-
culature. It is characterised by severe Raynaud’s phenomenon, digital 
ischaemia (Fig. 26.48), sclerodactyly, cardiac, lung, gut and renal dis-
ease. The peak age of onset is in the fourth and fth decades. It is a rare 
condition with a prevalence of 10–20 per 100 000, with a 4:1 female-
to-male ratio. It is subdivided into limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis 
(lcSScl: 70% of cases) and diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (dcSScl: 
30% of cases) depending on the extent of skin involvement and presence 
of major organ involvement. Some patients with lcSScl have calcinosis 
and telangiectasia and when combined with Raynaud’s phenomenon, 
oesophageal involvement and sclerodactyly this is referred to as the 
CREST syndrome (Calcinosis, Raynaud’s, oEsophageal involvement, 
Sclerodactyly and Telangiectasia), which has a good prognosis. The 
prognosis in dcSScl is poor (5-year survival about 70%). Features that 
associate with a poor prognosis include older age, diffuse skin disease, 
proteinuria, high ESR, a low gas transfer factor for carbon monoxide 
(TLCO) and pulmonary hypertension.
26.63 Criteria for the classication of systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Features
Characteristics
Malar rash
Fixed erythema, at or raised, sparing the 
nasolabial folds
Discoid rash
Erythematous raised patches with adherent 
keratotic scarring and follicular plugging
Photosensitivity
Rash due to unusual reaction to sunlight
Oral ulcers
Oral or nasopharyngeal ulceration, which 
may be painless
Arthritis
Non-erosive, involving two or more 
peripheral joints
Serositis
Pleuritis (history of pleuritic pain or rub, 
or pleural effusion) or pericarditis (rub, 
electrocardiogram evidence or effusion)
Renal disorder
Persistent proteinuria > 0.5 g/24 hrs or
cellular casts (red cell, granular or tubular)
Neurological disorder
Seizures or psychosis, in the absence of 
provoking drugs or metabolic derangement
Haematological disorder
Haemolytic anaemia or leucopenia* (< 4 × 
109/L) or lymphopenia* (< 1 × 109/L) or
thrombocytopenia* (< 100 × 109/L) in the 
absence of offending drugs
Immunological
Anti-DNA antibodies in abnormal titre or
presence of antibody to Sm antigen or
positive antiphospholipid antibodies
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
Abnormal titre of ANA by 
immunouorescence
An adult has SLE if any 4 of 11 features are present  
serially or simultaneously
*On two separate occasions.

[[p1100]]
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases    1041
26
Pathophysiology
The cause of SScl is not completely understood. There is evidence for 
a genetic component and associations with alleles at the HLA locus 
have been found. The disease occurs in all ethnic groups and race 
may inuence severity. Isolated cases have been reported in which an 
SScl-like disease has been triggered by exposure to silica dust, vinyl 
chloride, epoxy resins and trichloroethylene. There is clear evidence 
of immunological dysfunction: T lymphocytes, especially those of the 
Th17 subtype, inltrate the skin and there is abnormal broblast acti-
vation, leading to increased production of extracellular matrix in the 
dermis, primarily type I collagen. This results in symmetrical thicken-
ing, tightening and induration of the skin (scleroderma). Arterial and 
arteriolar narrowing occurs due to intimal proliferation and vessel wall 
inammation. Endothelial injury causes release of vasoconstrictors and 
platelet activation, resulting in further ischaemia, which is thought to 
exacerbate the brotic process.
Clinical features
Skin
Initially, there is non-pitting oedema of ngers and exor tendon sheaths. 
Subsequently, the skin becomes shiny and taut, and distal skin creases 
disappear. There can be capillary loss. The face and neck are often 
involved, with thinning of the lips and radial furrowing. In some patients, 
skin thickening stops at this stage. Skin involvement restricted to sites 
distal to the elbow or knee (apart from the face) is thus classied as 
lcSScl (Fig. 26.49). Involvement proximal to the knee and elbow and on 
the trunk is classied as ‘diffuse disease’ (dcSScl).
Raynaud’s phenomenon
This is a universal feature and can precede other features by many 
years. Involvement of small blood vessels in the extremities may cause 
critical tissue ischaemia, leading to localised distal skin infarction and 
necrosis.
Musculoskeletal features
Arthralgia and exor tenosynovitis are common. Restricted hand func-
tion is due to skin involvement rather than joint disease and erosive 
arthropathy is uncommon. Muscle weakness and wasting can result 
from myositis.
Gastrointestinal involvement
Smooth muscle atrophy and brosis in the lower two-thirds of the 
oesophagus lead to reux with erosive oesophagitis. Dysphagia and 
odynophagia may also occur. Involvement of the stomach causes early 
satiety and occasionally outlet obstruction. Recurrent occult upper gas-
trointestinal bleeding may indicate a ‘watermelon’ stomach (antral vascu-
lar ectasia; up to 20% of patients). Small intestine involvement may lead 
to malabsorption due to bacterial overgrowth and intermittent bloating, 
pain or constipation. Dilatation of bowel due to autonomic neuropathy 
may cause pseudo-obstruction with nausea, vomiting, abdominal dis-
comfort and distension, often worse after food (symptoms can mimic 
those of an acute abdomen and can lead to erroneous laparotomy).
Pulmonary involvement
Pulmonary hypertension complicates long-standing disease and is six 
times more prevalent in lcSScl than in dcSScl. It usually presents with 
insidiously evolving exertional dyspnoea and signs of right heart failure. 
Interstitial lung disease is common in patients with dcSScl who have 
topoisomerase 1 antibodies (Scl70). Dyspnoea can evolve slowly over 
time or rapidly in occasional cases.
Renal involvement
One of the main causes of death is hypertensive renal crisis, charac-
terised by rapidly developing accelerated phase hypertension and renal 
failure. Hypertensive renal crisis is much more likely to occur in dcSScl 
than in lcSScl, and in patients with topoisomerase 1 and RNP antibodies.
Investigations
As SScl can affect multiple organs, routine haematology, renal, liver and 
bone function tests and urinalysis are essential. ANA is positive in about 
95%. About 30% of patients with dcSScl have antibodies to topoisomer-
ase 1 (Scl70). About 60% of patients have anticentromere antibodies and 
this is a biomarker for lcSScl and CREST syndrome. Chest X-ray, trans-
thoracic echocardiography and lung function tests are recommended 
to assess for interstitial lung disease and pulmonary hypertension (low 
corrected transfer factor may indicate early pulmonary hypertension). 
High-resolution lung CT is recommended if interstitial lung disease is 
suspected. If pulmonary hypertension is suspected, right heart catheter 
measurements should be arranged at a specialist cardiac centre. A bar-
ium swallow can assess oesophageal involvement. A hydrogen breath 
test can indicate small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Management
For most patients, the focus of management is to ameliorate symptoms 
and combat the effects of the disease on target organs. In patients with 
severe dcSScl, encouraging results have been obtained with autol-
ogous stem cell transplantation following myeloablative therapy with 
cyclophosphamide.
 Raynaud’s phenomenon and digital ulcers. Avoidance of cold expo-
sure, use of thermal insulating gloves/socks and maintenance of a 
high core temperature all help. If symptoms are persistent, calcium 
channel blockers, losartan, uoxetine, sildenal and tadalal can be 
effective. Courses of intravenous prostacyclin are used for severe 
disease and critical ischemia. The endothelin-1 antagonist bosentan is 
Fig. 26.48 Systemic sclerosis. Hands showing tight, shiny skin, sclerodactyly 
and exion contractures of the ngers. From Callen J, Jorizzo J, Zone J, Piette W, 
Rosenbach M, Vleugels RA. Dermatological signs of systemic disease, 5th edn. 
Elsevier; 2017
Fig. 26.49 Typical facial appearance showing telangiectasias in localised 
cutaneous systemic sclerosis.

[[p1101]]
1042    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
licensed for treating ischaemic digital ulcers and digital tip tissue health 
can be maintained with regular use of fucidin–hydrocortisone cream.
 Gastrointestinal complications. Oesophageal reux should be 
treated with proton pump inhibitors and anti-reux agents. Rotating 
courses of antibiotics may be required for small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth (p. 848), while metoclopramide or domperidone may 
help patients with symptoms of dysmotility/pseudo-obstruction.
 Hypertension. Aggressive treatment with ACE inhibitors is needed, 
even if renal impairment is present.
 Joint involvement. This may be treated with analgesics and/or 
NSAIDs. If synovitis is present then therapy with MTX or other 
cDMARD can be of value.
 Progressive pulmonary hypertension. Early treatment with bosentan 
is required. In severe or progressive disease, heart–lung transplant 
may be considered.
 Interstitial lung disease. Cyclophosphamide is effective in slowing 
progression of interstitial lung disease and similar results have been 
observed with MMF. More recently the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
nintedanib (150 mg twice daily) has shown efcacy in slowing decline 
of lung function in dcSScl.
Mixed connective tissue disease
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a condition in which some 
clinical features of SScl, myositis and SLE all occur in the same patient. 
It commonly presents with indolent pufness of the ngers (the appear-
ance is between that of SpA-type dactylitis and sclerodactyly) with 
Raynaud’s phenomenon and myalgias. Most patients have anti-RNP 
antibodies. Management focuses on treating the individual components 
of the disease (see other sections).
Sjögren syndrome
Sjögren syndrome (SS) is characterised by grittiness of the eyes and dry-
ness of the mouth due to lymphocytic inltration of salivary and lacrimal 
glands, leading to glandular brosis and exocrine failure. The typical age 
of onset is between 40 and 50 years, with a 9:1 female-to-male ratio. It 
is subdivided into primary Sjögren syndrome (PSS), which occurs in the 
absence of other autoimmune disease, and secondary Sjögren syndrome, 
where it occurs in association with other conditions like RA and SLE.
Clinical features
The eye symptoms, termed keratoconjunctivitis sicca, are due to a lack 
of lubricating tears, which reects inammatory inltration of the lacri-
mal glands. Conjunctivitis and blepharitis are frequent and may lead to 
lamentary keratitis due to binding of tenacious mucous laments to 
the cornea and conjunctiva. Oral involvement manifests as a dry mouth 
(xerostomia). There is a high incidence of dental caries, gingivitis, per-
iodontitis and other dental problems. Lymphadenopathy is present in 
about two-thirds of patients and other sites of extraglandular involvement 
are listed in Box 26.64. Often the most disabling symptom is fatigue. 
There may be an association with inammatory small-joint OA, although 
formal studies have not been done to determine if this is a chance asso-
ciation. Sialadenitis, osteoarthritis and xerostomia (SOX) syndrome has 
been described; this may occur independently of PSS or, more likely, 
constitutes a mild form. Both interstitial lung disease (presenting with dry 
cough, dyspnoea and course crackles on lung auscultation) and inter-
stitial nephritis (presenting with polyuria and sometimes complicated by 
renal tubular acidosis) may occur and both require proactive screening. 
PSS is associated with a 40-fold increased lifetime risk of lymphoma, 
though the complication is still very rare. This should be suspected if 
there is progressive worsening of lymphadenopathy.
Investigations
Support for the diagnosis can be obtained by the Schirmer tear test, which 
measures tear ow over 5 minutes using absorbent paper strips placed 
on the lower eyelid; a normal result is more than 5 mm of wetting. Corneal 
staining with rose bengal may show punctate epithelial abnormalities 
over the area not covered by the open eyelid. If the diagnosis remains in 
doubt, it can be conrmed by demonstrating focal lymphocytic inltrate 
in a minor salivary gland biopsy. Most patients have an elevated ESR and 
hypergammaglobulinaemia, and one or more autoantibodies, including 
ANA and RF are usually present. ANA-negative disease does exist, but in 
this case anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies are usually detectable (see Box 
26.9). A chest X-ray, high resolution CT and lung function tests should be 
performed if symptoms suggestive of lung disease are present. Routine 
biochemistry and tests of urinary concentrating ability may be required if 
interstitial nephritis is suspected. Lymph node biopsy should be performed 
to exclude lymphoma in patients with progressive lymphadenopathy.
Management
No treatments can signicantly modify the course of SS and so manage-
ment is essentially symptomatic. Lacrimal substitutes, such as hypromel-
lose, should be used during the day in combination with more viscous 
lubricating application at night. Soft contact lenses can be useful for 
corneal protection in patients with lamentary keratitis and occlusion of 
the lacrimal ducts is occasionally needed. Articial saliva sprays, sali-
va-stimulating tablets, pastilles and oral gels can be tried for xerostomia, 
but often chewing gum is most effective. Adequate post-prandial oral 
hygiene and prompt treatment of oral candidiasis are essential. Vaginal 
dryness is treated with lubricants. A trial of systemic pilocarpine (5–30 
mg daily in divided doses) is worthwhile in early disease to increase sal-
ivary and lacrimal secretions. HCQ (200 mg twice daily) is sometimes 
used in the treatment of SS, but clinical trials have not shown convincing 
evidence of benet. Immunosuppression does not improve sicca symp-
toms, but is often used in the treatment of interstitial lung disease and 
interstitial nephritis although the evidence base for benet is limited.
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
Polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) are characterised by 
an inammatory inltrate of both skeletal and smooth muscle. In DM, 
26.64 Features of primary Sjögren syndrome
Risk factors
 Age of onset 40–60
 HLA-B8/DR3
 Female > male
Common clinical features
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Non-erosive arthralgia
 Xerostomia
 Generalised osteoarthritis
 Salivary gland enlargement
 Raynaud’s phenomenon
 Rashes/skin irritation
 Fatigue
Less common features
 Low-grade fever
 Peripheral neuropathy
 Interstitial lung disease
 Lymphadenopathy
 Anaemia, leucopenia
 Lymphoreticular lymphoma
 Thrombocytopenia
 Glomerulonephritis
 Cryoglobulinaemia
 Interstitial nephritis
 Vasculitis
 Renal tubular acidosis
Autoantibodies frequently detected
 Rheumatoid factor
 SS-B (anti-La)
 Antinuclear antibody
 Gastric parietal cell
 SS-A (anti-Ro)
 Thyroid
Associated autoimmune disorders
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Primary biliary cholangitis
 Systemic sclerosis
 Chronic active hepatitis
 Coeliac disease
 Myasthenia gravis
(HLA = human leucocyte antigen)

[[p1102]]
Autoimmune connective tissue diseases    1043
26
characteristic skin changes also occur. Both diseases are rare, with an 
incidence of 2–10 cases per million/year. They can occur in isolation or 
in association with other autoimmune diseases and both may be the 
presenting features of a previously undiagnosed malignancy.
Clinical features
The typical presentation of PM and DM is with symmetrical proximal 
muscle weakness over a few weeks, usually affecting the lower limbs 
more than the upper, in adults between 40 and 60 years of age. Patients 
report difculty rising from a chair, climbing stairs and lifting. Muscle 
pain is not a prominent feature but may be present in up to one-third of 
patients. Systemic features of fever, weight loss and fatigue are common. 
Subcutaneous calcication associated with skin ulceration may occur in 
both DM and PM. Respiratory or pharyngeal muscle involvement can 
lead to ventilatory failure or aspiration that requires urgent treatment. 
Interstitial lung disease occurs in up to 30% of patients and is associated 
with the presence of antisynthetase (Jo-1) antibodies.
The skin lesions in DM include Gottron’s papules, which are scaly, 
erythematous or violaceous, psoriasiform plaques occurring over the 
extensor surfaces of PIP and DIP joints, and a heliotrope rash that is 
a violaceous discoloration of the eyelid in combination with periorbital 
oedema (Fig. 26.50). Similar rashes occur on the upper back, chest and 
shoulders over a ‘shawl’ distribution. Periungual nail-fold capillaries are 
often enlarged and tortuous.
Investigations
Muscle biopsy is the pivotal investigation and shows the typical fea-
tures of bre necrosis, regeneration and inammatory cell inltrate 
(Fig. 26.51). Since muscle involvement may be patchy, it is common 
to perform an MRI scan prior to biopsy, which often shows features 
of increased signal intensity in STIR sequence images. This not 
only provides support for the diagnosis, but also can help choose 
the optimal site for a biopsy. Serum levels of creatine kinase are typ-
ically raised and are a useful measure of disease activity, although a 
normal creatine kinase does not exclude the diagnosis, particularly 
in juvenile myositis. Electromyography is very useful for highlighting 
non-autoimmune/non-inammatory myopathies. Screening for under-
lying malignancy should be undertaken routinely (full examination, 
chest X-ray, serum urine and protein electrophoresis, CT of chest/
abdomen/pelvis; prostate-specic antigen in men and mammography 
in women).
Management
Oral glucocorticoids (prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily) are the rst-line treat-
ment of PM and DM, but high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone 
(1 g/day for 3 days) may be required in patients with respiratory or 
pharyngeal weakness. If there is a good response, glucocorticoids should 
be reduced by approximately 25% per month aiming for a maintenance 
dose of 5–7.5 mg daily. Glucocorticoid-induced myopathy should be 
considered in patients who initially respond but then relapse. A second 
muscle biopsy can be of diagnostic value to guide further treatment in 
this situation since in the case of glucocorticoid myopathy type II bre 
atrophy is observed as compared with bre necrosis and regeneration 
in active myositis. Treatment should be adjusted accordingly. Although 
most patients respond well to glucocorticoids, additional immunosup-
pressive therapy may be required as steroid-sparing agents in the form of 
MTX, azathioprine, MMF or ciclosporin. Rituximab is sometimes used in 
refractory cases, but the only randomised trial of this agent did not show 
benet over placebo. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) has been shown 
to be effective in the treatment of DM and is often used in the treatment 
of refractory PM and DM. Antimalarials such as HCQ and mepacrine 
have been used for skin-predominant disease, but the evidence for 
bene t is limited and based on case reports.
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is by far the most common inammatory 
myopathy in children and adolescents, and typically does not require a 
search for malignancy. The incidence is 2–4 per million (United States 
and UK), with a median age of onset of 7 years (25% are below 4 years at 
diagnosis). Many clinical features are similar to those in the adult disease. 
JDM can be monocyclic, lasting up to 3 years (25%–40%), or polycy-
clic with periods of remission and relapse (60%–75%). In some cases, 
polycyclic JDM can be chronic and life-long. Skin ulceration occurs in 
10%–20% of cases and calcinosis in about 30%.
Intravenous methylprednisolone, then oral glucocorticoids and MTX 
produce a rapid response in many cases. Cyclophosphamide may be 
used for resistant disease with skin ulceration. IVIg is given in resistant 
cases.
Undifferentiated autoimmune connective 
tissue disease
The term undifferentiated autoimmune connective tissue disease is used 
to describe the situation where patients present with individual clinical 
features of AICTD, either simultaneously or sequentially, but do not meet 
the criteria for diagnosis of a specic disease. Some of these individuals 
may progress to develop a specic AICTD with time; others continue to 
have an undifferentiated disease that remains the same for many years, 
and in others the symptoms will recede. These patients should be kept 
under review with management directed at treating individual symptoms 
as they arise.
Fig. 26.50 Heliotrope rash and eyelid oedema in dermatomyositis. From 
Callen JP, Jorisso JL, Bolognia JL, Piette WW, Zone JZ. Dermatological signs of 
internal disease, 4th edn. Elsevier; 2009
Fig. 26.51 Muscle biopsy from a patient with polymyositis. The sample shows 
an intense inammatory cell inltrate in an area of degenerating and regenerating 
muscle bres.

[[p1103]]
1044    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Adult-onset Still’s disease
Adult-onset Still’s disease is a rare systemic inammatory disorder of 
unknown cause with features that are in some respects similar to sJIA 
and familial fever syndromes (p. 71). The presentation is with intermit-
tent fever, rash and polyarthritis or polyarthralgia. There is evidence that 
increased production of the pro-inammatory cytokine interleukin-1 may 
play a pathogenic role. Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly and lymphad-
enopathy may be present. Investigations typically provide evidence of 
an acute phase response with raised ESR and CRP and a markedly 
elevated serum ferritin. Tests for RF and ANA are negative. Treatment 
with NSAIDs can be effective in mild cases, but in more severe disease, 
glucocorticoids with or without DMARD such as azathioprine, MTX 
or MMF, are indicated. In resistant disease, the interleukin-1 inhibitors 
canakinumab or anakinra can be highly effective.
Vasculitis
Vasculitis is characterised by inammation and necrosis of blood vessel 
walls, with associated damage to skin, kidney, lung, heart, brain and 
gastrointestinal tract. There is a wide spectrum of involvement and sever-
ity, ranging from mild and transient disease affecting only the skin, to 
life-threatening fulminant disease with multiple organ failure. Principal 
sites of involvement for the main types of vasculitis are summarised in 
Figure 26.52. The clinical features result from a combination of local 
tissue ischaemia (due to vessel inammation and narrowing) and the 
systemic effects of widespread inammation. Systemic vasculitis should 
be considered in any patient with fever, weight loss, fatigue, evidence 
of multisystem involvement, rashes, raised inammatory markers and 
abnormal urinalysis (Box 26.65).
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated 
vasculitis
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) 
is a life-threatening disorder characterised by inammatory inltration of 
small blood vessels, brinoid necrosis and the presence of circulating 
antibodies to antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). The combined 
incidence is about 10–15/1 000 000. There are three main subtypes with 
differing clinical features:
Microscopic polyangiitis
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) is a necrotising small-vessel vasculitis 
found with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, often in association 
with alveolar haemorrhage. Cutaneous and gastrointestinal involve-
ment is common and other features include neuropathy (15%) and 
pleural effusions (15%). Patients are usually myeloperoxidase (MPO) 
antibody-positive.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), also known as Wegener’s gran-
ulomatosis, is characterised by granuloma formation, mainly affecting 
the nasal passages, airways and kidney. A minority of patients present 
with glomerulonephritis. The most common presentation of GPA is with 
epistaxis, nasal crusting and sinusitis, but haemoptysis and mucosal 
ulceration may also occur. Deafness may be a feature due to inner ear 
involvement and proptosis may occur because of inammation of the 
retro-orbital tissue (Fig. 26.53). This causes diplopia due to entrapment 
of the extra-ocular muscles, or loss of vision due to optic nerve com-
pression. Disturbance of colour vision is an early feature of optic nerve 
compression. Untreated nasal disease ultimately leads to destruction of 
bone and cartilage. Migratory pulmonary inltrates and nodules occur in 
50% of patients (as seen on high-resolution CT of lungs). Patients with 
GPA are usually proteinase-3 (PR3) antibody-positive.
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), also known as 
Churg–Strauss syndrome, is a small-vessel vasculitis with an incidence 
of about 1–3 per 1 000 000. Antibodies to MPO or PR3 can be detected 
in up to 60% of cases. It is somewhat distinct from MPA and GPA in 
that eosinophilia is a prominent feature. Some patients have a prodromal 
period for many years, characterised by allergic rhinitis, nasal polyposis 
and late-onset asthma that is often difcult to control. The typical acute 
presentation is with a triad of skin lesions (purpura or nodules), asym-
metric mononeuritis multiplex and eosinophilia. Pulmonary inltrates and 
pleural or pericardial effusions due to serositis may be present. Up to 
50% of patients have abdominal symptoms provoked by mesenteric 
vasculitis.
Investigation of AAV
Patients with active disease usually have a leucocytosis with elevated 
CRP and ESR. Complement levels are usually normal or slightly elevated. 
Eosinophilia is common in EGPA. Imaging of the upper airways, chest 
and nasal passages with MRI can be useful in localising abnormalities in 
26.65 Clinical features of systemic vasculitis
Systemic
 Malaise
 Weight loss
 Fever
 Myoarthralgias
 Night sweats
Rashes
 Palpable purpura
 Ulceration
 Pulp infarcts
 Livedo reticularis
Ear, nose and throat
 Epistaxis
 Deafness
 Recurrent sinusitis
Respiratory
 Haemoptysis
 Poorly controlled 
asthma
 Cough
Gastrointestinal
 Abdominal pain (due to mucosal  
inammation or enteric ischaemia)
 Mouth ulcers
 Diarrhoea
Neurological
 Sensory or motor neuropathy
Giant cell arteritis
Kawasaki
disease
Takayasu arteritis
Polyarteritis
nodosa
Behçet’s
disease
Behçet’s disease
Henoch-Schönlein
purpura
Polyangiitis with
granulomatosis
Eosinophilic
granulomatosis
with polyangiitis
Cryoglobulinaemic
vasculitis
Microscopic
polyangiitis
Fig. 26.52 Types of vasculitis. The anatomical targets of different forms of 
vasculitis are shown.

[[p1104]]
Vasculitis    1045
26
GPA. Often, the diagnosis of AAV can be made on clinical and serolog-
ical grounds in combination with the laboratory abnormalities described 
above, but if there is any doubt the diagnosis should be conrmed by 
biopsy of the kidney, skin or lesions in the sinuses and upper airways.
Management
Management of organ-threatening AAV is with high-dose glucocorti-
coids and immunosuppressive therapy. A commonly used regimen is 
pulse intravenous methylprednisolone 0.5–1 g for 3 days coupled with 
intravenous cyclophosphamide 15 mg/kg every 2 weeks for 3 months. 
This is followed by maintenance therapy with lower-dose glucocor-
ticoids and azathioprine, MTX or MMF. Rituximab in combination with 
high-dose glucocorticoids has been shown to be equally effective as oral 
cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids at inducing remission in AAV. 
Plasmapheresis should be considered for fulminant lung disease. High 
dose glucocorticoids and MTX are an effective combination for treating 
limited AAV where there is indolent sinus, lung or skin disease. Recently 
mepolizumab, an inhibitor of IL-5, has been shown to reduce the risk of 
relapse when combined with glucocorticoids in EGPA. Patients with AAV 
must be followed on a regular and long-term basis since the condition 
has a tendency to relapse, monitoring urinalysis for blood and protein, 
plasma creatinine, FBC, ESR, CRP, lung function and PR3 or MPO anti-
body titres.
Takayasu arteritis
Takayasu arteritis affects the aorta, its major branches and occasionally 
the pulmonary arteries. The typical age at onset is 25–30 years, with an 
8 : 1 female-to-male ratio. It has a worldwide distribution, but is most 
common in Asia. It is characterised by granulomatous inammation of 
the vessel wall, leading to its occlusion or weakening. It presents with 
claudication, fever, arthralgia and weight loss. Clinical examination may 
reveal loss of pulses, bruits, hypertension and aortic incompetence. 
Investigation typically shows a raised ESR and CRP and a normocytic, 
normochromic anaemia. The pivotal investigation is CT or MRI angiog-
raphy, which reveals thickening of the vessel wall and narrowing of the 
lumen. Aortic coarctation, and aneurysmal dilatation may also occur. The 
diagnosis can also be made by 18uorodeoxyglucose PET-CT imaging, 
where there is increased tracer uptake in affected vessels. Treatment is 
with high-dose glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants, as described 
for ANCA-associated vasculitis. With successful treatment, the 5-year 
survival is 83%.
Kawasaki disease
Kawasaki disease is a vasculitis that mostly involves the coronary ves-
sels. It presents as an acute systemic disorder, usually affecting chil-
dren under 5 years. It occurs mainly in Japan and other Asian countries, 
such as China and Korea, but other ethnic groups may also be affected. 
Presentation is with fever, generalised rash (including palms and soles), 
inamed oral mucosa and conjunctival injection resembling a viral exan-
them. The cause is unknown, but is thought to be an abnormal immune 
response to an infectious trigger. A syndrome with some similarities to 
Kawasaki disease has recently been reported to be a complication of 
COVID-19 infection in children. Cardiovascular complications include 
coronary arteritis, leading to myocardial infarction, transient coronary 
dilatation, myocarditis, pericarditis, peripheral vascular insufciency and 
gangrene. Treatment is with aspirin (5 mg/kg daily for 14 days) and IVIg 
(400 mg/kg daily for 5 days). Ciclosporin (5 mg/kg/day) in combination 
with IVIg can be effective in patients with resistant disease.
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyarteritis nodosa has a peak incidence between the ages of 40 and 
50, with a male-to-female ratio of 2:1. The annual incidence is about 
2/1 000 000. Hepatitis B is an important risk factor and the incidence 
is 10 times higher in the Inuit of Alaska, in whom hepatitis B infection 
is endemic. Presentation is with fever, myalgia, arthralgia and weight 
loss, in combination with manifestations of multisystem disease. The 
most common skin lesions are palpable purpura (Fig. 26.54), ulceration, 
infarction and livedo reticularis (see Fig. 26.47). Pathological changes 
comprise necrotising inammation and vessel occlusion, and in 70% 
of patients, arteritis of the vasa nervorum leads to neuropathy, which 
is typically symmetrical and affects both sensory and motor function. 
Severe hypertension and/or renal impairment may occur due to multi-
ple renal infarctions, but glomerulonephritis is rare (in contrast to MPA). 
The diagnosis is conrmed by conventional or MR angiography, which 
shows multiple aneurysms and smooth narrowing of mesenteric, hepatic 
or renal systems, or by muscle or sural nerve biopsy, which reveals the 
histological changes described above. Treatment is with high-dose glu-
cocorticoids and cyclophosphamide, as described for ANCA-associated 
vasculitis.
Giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is a granulomatous arteritis that affects medium- 
and large-sized arteries. It is commonly associated with polymyalgia 
rheumatica (PMR), which presents with symmetrical pain and stiffness 
affecting the shoulder and pelvic girdle. There is evidence that these 
symptoms are due to an inammatory inltrate of the synovium and 
Fig. 26.53 Eye involvement in antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated 
vasculitis.
Fig. 26.54 Rash of systemic vasculitis (palpable purpura).

[[p1105]]
1046    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
tendon sheaths in the affected regions. Since many patients with GCA 
have symptoms of PMR, and some patients with PMR go on to develop 
GCA if untreated, many rheumatologists consider them to be different 
manifestations of the same underlying disorder. Both diseases are rare 
under the age of 60 years. The average age at onset is 70, with a female-
to-male ratio of about 3:1. The prevalence of GCA in people of European 
descent is about 20 per 100 000 in those over the age of 50 years, 
while PMR affect abouts 60 per 100 000. Both conditions are much less 
common (1 in 100 000) in African and Asian populations. The cause is 
unknown, but there is a strong genetic component such that GCA is 
strongly associated with genetic variation at the HLA-DRB1 locus.
Clinical features
The cardinal symptom of GCA is headache, which is often localised to 
the temporal or occipital region and may be accompanied by scalp ten-
derness. Jaw pain develops in some patients, brought on by chewing or 
talking and is referred to as jaw claudication. Visual disturbance can occur 
(most specically amaurosis) and a catastrophic presentation is with blind-
ness in one eye due to occlusion of the posterior ciliary artery. In such 
cases the optic disc may appear pale and swollen with haemorrhages, but 
these changes may take 24–36 hours to develop and the fundi may initially 
appear normal. Rarely, neurological involvement may occur, with transient 
ischaemic attacks, brainstem infarcts and hemiparesis.
In GCA, constitutional symptoms, such as weight loss, fatigue, 
malaise and night sweats, are common. With PMR, there may be stiff-
ness and painful restriction of active shoulder movements on waking. 
Sometimes patients can present with symptoms that are similar to RA. 
The affected muscles are not tender and there is no weakness or mus-
cle-wasting. Other conditions that cause PMR-like symptoms are shown 
in Box 26.66
Investigations
The typical laboratory abnormality is an elevated ESR and CRP, often 
with a normochromic, normocytic anaemia. Abnormal liver function tests 
may also occur. Very rarely, PMR and GCA can present with a normal 
ESR in the early stages of disease evolution. More objective evidence 
for GCA should be obtained whenever possible. The two most com-
monly used investigations are temporal artery biopsy and ultrasound of 
the temporal arteries. Characteristic biopsy ndings are fragmentation 
of the internal elastic lamina with necrosis of the media in combination 
with a mixed inammatory cell inltrate. The sensitivity is about 70% with 
multiple biopsies and multiple section analysis (to detect ‘skip’ lesions), 
but a negative biopsy does not exclude the diagnosis. The characteris-
tic nding on Doppler ultrasound examination is the ‘halo’ sign, where 
the thickened vessel wall shows as a dark area surrounding a positive 
Doppler signal within the vessel. The overall sensitivity is about 55% and 
specicity about 70% in routine clinical practice. A negative result does 
not exclude the diagnosis.
Management
Prednisolone should be commenced urgently in suspected GCA 
because of the risk of visual loss (Box 26.67). Response is dramatic, 
such that symptoms largely resolve within 48–72 hours of starting ther-
apy in virtually all patients. It is customary to use higher doses in GCA 
(40–60 mg prednisolone) than in PMR (15–20 mg). In both conditions, 
the glucocorticoid dose should be progressively reduced, guided by 
symptoms and ESR, with the aim of reaching a dose of 10–15 mg by 
about 8 weeks. The rate of reduction should then be slowed by 1 mg 
per month. The IL-6 inhibitor tocilizumab has been shown to reduce 
the risk of relapse following glucocorticoid dose reductions in GCA 
and is of value in patients at high risk of glucocorticoid side effects. 
The long-term efcacy of tocilizumab in GCA remains under investiga-
tion. If symptoms recur, the dose should be increased to that which 
previously controlled the symptoms and reduction attempted again in 
another few weeks. Immunosuppressive therapy with MTX or azathi-
oprine may be required as steroid-sparing agents in patients where 
it is not possible to reduce the prednisolone dose below 10 mg daily. 
Most patients need glucocorticoids for an average of 12–24 months 
and in view of this bisphosphonate therapy is often required to protect 
against osteoporosis.
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
Henoch–Schönlein purpura is a small-vessel vasculitis caused by immune 
complex deposition following an infectious trigger. It is predominantly a 
disease of children and young adults. The usual presentation is with pur-
pura over the buttocks and lower legs, accompanied by abdominal pain, 
gastrointestinal bleeding and arthralgia. Nephritis can also occur and 
may present up to 4 weeks after the onset of other symptoms. Biopsy 
of affected tissue shows a vasculitis with IgA deposits in the vessel wall. 
Henoch–Schönlein purpura is usually a self-limiting disorder that settles 
spontaneously without specic treatment. Glucocorticoids and immuno-
suppressive therapy may be required in patients with more severe dis-
ease, particularly in the presence of nephritis.
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis
This is a small-vessel vasculitis that occurs when immunoglobulins 
precipitate out in the cold. Cryoglobulins are classied into three types 
(see Box 4.16). Types II and III are associated with vasculitis. The typi-
cal presentation is with a vasculitic rash over the lower limbs, arthralgia, 
Raynaud’s phenomenon and neuropathy. The ESR and CRP are ele-
vated in active disease and C3 levels may be reduced. Some cases are 
secondary to hepatitis C infection and others are associated with other 
autoimmune diseases. Affected patients should be screened and, if pos-
itive, treated for hepatitis C. There is no consensus as to how best to 
treat cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis in the absence of an obvious trigger. 
Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive therapy are often used empiri-
cally, but their efcacy is uncertain. In severe cases, plasmapheresis can 
be considered.
26.66 Conditions that can cause ‘polymyalgic’ axial and 
proximal limb inammatory symptoms or mimic polymyalgia 
rheumatica
 Calcium pyrophosphate disease
 Spondyloarthritis
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Hyper-/hypothyroidism
 Psoriatic arthritis (enthesopathic)
 Systemic vasculitis
 Myeloma
 Inammatory myopathy (particularly inclusion body myositis)
 Lambert–Eaton syndrome
 Multiple separate lesions (cervical spondylosis, cervical radiculopathy, 
bilateral subacromial impingement, facet joint arthritis, osteoarthritis of the 
acromioclavicular joint)
26.67 Emergency management of giant cell arteritis
 Take blood for CRP, ESR and FBC
 Commence prednisolone (40–60 mg daily)
 Consider urgent ophthalmology examination in patients with visual  
symptoms
 Consider temporal artery biopsy or ultrasound
 Review within 1 week and adjust glucocorticoid doses according to clinical 
response and results of investigations
(ACPA = anti-citrullinated peptide antibody; ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CPK = creatine phosphokinase; CRP = C-reactive 
protein; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FBC = full blood count)

[[p1106]]
Diseases of bone    1047
26
Behçet’s disease
This is a vasculitis of unknown aetiology that characteristically targets 
small arteries and venules. It is rare in Western Europe but more common 
in ‘Silk Route’ countries, around the Mediterranean and in Japan, where 
there is a strong genetic association with HLA-B51.
Oral ulcers are invariably present (Fig. 26.55). Unlike aphthous ulcers, 
they are usually deep and multiple, and last for 10–30 days. Genital ulcers 
are also a common problem, occurring in 60%–80% of cases. The usual 
skin lesions are erythema nodosum or acneiform lesions, but migratory 
thrombophlebitis and vasculitis also occur. Ocular involvement is common 
and may include anterior or posterior uveitis or retinal vasculitis. Neurological 
involvement occurs in 5% and mainly involves the brainstem, although the 
meninges, hemispheres and cord can also be affected, causing pyramidal 
signs, cranial nerve lesions, brainstem symptoms or hemiparesis. Recurrent 
thromboses also occur. Renal involvement is extremely rare.
The diagnosis is primarily made on clinical grounds (Box 26.68), but 
one characteristic feature that can be of diagnostic value is the pathergy 
test, which involves pricking the skin with a needle and looking for evi-
dence of pustule development within 48 hours.
Oral and genital ulceration can be managed with a combination of 
colchicine and topical glucocorticoid preparations. Colchicine can be 
effective for erythema nodosum and arthralgia. Glucocorticoids and 
immunosuppressants such as azathioprine are indicated for uveitis, 
recurrent venous thrombosis and neurological disease. Anti-TNF-α ther-
apy and/or thalidomide may be required in refractory patients.
Relapsing polychondritis
Relapsing polychondritis is a rare inammatory disease of cartilage that 
classically presents with acute pain and swelling of one or both ear pinnae, 
sparing the lower non-cartilaginous portion. Around 30% of patients 
have coexisting autoimmune or connective tissue disease. Involvement 
of tracheobronchial cartilage may lead to a hoarseness, cough, stridor or 
expiratory wheeze. Other manifestations include collapse of the bridge of 
the nose, scleritis, hearing loss and cardiac valve dysfunction. Cartilage 
biopsy shows an inammatory inltrate in the perichondrium. Both ESR 
and CRP are raised in active disease. Pulmonary function tests, including 
ow–volume loops, should be performed to assess the degree of laryn-
gotracheal disease, since this is an important cause of mortality. Mild dis-
ease usually responds to low-dose glucocorticoids or NSAIDs, whereas 
major tracheobronchial involvement requires high-dose glucocorticoids 
and immunosuppressants, as described for SLE.
IgG4 disease
This is a rare condition (1–3/100 000) characterised by an inammatory 
inltrate of affected tissues in the early stages followed by brotic dam-
age as the disease progresses. The disease may present in many ways, 
including with swelling of the lacrimal and salivary glands (mimicking 
Sjögren syndrome) and proptosis, sinusitis, hearing loss, interstitial lung 
disease and cranial nerve lesions (mimicking GPA). Inammatory disease 
of the great vessels may occur while abdominal pain may result from 
inltration of the pancreas or retroperitoneum. Thyroid involvement may 
manifest as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Reidel’s thyroiditis. The diagnosis 
may be suspected by the presence of an lymphocytic inltrate on tissue 
biopsy, which is rich in IgG4-secreting plasma cells, and raised serum 
IgG4. Management is with glucocorticoids (prednisolone 30–40 mg/
day with progressive dose reduction guided by symptoms, inammatory 
markers and IgG4 levels) and an immunosuppressive such as MTX, aza-
thioprine or MMF. Intravenous rituximab has also been used successfully 
using a similar regimen as in RA.
Diseases of bone
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is the most common bone disease. It has been esti-
mated that more than 8.9 million fractures occur annually worldwide 
and most of these occur in patients with osteopenia or osteoporosis. 
About one-third of all women and one-fth of men aged 50 and above 
suffer fractures at some point in life. The burden of osteoporosis-related 
fractures is predicted to increase by two- to threefold by 2050 on a 
worldwide basis, due to ageing of the population. Osteoporosis is under-
diagnosed and under-treated throughout Asia, particularly in rural areas, 
due to low provision of technologies like DXA, which are required to 
make the diagnosis. Osteoporosis-related fractures can affect any bone, 
but common sites are the forearm (Colles’ fracture), spine (vertebral frac-
tures), humerus and hip. All of these fractures become more common 
with increasing age (Fig. 26.56). Since only about one-third of vertebral 
fractures come to medical attention (clinical vertebral fractures), the true 
number of patients with vertebral fracture is likely to be much greater 
than that shown in Figure 26.56. Hip fractures are the most serious com-
plication of osteoporosis and have an immediate mortality of about 12% 
and a continued increase in mortality of about 20% when compared with 
age-matched controls. Treatment of hip fracture accounts for the major-
ity of the health-care costs associated with osteoporosis.
Pathophysiology
The dening feature of osteoporosis is reduced bone density, which 
causes micro-architectural deterioration of bone tissue and leads to 
an increased risk of fracture, in response to minor trauma. The risk of 
fracture increases markedly with age in both genders (see Fig. 26.56). 
This is mostly attributable to an increased risk of falling with age, but is 
also due in part to an age-related decline in bone density, especially in 
Fig. 26.55 Oral ulceration in Behçet’s disease.
26.68 Criteria for the diagnosis of Behçet’s disease
Recurrent oral ulceration: minor aphthous, major aphthous or herpetiform 
ulceration at least three times in 12 months plus two of the following:
 Recurrent genital ulceration
 Eye lesions: anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis, cells in vitreous on slit-lamp 
examination, retinal vasculitis
 Skin lesions: erythema nodosum, pseudofolliculitis, papulopustular lesions, 
acneiform nodules
 Positive pathergy test

[[p1107]]
1048    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
women (Fig. 26.57). Bone mass increases during growth to reach a peak 
between the ages of 20 and about 45 years, but falls thereafter in both 
genders with an accelerated phase of bone loss after the menopause 
in women due to oestrogen deciency. The loss of bone with ageing 
is caused by an imbalance in the bone remodelling cycle, whereby the 
amount of new bone formed by osteoblasts cannot keep pace with the 
amount that is removed by osteoclasts (see Fig. 26.2). The reduction in 
bone formation is thought to be partly due to differentiation of bone mar-
row stem cells to adipocytes, as opposed to osteoblasts. Osteoporosis 
sometimes occurs because of failure to attain adequate levels of peak 
bone mass, but is more commonly due to age-related bone loss.
Osteoporosis is a complex disease that can occur in association with 
a wide variety of risk factors, as summarised in Box 26.69. Genetic fac-
tors account for up to 80% of variation in bone density and genome-wide 
association studies have shown that susceptibility is determined in part 
by a large number of common variants, some of which are involved in the 
RANK and Wnt signalling pathways (see Fig. 26.3). Rarely, osteoporo-
sis may be caused by mutations in single genes. Environmental factors, 
such as exercise and calcium intake during growth and adolescence, 
F
A
B
C
D
E
40
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Fractures 10 000 person-years
45 50 55 60
Age
Women
65 70 75 80 85
Hip
Wrist
Humerus
Clinical vertebral
85
40
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Fractures 10 000 person-years
45 50 55 60
Age
Men
65 70 75 80
Hip
Wrist
Humerus
Clinical vertebral
Fig. 26.56 Fractures associated with osteoporosis. 
changing incidence of each of these fractures with age in women and men, respectively. From Curtis EM, van der Velde R, Moon RJ, et al. Epidemiology of fractures in the 
United Kingdom, 1988–2012: variation with age, sex, geography, ethnicity and socioeconomic status. Bone 2016; 87:19–26.
Normal
+1.0
0
–1.0
–2.0
–3.0
0
20
40
Age (years)
60
80
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
Bone density T-score
Fig. 26.57 Changes in bone mass with age. Changes in men (blue line) and 
women (red line).
26.69 Risk factors for osteoporosis
Genetics
 Single-gene disorders:
 Polygenic inheritance:
 LRP5 mutations
 Common variants in many 
pathways
 Oestrogen receptor mutations
Endocrine disease
 Hypogonadism
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Hyperthyroidism
 Cushing’s syndrome
Inammatory disease
 Inammatory bowel disease
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Ankylosing spondylitis
Drugs
 Glucocorticoids
 Aromatase inhibitors
 Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone  
(GnRH) agonists
 Thiazolidinediones
 Anticonvulsants
 Levothyroxine over-replacement
 Alcohol intake > 3 U/day
 Heparin
Gastrointestinal disease
 Malabsorption
 Chronic liver disease
Lung disease
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Cystic brosis
Miscellaneous
 Myeloma
 Systemic mastocytosis
 Homocystinuria
 Immobilisation
 Anorexia nervosa*
 Low body mass index
 Highly trained athletes*
 Heavy smoking
 HIV infection
 Autoantibodies to 
osteoprotegerin (OPG)
 Gaucher’s disease
*Hypogonadism also plays a role in osteoporosis associated with these conditions.

[[p1108]]
Diseases of bone    1049
26
are important in maximising peak bone mass and in regulating rates of 
post-menopausal bone loss. Smoking has a detrimental effect on BMD 
and is associated with an increased fracture risk, partly because female 
smokers have an earlier menopause than non-smokers. Heavy alcohol 
intake is a recognised cause of osteoporosis and fractures, but moderate 
intake does not substantially alter risk.
Idiopathic osteoporosis
The term idiopathic osteoporosis is frequently used to describe the 
occurrence of osteoporosis in patients with no specic underlying cause. 
It is slightly misleading, since most, if not all, patients in this category 
have age-related osteoporosis or osteoporosis associated with inher-
itance of genetic variants that regulate bone density.
Secondary osteoporosis
Osteoporosis can occur in association with a variety of diseases and 
drug treatments, and in many cases more than one disease or risk 
factor is operative. The most important causes are summarised in 
Box 26.69. Secondary causes of osteoporosis are particularly common 
in men, occurring in up to 50% of patients. Hypogonadism, glucocorti-
coid use (see below) and alcohol excess are the most important predis-
posing factors.
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis is a common problem in patients 
with systemic inammatory and chronic pulmonary diseases. The risk 
of osteoporosis is related to dose and duration of glucocorticoid ther-
apy and increases substantially in patients who have taken more than 
7.5mg of prednisolone daily for more than 3 months (or an equivalent 
dose of another glucocorticoid). Inhaled glucocorticoids can reduce 
bone density, but the risk of osteoporosis is much lower than with sys-
temic therapy. Glucocorticoids mainly cause osteoporosis by inhibiting 
bone formation and causing apoptosis of osteoblasts and osteocytes. 
Other contributory mechanisms include inhibition of intestinal calcium 
absorption, increased renal excretion of calcium and secondary hyper-
parathyroidism, which stimulates osteoclastic bone resorption.
Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis
This is a rare form of osteoporosis that typically presents with back pain 
and multiple vertebral fractures usually during the third trimester or puer-
perium. It is discussed in more detail in Chapter 32.
Clinical features
Osteoporosis does not cause symptoms until a fracture occurs. Non-
vertebral fractures are almost always caused by a traumatic event, most 
usually a simple fall. The term ‘fragility fracture’ is used to describe a 
fracture that occurs as the result of a fall from standing height or less. 
These are typical of osteoporosis. It is important to remember that the 
majority of people who suffer a fragility fracture do not have osteopo-
rosis; some have normal BMD, but most have osteopenia (Fig. 26.58). 
The clinical signs of fracture are pain, local tenderness and deformity. 
In hip fracture, the patient is (with rare exceptions) unable to weight-
bear and has a shortened and externally rotated limb on the affected 
side. The presentation of vertebral fractures is variable. Some patients 
present with acute severe back pain. This may radiate to the anterior 
chest or abdominal wall and be mistaken for a myocardial infarction, 
aortic dissection or intra-abdominal pathology. In others the presentation 
is with height loss and kyphosis in the absence of pain or with chronic 
back pain. Osteoporosis may be suspected by the nding of radiological 
osteopenia or vertebral deformities on imaging that has been performed 
for other reasons.
Investigations
The most important investigation is DXA (see Fig. 26.9). This should be 
considered in patients aged over 50 who have already suffered a fragility 
fracture, and in those with clinical risk factors (Box 26.70) when a fracture 
risk assessment tool has returned an elevated value. The risk at which 
DXA should be performed remains a subject of debate, but a 10-year risk 
of over 10% has been suggested, since there is evidence of benet from 
treatment at this level. Other indications for DXA are in patients under 
50 years who have very strong risk factors, such as premature meno-
pause or high-dose glucocorticoids. Figure 26.59 provides a suggested 
algorithm for the investigation of patients with suspected osteoporosis.
+1 to +0.5
> +1
+0.5 to 0
 0 to -0.5
-0.5 to -1.0
-1.0 to -1.5
-1.5 to -2.0
-2.0 to -2.5
-2.5 to -3.0
-3.0 to -3.5
< -3.5
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
50
100
150
Number of fractures
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Bone density T-score
18%
Normal BMD
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
50%
32%
Relative risk of fracture
A
B
Fig. 26.58 Relation between bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures. 
higher in people with a T-score of < −3.5 compared with those with normal BMD. In absolute terms, however, more fractures occur in people with normal BMD or osteopenia 
26.70 Indications for dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
 Low-trauma fracture, age > 50years
 Clinical risk factors and 10-year fracture risk > 10%
 Glucocorticoid therapy (> 7.5 mg prednisolone daily for > 3 months)
 Baseline and follow-up assessment of response of osteoporosis to treatment
 Assessment of progression of osteopenia to osteoporosis
 Age < 50 years and strong risk factors for osteoporosis

[[p1109]]
1050    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Transition to antiresorptive
on completion of therapy
Hip fracture
Other fracture
Fracture risk assessment
Lifestyle advice
Reassess if risk
profile changes
Lifestyle advice
Reassess if risk
profile changes
Zoledronic acid
18 monthly
Zoledronic acid
annually
Give 3 infusions
and review after
5 years
Continue for 6
years and review
Continue for 5
years and review
Continue for 5
years and review
10-year risk
≥10%
Severe
osteoporosis
spine?2
Decision to
stop denosumab
therapy?
Parenteral
bisphosphonate
appropriate?
High risk of hip
or non-vertebral
fracture?
Adverse effects,
poor response or
patient preference
for parenteral
therapy?
Suitable
for oral
therapy?
Fragility fracture
age ≥ 50
Strong clinical risk
factors age < 50
Clinical risk
factors age ≥ 50
Secondary fracture prevention
Primary fracture prevention
Spine fracture
Romosozumab
Denosumab
Teriparatide
DXA
scan1
Osteopenia
T= -1.0 to -2.5
Osteoporosis
T≤ -2.5
Alendronate
Risedronate
Normal
T> -1.0
DXA
scan
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Age ≥ 65?
Yes
No
No
No
Transition to
bisphosphonates
Continue to 10
years and review
Yes
No
DXA
scan1
Fig. 26.59 Algorithm for the diagnosis and management of osteoporosis. 1DXA scan advisable to obtain baseline BMD but not necessary to initiate treatment. 2One 
severe or two or more moderate vertebral fractures on X-ray, and T-score < −1.5 at any site or spine T score < −4.0. Adapted from SIGN 142. www.sign/ac/uk

[[p1110]]
Diseases of bone    1051
26
A history should be taken to identify any predisposing causes, such as 
early menopause, excessive alcohol intake, smoking and glucocorticoid 
therapy. Signs of endocrine disease, neoplasia and inammatory dis-
ease should be sought on clinical examination. A falls history should be 
taken and screening tests performed to assess the risk of falls (p. 1297). 
Screening for secondary causes of osteoporosis should be performed, 
as summarised in Box 26.71
Management
The aim of treatment is to reduce the risk of fracture and this can be 
achieved by a combination of approaches.
Non-pharmacological interventions
Advice on smoking cessation, moderation of alcohol intake, ade-
quate dietary calcium intake and exercise should be given. Those 
with recurrent falls or unsteadiness on a ‘get up and go’ test (p. 1297) 
should be referred to a multidisciplinary falls-prevention team. Hip 
protectors can reduce the risk of hip fracture in selected patients, but 
adherence is often poor.
Pharmacological interventions
Several drug treatments are now available to reduce the risk of fracture in 
osteoporosis. The dosages, mode of administration and indications are 
summarised in Box 26.72. More detail on the individual drugs is provided 
below.
Bisphosphonates Bisphosphonates are the rst-line treatment for osteo-
porosis. These are a class of drugs with a central core of P-C-P atoms, 
to which various side-chains are attached. Following administration, they 
target bone surfaces and are ingested by osteoclasts during the process 
of bone resorption. The bisphosphonate is released within the osteo-
clast, causing cell death and thereby bone resorption. This in turn causes 
an increase in bone density, but this is principally due to increased min-
eralisation of bone, rather than an increase in bone mass (Fig. 26.60). 
Bisphosphonates reduce the risk of fractures in osteoporosis, but do not 
completely prevent the occurrence of fractures.
Oral bisphosphonates are typically given for a period of 5 years, at 
which point the need for continued therapy should be evaluated, with a 
repeat DXA if possible. If patients have remained free of fractures after 5 
years and if BMD levels have increased and no longer remain in the osteo-
porotic range, it is usual to instigate a 5-year spell off therapy. Treatment 
may be continued for up to 10 years in patients whose BMD levels 
remain in the osteoporotic range after 5 years and in those with pre-ex-
isting vertebral fractures. A change in treatment should be considered in 
patients who have lost BMD despite oral bisphosphonates (more than 
4% at any site). Most commonly, this will be a switch to parenteral zole-
dronic acid which is often given by annual infusion of 5 mg for 3 consecu-
tive years followed by a spell of 2 years without treatment. Infusions every 
18 months over a spell of 6 years have also been found to be effective 
for fracture prevention.
Oral bisphosphonates are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal 
tract and should be taken on an empty stomach with plain water; no 
26.71 Investigations to consider in suspected osteoporosis
Investigation
Secondary cause of osteoporosis
Urea, creatinine and electrolytes
Chronic kidney disease
Liver function tests and albumin
Chronic liver disease
Full blood count, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate
Inammatory disease
Myeloma
Tissue transglutaminase  
antibodies
Coeliac disease
Serum calcium and phosphate, 
25(OH)D, PTH
Primary and secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D  
deciency. Normocalcaemic PHPT 
exists with reference range calcium
Thyroid function tests
Hyperthyroidism
Serum protein electrophoresis
Myeloma
Monoclonal gammopathy of 
uncertain signicance
Urine Bence Jones protein
Myeloma
Testosterone and gonadotrophins
Male hypogonadism
Oestrogen and gonadotrophins
Female hypogonadism1
Bone biopsy
Unexplained early-onset 
osteoporosis2
1Only required for unexplained osteoporosis in young women who are amenorrhoeic. 2Seldom 
required.
26.72  Drug treatments for osteoporosis
Drug
Regimen
Postmenopausal 
osteoporosis
Glucocorticoid  
osteoporosis
Male osteoporosis
Alendronic acid
70 mg/week orally
✓
✓
✓
Risedronate
35 mg/week orally
✓
✓
✓
Ibandronate
150 mg/monthly orally
3 mg/3-monthly IV
✓
✓
✓
Zoledronic acid
5 mg annually IV
✓
✓
✓
Denosumab
60 mg 6-monthly SC
✓
✓
✓
Calcium/vitamin D
Calcium 500–1000 mg daily
Vitamin D 400–800 IU orally
✓
✓
✓
Teriparatide
20 µg/day SC
✓
✓
✓
Abaloparatide
80 µg/day SC
✓
–
–
Romosozumab
210 mg/month SC
✓
Hormone replacement therapy
Various preparations
✓
–
–
Raloxifene
60 mg/day orally
✓
–
–
Tibolone
1.25 mg/day orally
✓
–
–
(IV = intravenous; SC = subcutaneous)
(25(OH)D = 25 hydroxy-vitamin D; PTH = parathyroid hormone)

[[p1111]]
1052    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
food should be eaten for 30–45 minutes after administration. They are 
contraindicated in patients with oesophageal stricture or achalasia, since 
tablets may stick in the oesophagus, causing ulceration and perfora-
tion. Upper gastrointestinal upset occurs in about 5% of cases. Oral bis-
phosphonates can be used in patients with gastro-oesophageal reux 
disease, but may cause worsening of symptoms. The most common 
adverse effect with intravenous bisphosphonates is a transient inuen-
za-like illness with fever, malaise, anorexia and generalised aches, which 
occurs 24–48 hours after administration. This is self-limiting, but can be 
treated with paracetamol or NSAIDs if necessary. It predominantly occurs 
after the rst exposure and tolerance develops thereafter. Other adverse 
effects are shown in Box 26.73. Osteonecrosis of the jaw is character-
ised by the presence of necrotic bone in the mandible or maxilla, typically 
occurring after tooth extraction when the socket fails to heal. This com-
plication is very rare in osteoporosis, but patients receiving bisphospho-
nates should be advised to pay attention to good oral hygiene. There is 
no evidence that temporarily stopping bisphosphonates for tooth extrac-
tion alters the risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw. Atypical subtrochanteric 
fractures have been described in patients who have received long-term 
bisphosphonates and appear to be the result of over-suppression of nor-
mal bone remodelling. In the vast majority, the benets of bisphospho-
nate therapy far outweigh the risks, but it is important for treatment to be 
targeted to patients with low BMD who are most likely to benet.
Denosumab Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody that inhibits bone 
resorption by neutralising the effects of RANKL (see Fig. 26.2). It is 
administered by subcutaneous injection of 60 mg every 6 months in the 
treatment of osteoporosis and has similar efcacy to zoledronic acid. 
One potential adverse effect is hypocalcaemia, but this can be mitigated 
by calcium and vitamin D supplements. Denosumab may rarely cause 
osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical subtrochanteric fractures. When 
denosumab is stopped, there is a rebound increase in bone turnover that 
can be associated with an increased risk of vertebral fracture and even 
hypercalcaemia. Because of this denosumab needs to be continued on 
a long-term basis; if it has to be stopped for any reason, bisphosphonate 
therapy should be given to inhibit the rebound increase in bone turnover.
Calcium and vitamin D Combined calcium and vitamin D supplements 
have limited efcacy in the prevention of osteoporotic fractures when 
given alone, but are widely used as an adjunct to other treatments. A 
typical daily dosage is 1000 mg calcium and 800 IU vitamin D. Calcium 
and vitamin D supplements have efcacy in preventing fragility fractures 
in old age or in institutionalised patients, who are at high risk of deciency 
(Box 26.74). Vitamin D supplements alone do not prevent fractures in 
osteoporosis, but there is evidence that the response to bisphospho-
nates is blunted in patients with vitamin D deciency. If the patient’s 
dietary calcium is sufcient, stand-alone vitamin D supplements (800 IU 
daily) can be prescribed as an adjunct to anti-osteoporosis therapies. 
Calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D3), the active metabolite of vitamin D, is licensed 
for treatment of osteoporosis but it is seldom used because the data on 
fracture prevention are less robust than for other agents.
Teriparatide Teriparatide (TPTD) is the 1-34 fragment of human PTH. It 
is an effective treatment for osteoporosis, which works by stimulating 
new bone formation. Although TPTD also stimulates bone resorption, the 
increase in bone formation is greater, resulting in increased bone density, 
particularly at sites rich in trabecular bone such as the spine. It is given 
by a self-administered subcutaneous injection in a dose of 20 µg daily for 
2 years. At the end of this period, bisphosphonate therapy or another 
inhibitor of bone resorption should be administered to maintain the 
increase in BMD. Oral bisphosphonates and TPTD should not be given 
in combination, however, since the bisphosphonate blunts the anabolic 
effect. The efcacy of TPTD for prevention of non-vertebral fractures 
is similar to that of bisphosphonates, but it is superior to oral bisphos-
phonates in preventing vertebral fractures. The most common adverse 
effects are headache, muscle cramps and dizziness. Mild hypercalcae-
mia may occur, but it is usually asymptomatic and does not require dis-
continuation of treatment. Monitoring of serum calcium is not required 
during TPTD treatment.
Abaloparatide Abaloparatide is the 1-34 fragment of PTH-related protein 
which has effects similar to those of TPTD. It is given as a self-admin-
istered injection of 80 μg daily for 18 months. At the end of this period 
an inhibitor of bone resorption should be given to maintain the increase 
in bone mass. Efcacy has been demonstrated for the prevention of 
vertebral fractures.
Bisphosphonate
given orally or
intravenously
Bisphosphonate
binds avidly to
bone surface
Bisphosphonate
released within
osteoclast, causing
cell death
Osteoclast inhibition
increases bone density
and mineralisation
Osteoclasts resorb
bone containing
bisphosphonate
Fig. 26.60 Mechanism of action of bisphosphonates.
26.73 Adverse effects of bisphosphonates
Common
 Upper gastrointestinal intolerance (oral)
 Acute phase response (intravenous)
Less common
 Atrial brillation (intravenous zoledronic acid)
 Hypocalcaemia (intravenous bisphosphonates)
 Atypical subtrochanteric fractures
Rare
 Uveitis
 Osteonecrosis of the jaw
 Oesophageal ulceration
26.74 Osteoporosis in old age
 Bone loss: due to increased bone turnover, with an age-related defect switch 
in differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells to form adipocytes as opposed to 
osteoblasts.
 Fractures due to osteoporosis: common cause of morbidity and mortality, 
although fracture healing is not delayed by age.
 Recurrent fractures: those who suffer a fragility fracture are at increased risk 
of further fracture, so should be investigated for osteoporosis and treated if this 
is conrmed.
 Falls: risk factors for falls (such as visual and neuromuscular impairments) 
are independent risk factors for hip fracture in older people, so intervention to 
prevent falls is as important as treatment of osteoporosis.
 Intravenous zoledronic acid: reduces mortality and subsequent fracture in 
selected older patients with hip fractures.
 Calcium and vitamin D: reduce the risk of fractures in those who are 
housebound or living in care homes.

[[p1112]]
Diseases of bone    1053
26
Romosozumab This is a neutralising antibody to sclerostin, which is pro-
duced by osteocytes and acts to inhibit bone formation (see Fig. 26.3). 
Romosozumab is a highly effective treatment for osteoporosis and 
works by inhibiting bone resorption and stimulating bone formation. It 
is indicated for the treatment of severe osteoporosis, where it is given 
by self-administered subcutaneous injection 210 mg once a month for 
12 months. Following completion of treatment, an inhibitor of bone 
resorption should be given to maintain the increase in bone density. 
Romosozumab is signicantly more effective than oral alendronic acid at 
preventing fractures of all types and it is one of the most effective treat-
ments for osteoporosis currently available. Adverse effects are uncom-
mon, although a slight excess of cardiovascular events was observed in 
some clinical trials and because of that it is contraindicated in patients 
with a previous history of myocardial infarction or stroke.
Hormone replacement therapy Cyclical HRT with oestrogen and pro-
gestogen prevents post-menopausal bone loss and reduces the risk 
of vertebral and non-vertebral fractures in post-menopausal women. 
It is primarily indicated for the prevention of osteoporosis in women 
with an early menopause and for treatment of women with osteopo-
rosis in their early fties who have troublesome menopausal symp-
toms. It is not recommended above the age of 60 because of an 
increased risk of breast cancer, cardiovascular disease and venous 
thromboembolism.
Raloxifene Raloxifene is a selective oestrogen receptor modulator 
(SERM) that acts as a partial agonist at oestrogen receptors in bone 
and liver, but as an antagonist in breast and endometrium. It is effec-
tive in reducing the risk of vertebral fractures, but does not inuence 
the risk of non-vertebral fracture and is seldom used. Adverse effects 
include muscle cramps, worsening of hot ushes and an increased risk 
of venous thromboembolism. Bazedoxifene is a related SERM that has 
similar effects to raloxifene.
Tibolone
Tibolone has partial agonist activity at oestrogen, progestogen and andro-
gen receptors. It has been shown to prevent vertebral and non-vertebral 
fractures in post-menopausal osteoporosis. Treatment is associated with a 
slightly increased risk of stroke, but a reduced risk of breast cancer.
Surgery
Orthopaedic surgery with internal xation is frequently required to reduce 
and stabilise osteoporotic fractures. Patients with intracapsular fracture 
of the femoral neck generally need hemi-arthroplasty or total hip replace-
ment in view of the high risk of osteonecrosis.
Vertebroplasty is sometimes used in the treatment of painful vertebral 
compression fractures. It involves injecting methyl methacrylate (MMA) 
into the affected vertebral body under sedation and local anaesthesia. 
Randomised trials have not shown convincing evidence of benet as 
compared with a sham procedure. Kyphoplasty is used under similar 
circumstances, but in this case a needle is introduced into the affected 
vertebral body and a balloon is inated, which is then lled with MMA. It 
has similar efcacy to vertebroplasty. Serious adverse effects may occur 
with both procedures, including spinal cord compression due to leakage 
of MMA and fat embolism.
Osteomalacia, rickets and vitamin D deciency
Osteomalacia and rickets are characterised by defective mineralisation of 
bone. The most common cause is vitamin D deciency, but both condi-
tions can also occur as the result of inherited defects in renal phosphate 
excretion, inherited defects in the vitamin D receptor and in the pathways 
responsible for vitamin D activation. Other causes are summarised in 
Box 26.75 and are discussed in more detail below. The term osteomala-
cia refers to the syndrome when it occurs in adults; rickets is the equiv-
alent in children.
26.75  Causes of osteomalacia and rickets
Cause
Predisposing factor
Mechanism
Vitamin D deciency
Classical
Lack of sunlight exposure and poor diet
Reduced cholecalciferol synthesis in the skin/low 
levels of vitamin D in the diet
Gastrointestinal disease
Malabsorption
Malabsorption of dietary vitamin D and calcium
Failure of 1,25 vitamin D synthesis
Chronic renal failure
Hyperphosphataemia and kidney damage
Impaired conversion of 25(OH)D3 to 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D-resistant rickets type I (autosomal 
recessive)
Loss-of-function mutations in renal 25(OH)D 
1α-hydroxylase enzyme
Impaired conversion of 25(OH)D3 to 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D receptor defects
Vitamin D-resistant rickets type II (autosomal 
recessive)
Loss-of-function mutations in vitamin D receptor
Impaired response to 1,25(OH)2D3
Defects in phosphate and pyrophosphate metabolism
Hypophosphataemic rickets (X-linked dominant)
Mutations in PHEX
Increased FGF23 production (mechanism unclear)
Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets
Mutation in FGF23
Mutant FGF23 is resistant to degradation
Autosomal recessive hypophosphataemic rickets
Mutations in DMP1
Increased production of FGF23. Local deciency of 
DMP1 inhibits mineralisation
Tumour-induced hypophosphataemic osteomalacia
Ectopic production of FGF23 by tumour
Over-production of FGF23
Hypophosphatasia
Mutations in ALPL, which encodes alkaline 
phosphatase
Inhibition of bone mineralisation due to accumulation 
of pyrophosphate in bone
Iatrogenic and other causes
Bisphosphonate therapy
High-dose etidronate/pamidronate
Drug-induced impairment of mineralisation
Aluminium
Use of aluminium-containing phosphate binders or 
aluminium in dialysis uid
Aluminium-induced impairment of mineralisation
Fluoride
High uoride in water
Inhibition of mineralisation by uoride
(FGF23 = broblast growth factor 23)

[[p1113]]
1054    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Vitamin D deciency
Vitamin D deciency is a biochemical diagnosis, which is dened to 
be present when serum 25(OH)D concentrations are below 25 nmol/L 
(10 ng/mL). People with vitamin D levels in the range 25–50 nmol/L 
(10–20 ng/mL) are said to have vitamin D insufciency, whereas those 
with 25(OH)D levels above 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) are classied as having 
normal vitamin D status. The likelihood of developing vitamin D deciency 
is strongly related to sunlight exposure. It is common in northern lati-
tudes (or southern latitudes in the southern hemisphere) and shows sea-
sonal variation. Vitamin D deciency is more common in the winter and 
spring and less common in summer and autumn (for a UK example, see 
Fig. 26.61). People with dark skin and those who wear facial coverings 
are more prone to developing vitamin D deciency.
Pathogenesis
The source of vitamin D and pathways involved in regulating its metab-
olism are shown in Figure 26.62. In normal individuals, vitamin D (also 
known as cholecalciferol) comes from two sources: about 70% is made 
in the skin, where 7-dehydrocholesterol is converted to cholecalciferol 
under the inuence of ultraviolet light, whereas the remaining 30% is 
derived from the diet. The main dietary sources are oily sh and meat, 
although bread and dairy products are fortied with vitamin D in some 
countries. On entering the circulation, vitamin D is hydroxylated in the liver 
to form 25(OH)-vitamin D and this is further hydroxylated in the kidney 
to form 1,25(OH)2D, the biologically active metabolite. The 1,25(OH)2D 
primarily acts on the gut to increase intestinal calcium absorption, but 
also acts on the skeleton to stimulate bone remodelling. Synthesis of 
1,25(OH)2D is regulated by a negative feedback loop orchestrated by 
the parathyroid glands. When vitamin D levels fall – as the result of lower 
sunlight exposure or dietary lack – production of 1,25(OH)2D is reduced, 
causing a reduction in calcium absorption from the gut. This causes a 
transient fall in serum calcium, which is detected by calcium-sensing 
receptors on the parathyroid chief cells; this increases PTH secretion, 
which restores calcium levels to normal. Vitamin D deciency is, there-
fore, usually characterised by a low level of 25(OH)D and a raised level of 
PTH. Sometimes, low 25(OH)D levels may be observed in the presence 
of a normal PTH concentration. This is of uncertain clinical signicance 
and can be due to variations in levels of vitamin D-binding protein. Serum 
concentrations of vitamin D are under genetic control and are associated 
with variants close to the GC gene, which encodes vitamin D-binding 
0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
25(OH)D (nmol/L)
SW England
NE Scotland
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Spring
Fig. 26.61 Seasonal changes in vitamin D concentrations. (To convert nmol/L 
to ng/mL, multiply by 2.5.) Adapted from McDonald HM, Mavroeidi A, Fraser WD, 
et al. Sunlight and dietary contributions to the seasonal vitamin D status of cohorts 
of healthy postmenopausal women living at northerly latitudes: a major cause for 
concern? Osteoporosis Int 2011; 22:2461–2472.
Liver
Kidney
Parathyroids
Gut
Sunlight
7-DHC
1,25(OH2)D
(active)
Calcium
absorption↑
Bone
resorption↑
-ve feedback
Renal tubules
24,25(OH2)D
(inactive)
Serum
calcium↑
Serum
phosphate↓
CYP2R1
Vitamin D
Cholesterol
UVB
DCHR7
PTH
Calcium-sensing
receptor
PTH
secretory
granules
Parathyroid
chief cell
–ve
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Bone
CYP27B1
CYP24A1
25(OH)D
(inactive)
PTH
Fig. 26.62 Vitamin D metabolism. Vitamin D is produced in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) by ultraviolet B (UVB) light. The 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase 
enzyme, which is encoded by the DHCR7 gene, opposes the effect of UVB by converting 7-DHC to cholesterol. The vitamin D then undergoes hydroxylation steps in the liver and 
kidney to form the active metabolite 1,25(OH)2D, which regulates calcium homeostasis by stimulating calcium absorption from the diet and bone resorption. See text for details. 
(PTH = parathyroid hormone)

[[p1114]]
Diseases of bone    1055
26
protein; the DHCR7 gene, which encodes 7-dehydrocholesterol reduc-
tase, responsible for catalysing conversion of 7-DHC to cholesterol; the 
CYP2R1 gene, which encodes vitamin D-25-hydroxylase, responsible for 
hydroxylation of vitamin D in the liver; and the CYP24A1 gene, which 
encodes vitamin D-24-hydroxylase, responsible for converting 25(OH)D 
to the inactive metabolite 24,25(OH)2D.
Clinical features
Low circulating levels of vitamin D do not cause symptoms unless the 
vitamin D deciency is severe, so the diagnosis of vitamin D deciency 
is primarily made as the result of biochemical testing. A wide range of 
diseases, including most types of cancer, diabetes, multiple sclerosis 
and chronic inammatory diseases have been associated with vitamin 
D deciency. Current evidence suggests that these are not causal asso-
ciations, but explained by confounding whereby people who are unwell 
have reduced sunlight exposure and poor diet. If vitamin D deciency 
is prolonged and severe, then osteomalacia and rickets may occur, as 
discussed below.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be made by measurement of serum 25(OH)D. In 
patients with low 25(OH)D, measurements of PTH, serum calcium, phos-
phate and ALP should also be considered. Low levels of 25(OH)D in the 
absence of other abnormalities is unlikely to be of any clinical signicance 
and in many cases is likely to be due to low levels of vitamin D-binding 
protein, the levels of which are genetically determined. If low 25(OH)D 
levels are combined with raised levels of PTH, this is of more signicance 
since it indicates secondary hyperparathyroidism, which if untreated and 
prolonged, may impair bone health and eventually lead to osteomalacia 
or rickets.
Management
Vitamin D supplements should be considered in patients who have low 
25(OH)D levels and raised levels of PTH. In most young adults, greater 
exposure to UV light and cholecalciferol in a dose of 800 IU daily should 
be sufcient to correct the deciency. Short courses of high-strength vita-
min D can also be used, such as 20 000 IU once weekly for 4–6 weeks. 
The benet of treating low 25(OH)D values in the absence of other abnor-
malities of calcium biochemistry is uncertain. There is some evidence 
that response to bisphosphonate treatment of osteoporosis is impaired 
in patients with vitamin D deciency and this is an indication for sup-
plements. Similarly, patients who are receiving intravenous bisphospho-
nates and denosumab for osteoporosis should have vitamin D deciency 
corrected by supplementation to reduce the risk of hypocalcaemia.
Osteomalacia and rickets
Severe and prolonged vitamin D deciency can result in the occur-
rence of osteomalacia in adults and rickets in children. Improvements 
in nutrition mean that these are now relatively uncommon conditions in 
high-income countries, but they remain prevalent in older housebound 
individuals, who may have a poor diet and limited sunlight exposure, in 
women who wear facial coverings such as the niqab or burka, and in 
people with malabsorption.
Pathogenesis
Osteomalacia and rickets occur as the result of chronic secondary hyper-
parathyroidism, which invariably accompanies severe and long-standing 
vitamin D deciency. The sustained elevation in PTH levels maintains nor-
mal levels of serum calcium by increasing bone resorption, which even-
tually causes progressive demineralisation of the skeleton. Phosphate 
released during the process of bone resorption is lost through increased 
renal excretion, resulting in hypophosphataemia. The raised levels of 
PTH stimulate osteoblast activity and cause new bone formation, but 
the matrix is not mineralised properly because of deciency of calcium 
and phosphate. The under-mineralised bone is soft, mechanically weak 
and subject to fractures, particularly stress fractures. Normal levels of 
serum calcium tend to be maintained until a very advanced stage, when 
hypocalcaemia may occur.
Clinical features
Vitamin D deciency in children causes delayed development, muscle 
hypotonia, craniotabes (small unossied areas in membranous bones of 
the skull that yield to nger pressure with a cracking feeling), bossing of 
the frontal and parietal bones and delayed anterior fontanelle closure, 
enlargement of epiphyses at the lower end of the radius and swelling of 
the rib costochondral junctions (‘rickety rosary’). Osteomalacia in adults 
can present with fractures and low BMD, mimicking osteoporosis. Other 
symptoms include bone pain and general malaise. Proximal muscle 
weakness is prominent and the patient may walk with a waddling gait 
and struggle to climb stairs or stand up from a chair. There may be bone 
and muscle tenderness on pressure and focal bone pain can be due to 
ssure fractures of the ribs and pelvis.
Investigations
The diagnosis can usually be made by measurement of serum 25(OH)
D, PTH, calcium, phosphate and ALP. Typically, serum ALP levels are 
raised, 25(OH)D levels are undetectable and PTH is markedly elevated. 
Serum phosphate levels tend to be low, but serum calcium is usually 
normal, unless the disease is advanced. X-rays often show osteope-
nia or vertebral crush fractures and, with more advanced disease, focal 
radio lucent areas (pseudofractures or Looser zones) may be seen in ribs, 
pelvis and long bones (Fig. 26.63). In children, there is thickening and 
widening of the epiphyseal plate. A radionuclide bone scan may show 
multiple hot spots in the ribs and pelvis at the site of fractures and the 
appearance may be mistaken for metastases. Where there is doubt, the 
diagnosis can be conrmed by bone biopsy, which shows the pathogno-
monic increased thickness and extent of osteoid seams (see Fig. 26.63).
Management
Osteomalacia and rickets respond promptly to treatment with vitamin D. 
A wide variety of doses can be used. Treatment with between 10 000 and 
25 000 IU daily for 2–4 weeks is associated with rapid clinical improve-
ment, an elevation in serum 25(OH)D and a reduction in PTH. Serum ALP 
levels sometimes rise initially as mineralisation of bone increases, but 
eventually fall to within the reference range as the bone disease heals. 
Subsequently, the dose of vitamin D can usually be reduced to a main-
tenance level of 800–1600 IU daily (10–20 µg), except in patients with 
malabsorption, who may require higher maintenance doses.
Vitamin D-resistant rickets
This is a genetically determined condition that presents in childhood with 
rickets that is resistant to therapy with vitamin D in standard dosages.
A
B
Fig. 26.63 Osteomalacia.
biopsy from a patient with osteomalacia showing thickened osteoid seams, stained 
light blue (arrows) covering most of the bone surface (left). Calcied bone is stained 
(arrow).

[[p1115]]
1056    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Pathogenesis
Type I vitamin D-resistant rickets (VDRR) is caused by inactivating muta-
tions in the 25(OH)D-1α-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) enzyme, which con-
verts 25(OH)D to the active metabolite 1,25(OH)2D3. Type II VDRR is 
caused by inactivating mutations in the vitamin D receptor, which impair 
its ability to activate gene transcription. Both are recessive disorders and 
consanguinity is common.
Clinical features
These are as described above for infantile rickets. The diagnosis is 
usually rst suspected when the patient fails to respond to vitamin D 
supplementation.
Investigations
The biochemical features of type I VDRR are similar to those of ordinary 
vitamin D deciency, except that levels of 25(OH)D are normal, but 1,25
(OH)2D is low. In type II VDRR, 25(OH)D is normal, but PTH and 1,25(OH)2D3
values are raised. The diagnosis can be conrmed by genetic testing.
Management
Type I VDRR responds fully to treatment with the active vitamin D metab-
olites 1α-hydroxy-vitamin D (1–2 µg daily, orally) or 1,25-dihydroxy-vita-
min D (0.25–1.5 µg daily, orally). Calcium supplements are not necessary 
unless there is dietary deciency. Type II VDRR sometimes responds 
partially to very high doses of active vitamin D metabolites, which can 
activate the mutant receptor, although additional calcium and phosphate 
supplements are also necessary.
Hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets
This group of disorders are caused by inherited defects in renal tubular 
phosphate reabsorption. The most common is X-linked hypophospha-
taemic rickets (XLH), but autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive 
forms also occur (see Box 26.75).
Pathophysiology
Most forms of hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets are associated with 
raised circulating concentrations of the phosphate-regulating hormone 
broblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). This hormone is produced by osteo-
cytes (see Fig. 26.3) and enters the circulation, where it is normally inacti-
vated by proteolytic cleavage. Production of FGF23 by osteocytes is under 
tonic inhibition by DMP1 and PHEX. In XLH, the inhibitory effect on FGF23 
production is lost due to mutations in PHEX and a similar situation occurs in 
autosomal recessive hypophosphataemic rickets (ARHR1) due to loss-of-
function mutations in DMP1. In autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic 
rickets (ADHR), the FGF23 protein carries mutations that prevent FGF23 
being degraded, thereby causing accumulation of intact FGF23 hormone 
in the circulation. In all three diseases, the elevation in FGF23 results in 
osteomalacia and rickets by causing phosphaturia by up-regulation of 
sodium-dependent phosphate transporters in the renal tubules, and also 
by inhibiting conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D by the kidney, which 
in turn causes reduced calcium and phosphate absorption from the gut.
Clinical features
The presentation is with symptoms and signs of rickets during childhood 
that do not respond to vitamin D supplementation. In adults, hypophos-
phataemic rickets may be accompanied by dental abscesses, and by 
bone and joint pain due to the development of an enthesopathy.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be conrmed by the nding of low serum phosphate 
levels and a reduction in tubular reabsorption of phosphate. Serum levels 
of vitamin D are normal and PTH is normal or elevated. Serum concen-
trations of FGF23 are markedly elevated. The causal mutations can be 
identied by genetic testing.
Management
The aim of treatment is to ameliorate symptoms, restore normal growth 
and maintain serum phosphate levels within the reference range. 
Traditionally, treatment has been with phosphate supplements (1–4 g 
daily) and alfacalcidol (1–2 µg daily) or calcitriol (0.5–1.5 µg daily), with the 
aim of promoting intestinal calcium and phosphate absorption. Levels of 
calcium and phosphate, as well as renal function, should be monitored 
regularly and the doses of phosphate and vitamin D metabolites carefully 
titrated to maintain serum phosphate within the normal range, but avoid 
hypercalcaemia. Burosumab is a neutralising antibody to FGF23 which 
can reverse the biochemical abnormalities in hereditary hypophospha-
taemic rickets. It is currently licensed for the treatment of XLH in children 
where it has been shown to be superior to standard therapy with phos-
phate supplements and active vitamin D metabolites at healing rickets. It 
is also effective at reversing hypophosphataemia in adults, and trials are 
currently in progress to examine the effects on clinical outcome of the 
disease in adults.
Tumour-induced osteomalacia
This is a rare syndrome caused by over-production of FGF23 by mes-
enchymal tumours. The presentation is with severe osteomalacia and 
hypophosphataemia in an adult patient with no obvious predispos-
ing risk factor for vitamin D deciency. Biochemical ndings are as 
described for hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets. The underlying 
tumour can be difcult to nd and multiple modality imaging with whole-
body MRI, CT and somatostatin or gallium-68 DOTATATE scintigraphy 
is often needed. Options for medical management include phosphate 
supplements and active vitamin D metabolites or burosumab, but the 
treatment of choice is surgical resection of the primary tumour, which 
is curative.
Hypophosphatasia
Hypophosphatasia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by loss-
of-function mutations in the TNALP gene, which results in accumulation 
of pyrophosphate and inhibition of bone mineralisation. The typical pres-
entation is with severe intractable rickets during infancy, sometimes in 
association with seizures. Investigations show low or undetectable levels 
of serum ALP, but normal levels of calcium, phosphate, PTH and vita-
min D metabolites. Urine excretion of pyridoxal 5′ phosphate and phos-
phoethanolamine (substrates for ALP) is increased. In severely affected 
patients, remarkable therapeutic responses have been obtained with 
recombinant ALP therapy (asfotase alfa), which is curative. Heterozygous 
carriers of mutation in TNALP may present in adulthood with osteoporo-
sis, fractures and low ALP values. The best mode of treatment for these 
patients remains to be determined.
Other causes of osteomalacia
These are summarised in Box 26.75. Osteomalacia may occur as a 
component of renal osteodystrophy in patients with chronic kidney dis-
ease. The mechanism is reduced conversion of 25(OH)D into the active 
metabolite 1,25(OH)2D by the failing kidney. Aluminium intoxication is 
now rare due to reduced use of aluminium-containing phosphate bind-
ers and removal of aluminium from the water supplies used in dialysis. 
If aluminium intoxication is suspected, the diagnosis can be conrmed 
by demonstration of aluminium at the calcication front in a bone biopsy. 
Osteomalacia due to bisphosphonates has mostly been described in 
patients with Paget’s disease who are receiving etidronate and high-
dose pamidronate. It is usually asymptomatic and healing occurs when 
treatment is stopped. Excessive uoride intake causes osteomalacia due 
to direct inhibition of mineralisation and is common in parts of the world 
where there is a high uoride content in drinking water. The condition 
reverses when uoride intake is reduced.

[[p1116]]
Diseases of bone    1057
26
Paget’s disease of bone
Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is characterised by focal areas of increased 
and disorganised bone remodelling involving one or more skeletal sites. 
The disease is common in the UK, affecting about 1% of those aged 
above 55, and in other countries in Europe. It is rare in Scandinavia and 
Asia. The prevalence doubles each decade from the age of 50 onwards 
and affects up to 8% of the UK population by the age of 85.
Pathophysiology
The primary abnormality is increased osteoclastic bone resorption, 
accompanied by marrow brosis, increased vascularity of bone and 
increased, but disorganised, bone formation. Osteoclasts in PDB are 
greater in number and unusually large, containing characteristic nuclear 
inclusion bodies. Genetic factors are important and mutations in the 
SQSTM1 gene are a common cause of classical PDB. The presence of 
nuclear inclusion bodies in osteoclasts has fuelled speculation that PDB 
might be caused by a slow virus infection, but this remains unproven. 
Biomechanical factors may inuence which bones are affected, as PDB 
often starts at sites of muscle insertions into bone and, in some cases, 
localises to bones or limbs that have been subjected to repetitive trauma 
or overuse. Involvement of subchondral bone can compromise the joint 
and predispose to OA. The prevalence of PDB has fallen in many coun-
tries over recent decades, suggesting that environmental factors play a 
role, but their identity remains unclear.
Clinical features
The axial skeleton is predominantly affected and common sites of involve-
ment are the pelvis, femur, tibia, lumbar spine, skull and scapula. The 
most common presentation is with bone pain localised to an affected 
site, but bone deformity, deafness and pathological fractures may also be 
presenting features. Many patients are asymptomatic and in about 20% 
of cases the diagnosis is made on the basis of an X-ray or blood test 
performed for another reason. Clinical signs include bone deformity and 
expansion, and increased warmth over an affected bone. Neurological 
problems, such as deafness, cranial nerve defects, nerve root pain, spinal 
cord compression and spinal stenosis, may occur due to enlargement of 
affected bones and encroachment on the spinal cord and nerve foram-
ina. Surprisingly, deafness is seldom due to compression of the auditory 
nerve, but instead is conductive in nature due to osteosclerosis of the 
temporal bone. The increased vascularity of pagetic bone can very rarely 
precipitate high-output cardiac failure in older patients with limited cardiac 
reserve. Osteosarcoma is an unusual but serious complication that pre-
sents with increasing pain and swelling of an affected site.
Investigations
The characteristic features are an isolated elevation in ALP and bone 
expansion on X-rays, with alternating areas of radiolucency and osteo-
sclerosis (Fig. 26.64A). Levels of ALP can be normal if only a single 
bone is affected. The best way of identifying affected sites is a radio-
nuclide bone scan, which shows increased uptake in affected bones 
(Fig. 26.64B). If the bone scan is positive, X-rays should be taken to 
conrm the diagnosis. Bone biopsy is not usually required, but may help 
to exclude osteosclerotic metastases in cases of diagnostic uncertainty.
Management
The main indication for treatment with inhibitors of bone resorption is bone 
pain, which is thought to be due to increased metabolic activity (Box 26.76). 
Patients should be carefully assessed to determine the cause of the pain 
since it can be difcult to differentiate the pain caused by increased meta-
bolic activity of PDB from that caused by complications such as bone deform-
ity, nerve compression symptoms and OA. Zoledronic acid is considered 
the treatment of choice since it is highly effective at suppressing elevated 
bone turnover in PDB and is most likely to give a favourable pain response. 
Intravenous pamidronate and oral risedronate can also be effective. If there 
is doubt about whether the pain is due to PDB, it can be worthwhile giving 
a therapeutic trial of bisphosphonate to determine whether the symp-
toms improve. Although there is always the possibility of a ‘placebo effect’, 
a positive response usually indicates that the pain was due to increased 
metabolic activity. Repeated courses of bisphosphonates can be given 
if symptoms recur. There is not any rm evidence as yet to suggest 
A
B
Fig. 26.64 Paget’s disease of bone. 
affected bone.
26.76 Medical management of Paget’s disease
Drug
Route of 
administration
Dose
Risedronate
Oral
30 mg daily for 2 months
Pamidronate
IV
1–3 × 60 mg infusions
Zoledronic acid
IV
1 × 5 mg infusion
Calcitonin
SC
100–200 IU 3 times weekly 
for 2–3 months
(IV = intravenous; SC = subcutaneous)

[[p1117]]
1058    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
that prophylactic bisphosphonates prevent the development of complica-
tions in PDB, but this issue is under investigation.
Other bone diseases
Complex regional pain syndrome type 1
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) type 1 is characterised by 
gradual onset of pain, swelling and local tenderness, usually affecting 
a limb extremity. It may be triggered by fracture, but can also occur in 
association with soft tissue injury, pregnancy and intercurrent illness or 
can develop spontaneously. The cause is unknown, but abnormalities of 
the sympathetic nervous system are thought to play a pathogenic role. 
The affected limb is swollen and tender, and there may be evidence of 
regional autonomic dysfunction with abnormal sweating and changes in 
skin colour and temperature. The diagnosis is primarily clinical, based 
on the features shown in Box 8.12. Support for the diagnosis can be 
obtained with MRI, which shows bone marrow oedema, or radionuclide 
bone scan, which shows a local increase in tracer uptake. X-rays typ-
ically show localised patchy osteoporosis. Haematology, biochemistry 
and immunology are normal.
The aims of treatment are to control pain and encourage mobilisation. 
Analgesics, NSAIDs, antineuropathic agents, calcitonin, glucocorticoids, 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), sympathectomy and bisphos-
phonates have all been tried, but none is particularly effective. Although 
some cases resolve with time, many individuals have persistent symp-
toms and fail to regain normal function.
Osteonecrosis
Osteonecrosis is the term used to describe death of bone due to impair-
ment of its blood supply. The most commonly affected sites are the fem-
oral head, humeral head navicular and scaphoid. In some cases, the 
condition occurs as the result of direct trauma that interrupts the blood 
supply to the affected bone. This is the reason for osteo necrosis of the 
femoral head following fractures of the femoral neck and in patients with 
thrombophilia, antiphospholipid syndrome, Gaucher’s disease and hae-
moglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease. Other important predispos-
ing factors include high-dose glucocorticoid treatment, alcohol excess, 
SLE, HIV and radiotherapy, but in many of these conditions the patho-
physiology is poorly understood. The presentation is with pain localised 
to the affected site, which is exacerbated by weight-bearing. The diag-
nosis can be conrmed by MRI, which shows evidence of subchondral 
necrotic bone and bone marrow oedema. X-rays are normal in the early 
stages, but later may show evidence of osteosclerosis and deformity of 
the affected bone. There is no specic treatment. Management should 
focus on controlling pain and encouraging mobilisation. Symptoms often 
improve spontaneously with time, but joint replacement may be required 
in patients who have persisting pain in association with signicant struc-
tural damage to the affected joint.
Scheuermann’s osteochondritis
This disorder predominantly affects adolescent boys, who develop a 
dorsal kyphosis in association with irregular radiographic ossication of 
the vertebral end plates. It has a strong genetic component and may 
sometimes be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most patients 
are asymptomatic, but back pain aggravated by exercise and relieved 
by rest may occur. Excessive exercise and heavy manual labour before 
epiphyseal fusion has occurred may aggravate symptoms. Management 
consists of advice to avoid excessive activity and provision of protective 
postural exercises. Rarely, corrective surgery may be required if there 
is severe deformity. Scheuermann’s disease can sometimes present for 
the rst time in adulthood, when it can be confused with osteoporo-
tic vertebral fractures. It can be differentiated from osteoporosis by the 
characteristic X-ray changes, which show mild wedge deformity of 3–4 
adjacent vertebrae, irregularity of the vertebral end plates, and normal 
BMD on DXA examination.
Fibrous dysplasia
This is an acquired systemic disorder that mainly affects the skeleton and 
is caused by somatic mutations in the GNAS1 gene. The characteristic 
presentation is with bone pain and pathological fractures. Associated 
features include endocrine dysfunction, especially precocious puberty, 
and café-au-lait skin pigmentation (McCune–Albright syndrome). The 
diagnosis can usually be made by imaging, which shows focal, predom-
inantly osteolytic lesions with bone expansion on X-rays (Fig. 26.65), and 
focal increased uptake on bone scan. The condition may cause a single 
(monostotic) or multiple (polyostotic) lesions. The condition can super-
cially resemble Paget’s disease of bone, but the earlier age of onset 
and pattern of involvement are usually distinctive. Very rarely, malignant 
change can occur and should be suspected if there is a sudden increase 
in pain and swelling. Management is symptomatic. Intravenous bisphos-
phonates are often used in an attempt to control pain, but the evidence 
base for their efcacy is weak. Orthopaedic surgery may be required for 
treatment of fracture and deformity or to prevent a pathological fracture 
in a weight-bearing bone. Endocrine manifestations, such as precocious 
puberty, may require specic treatment.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is the name given to a group of disorders 
characterised by severe osteoporosis and multiple fractures in infancy 
and childhood. Most cases are caused by mutations in the COL1A1 and 
COL1A2 genes, which encode the proteins that make type I collagen. 
These result in reduced collagen production (in mild OI) or in formation 
of abnormal collagen chains that are rapidly degraded (in severe OI). 
Mutations in several other genes have been described that can cause 
OI, some of which affect post-translational modication of collagen and 
Fig. 26.65 Fibrous dysplasia. X-ray of the right humerus in a patient with 
polyostotic brous dysplasia showing multiple expansile osteolytic lesions and a 
pathological fracture in the humeral mid-shaft (arrowed).

[[p1118]]
Rheumatological involvement in other diseases     1059
26
others that affect bone formation. Many patients have no family history. 
Some of these have new mutations whereas others may have recessive 
forms of the disease. The Sillence classication is commonly used to 
grade severity. This varies from neonatal lethal OI (type II), through very 
severe OI with multiple fractures in infancy and childhood (types III and 
IV), to mild (type I), in which affected patients typically have blue sclerae. 
The diagnosis of OI is usually obvious clinically, based on the presenta-
tion with multiple low-trauma fractures during infancy. The disease can 
be mistaken for non-accidental injury in childhood and for osteoporosis 
in adulthood; in such cases, genetic testing can be of diagnostic value. 
Treatment is multidisciplinary, involving surgical reduction and xation 
of fractures and correction of limb deformities, with physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy for rehabilitation of patients with bone deformity. 
Bisphosphonates are widely used in the treatment of OI, especially intra-
venous pamidronate and zoledronic acid in children, but there is limited 
evidence for efcacy in fracture prevention.
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis is the collective name given to a rare group of inherited 
diseases caused by failure of osteoclast function. Presentation is highly 
variable, ranging from a lethal disorder that presents with bone marrow 
failure in infancy to a milder and sometimes asymptomatic form that pre-
sents in adulthood. Severe osteopetrosis is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner and presents with failure to thrive, delayed dentition, 
cranial nerve palsies (due to absent cranial foramina), blindness, anaemia 
and recurrent infections due to bone marrow failure. The adult-onset type 
(Albers–Schönberg disease) shows autosomal dominant inheritance and 
presents with bone pain, cranial nerve palsies, osteomyelitis, OA or frac-
ture; it is sometimes detected as an incidental radiographic nding. The 
responsible mutations affect either the genes that regulate osteoclast 
differentiation (RANK, RANKL), causing ‘osteoclast-poor’ osteopetrosis, 
or the genes involved in bone resorption, causing ‘osteoclast-rich’ osteo-
petrosis. These include mutations in the TCIRG1 gene, which encodes a 
component of the osteoclast proton pump, and mutations in the CLCN7
gene, which encodes the osteoclast chloride pump. The most effective 
treatment is bone marrow transplantation that can provide a source of 
osteoclasts that resorb bone normally, but this is not effective in patients 
with RANKL mutations. Medical management has generally limited ef-
cacy, but IFNγ treatment may improve blood counts and reduce the fre-
quency of infections.
Sclerosing bone dysplasias
These are rare diseases characterised by osteosclerosis and increased 
bone formation. Van Buchem disease and sclerosteosis are recessive 
disorders caused by loss-of-function mutations in the SOST gene, which 
normally suppresses bone formation (see Fig. 26.3). The resulting lack of 
functional sclerostin causes increased bone formation and bone over-
growth, leading to enlargement of the cranium and jaw, tall stature and 
cranial nerve palsies. There is no effective treatment. High bone mass 
syndrome is a benign disorder caused by mutations in the LRP4 or 
LRP5 gene, which is characterised by unusually high bone density. The 
mutations render the LRP receptors resistant to the inhibitory effects of 
SOST. Most patients are asymptomatic, but bone overgrowth in the pal-
ate (torus palatinus) and enlargement of the mandible can occur in later 
life. Treatment is not usually required. Camurati–Engelmann disease is an 
autosomal dominant condition caused by gain of function in the TGFB1
gene. It presents with bone pain, muscle weakness and osteosclerosis 
mainly affecting the diaphysis of long bones. Glucocorticoids can help 
the bone pain, although usually analgesics are also required.
Bone and joint tumours
Primary tumours of bones and joints are rare, have a peak incidence 
in childhood and adolescence, and can be benign or malignant 
(Box 26.77). Paget’s disease of bone accounts for most cases of osteo-
sarcoma occurring above the age of 40.
Osteosarcoma
This is a rare tumour with an incidence of 0.6–0.85 per 100 000 popula-
tion. It is the most common primary bone tumour. Most patients present 
under the age of 30, but osteosarcoma also occurs in old age in associ-
ation with Paget’s disease. The presentation is with local pain and swell-
ing. X-rays show expansion of the bone with a surrounding soft tissue 
mass, often containing islands of calcication. If the diagnosis is being 
considered, MRI or CT should be performed to determine the extent of 
tumour. Patients suspected of having osteosarcoma should be referred 
to a specialist team for biopsy. Treatment depends on histological type, 
but generally involves surgical removal of the tumour, followed by chemo-
therapy and radiotherapy. The prognosis is normally good in cases that 
present in childhood and adolescence, but poor in older patients.
Chondrosarcoma
This is the second most common primary bone tumour. Presentation 
is as described for osteosarcoma. The treatment of choice is surgical 
resection since chondrosarcomas are relatively resistant to chemother-
apy and radiotherapy. The prognosis is good for low-grade tumours, but 
poor for anaplastic tumours.
Ewing’s sarcoma
This is the third most common sarcoma, which presents almost exclu-
sively under the age of 40. Presentation is as described for osteosarcoma. 
Treatment is by local excision and surgical resection. The prognosis is 
excellent for patients who present before metastasis has occurred.
Metastatic bone disease
Metastatic bone disease may present in a variety of ways: with local-
ised or generalised progressive bone pain, generalised regional pain, 
symptoms of spinal cord compression, or acute pain due to patho-
logical fracture. Systemic features, such as weight loss and anorexia, 
and symptoms referable to the primary tumour are often present. The 
tumours that most commonly metastasise to bone are myeloma and 
those of bronchus, breast, prostate, kidney and thyroid. Management is 
discussed in Chapter 7.
Rheumatological involvement in  
other diseases
Many systemic diseases can affect the locomotor system and many 
drugs may cause adverse musculoskeletal effects (Box 26.78). The most 
26.77 Primary tumours of the musculoskeletal system
Cell type
Benign
Malignant
Osteoblast
Osteoid osteoma
Osteosarcoma
Chondrocyte
Chondroma
Osteochondroma
Chondrosarcoma
Fibroblast
Fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Bone marrow cell
Eosinophilic granuloma
Ewing’s sarcoma
Endothelial cell
Haemangioma
Angiosarcoma
Osteoclast precursor
Giant cell tumour
Malignant giant cell 
tumour

[[p1119]]
1060    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
common examples are described here. Bone disease may also occur in 
sarcoidosis, haemophilia and sickle-cell anaemia.
Malignant disease
Malignant disease can cause a variety of non-metastatic musculoskeletal 
problems (Box 26.79). One of the most striking is hypertrophic pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy (HPOA), characterised by clubbing and painful swelling 
of the limbs, periosteal new bone formation and arthralgia/arthritis. The 
most common causes are bronchial carcinoma and mesothelioma. Bone 
scans show increased periosteal uptake before new bone is apparent on 
X-ray. The course follows that of the underlying malignancy and HPOA 
resolves if this is cured.
Endocrine disease
Hypothyroidism may present with carpal tunnel syndrome or, rarely, with 
painful, symmetrical proximal myopathy and muscle hypertrophy. Both 
resolve with levothyroxine replacement. Primary hyperparathyroidism is 
associated with osteoporosis and also predisposes to CPPD disease 
and to calcic periarthritis, especially in patients with renal disease.
Diabetes mellitus commonly causes diabetic cheirarthropathy, charac-
terised by tightening of skin and periarticular structures, causing exion 
deformities of the ngers that may be painful. Diabetic osteopathy presents 
as forefoot pain with radiographic progression from osteopenia to com-
plete osteolysis of the phalanges and metatarsals. Diabetes also predis-
poses to osteoporosis, fragility fractures, adhesive capsulitis, Dupuytren’s 
contracture, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis and Charcot’s joints.
Acromegaly can be associated with mechanical back pain, with normal 
or excessive movement; carpal tunnel syndrome; Raynaud’s syndrome 
and an arthropathy (50%). This arthropathy mainly affects the large joints 
and has clinical similarities to OA, but with a normal or increased range of 
movement. X-rays may show widening of joint spaces, squaring of bone 
ends, generalised osteopenia and tufting of terminal phalanges. It does 
not improve with treatment of the acromegaly and is an important cause 
of reduced quality of life in affected individuals.
Haematological disease
Haemochromatosis is complicated by an arthropathy in about 50% of 
cases. It typically presents between the ages of 40 and 50 and may 
predate other features of the disease. The small joints of the hands and 
wrists are typically affected but the hips, shoulders and knees may also 
be involved. The X-ray changes resemble OA, but cysts are often mul-
tiple and prominent with little osteophyte formation. Involvement of the 
radiocarpal and MCP joints may occur, which is unusual in primary OA, 
and about 30% have CPPD. Treatment of the haemochromatosis does 
not inuence the arthropathy and management is as described for OA. 
Haemophilia can be complicated by haemarthrosis, which, if recurrent, 
can result in the development of secondary OA. Sickle-cell disease 
may be associated with bone pain, osteonecrosis and osteomyelitis. 
Thalassaemia may be complicated by bone deformity, especially affect-
ing the craniofacial bones, and by osteoporosis.
Neurological disease
Neurological disease may result in rapidly destructive arthritis of joints, 
rst described by Charcot in association with syphilis. The cause is 
incompletely understood, but may involve repetitive trauma as the result 
of sensory loss and altered blood ow secondary to impaired sympa-
thetic nervous system control. The main predisposing diseases and sites 
of involvement are:
 diabetic neuropathy (hindfoot)
 syringomyelia (shoulder, elbow, wrist)
 leprosy (hands, feet)
 tabes dorsalis (knees, spine).
The presentation is with subacute or chronic monoarthritis. Pain can 
occur, especially at the onset, but once the joint is severely deranged, 
pain is often minimal and signs become disproportionately greater than 
symptoms. The joint is often grossly swollen, with effusion, crepitus, 
marked instability and deformity, but usually no increased warmth. X-rays 
show disorganisation of normal joint architecture and often multiple loose 
bodies (Fig. 26.66), and either no (atrophic) or gross (hypertrophic) new 
bone formation. Management principally involves orthoses and occa-
sionally arthrodesis.
Miscellaneous conditions
Anterior tibial compartment syndrome
This is characterised by severe pain in the front of the lower leg, aggra-
vated by exercise and relieved by rest. Symptoms result from fascial 
compression of the muscles in the anterior tibial compartment and may 
be associated with foot drop. Treatment is by surgical decompression.
Carpal tunnel syndrome
This is a common nerve entrapment syndrome caused by compression 
of the median nerve at the wrist. It presents with numbness, tingling 
26.78 Drug-induced effects on the musculoskeletal system
Musculoskeletal problem
Principal drug
Secondary gout
Thiazides, furosemide, alcohol
Osteoporosis
Glucocorticoids, heparin, glitazones, 
aromatase inhibitors, GnRH agonists
Osteomalacia
Anticonvulsants, etidronate and 
pamidronate (high-dose)
Osteonecrosis
Glucocorticoids, alcohol
Drug-induced lupus syndrome
Procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, 
chlorpromazine, minocycline, anti-
TNF-α biologics
Arthralgias
Glucocorticoid withdrawal, 
glibenclamide, methyldopa, 
ciclosporin, isoniazid, barbiturates, 
bisphosphonates, aromatase 
inhibitors
Myalgia
Glucocorticoid withdrawal, 
L-tryptophan, brates, statins
Myopathy/myositis
Glucocorticoids, chloroquines, 
penicillamine, statins, zidovudine, 
colchicine, brates, alcohol
Arthritis
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)
Vasculitis
Penicillins, cephalosporins, 
sulphonamides, thiazides, phenytoin, 
allopurinol
(ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone)
26.79 Rheumatological manifestations of malignancy
 Polyarthritis
 Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
 Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia
 Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
 Vasculitis, connective tissue disease
 Raynaud’s syndrome
 Polymyalgia rheumatica-like syndrome

[[p1120]]
Miscellaneous conditions    1061
26
and pain in a median nerve distribution. The most common causes 
are hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, obesity and 
pregnancy (especially in the third trimester). In some patients, no under-
lying cause may be identied. Carpal tunnel syndrome often responds 
to treatment of the underlying condition, but other options include local 
glucocorticoid injections and surgical decompression.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a common disorder, 
affecting 10% of men and 8% of women over the age of 65, but its 
prevalence increases further with age and is associated with obesity, 
hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is characterised by syndes-
mophytes and orid new bone formation along the anterolateral aspect 
of contiguous vertebral bodies (Fig. 26.67). DISH is distinguished from 
lumbar spondylosis by the absence of disc space narrowing and mar-
ginal vertebral body sclerosis, and from ankylosing spondylitis by the 
absence of sacroiliitis or apophyseal joint fusion. It is usually an asymp-
tomatic radiographic nding, but can cause back pain or pain at periph-
eral sites, such as the heel, in association with enthesophyte formation.
Dupuytren’s contracture
Dupuytren’s contracture is characterised by brosis and contracture of 
the supercial palmar fascia of the hands. The patient is unable to extend 
the ngers fully and there is puckering of the skin with palpable nod-
ules. The ring and little ngers are usually the rst and worst affected. 
Dupuytren’s contracture is usually painless, but causes problems due to 
limitation of hand function and snagging of the curled ngers in pockets. 
It is age-related, usually bilateral and more common in men. There is a 
strong genetic component and sometimes may be familial, with domi-
nant inheritance. The condition can be associated with plantar broma-
tosis, Peyronie’s disease, alcohol misuse and chronic vibration injury. It 
is very slowly progressive. Often no treatment is required, but it can be 
treated medically by local injections of collagenase or surgically by fasci-
otomy if symptoms are troublesome.
Joint hypermobility
Joint hypermobility is caused by increased laxity of connective tissues. 
It is commonly observed in a number of hereditary conditions includ-
ing: Marfan syndrome, which arises from mutations in the FBN1 gene; 
osteogenesis imperfecta and Ehlers–Danlos syndrome types I, II and IV, 
caused by mutations in the COL3A1, COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes.
The term hypermobile Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (hEDS), which is also 
known as EDS type III, is used to describe a polygenic form of joint 
hypermobility. Patients with this condition have hypermobile joints in 
combination with a range of symptoms such as chronic joint and liga-
mentous pain, bromyalgia-like symptoms, recurrent dislocations, easy 
bruising, abdominal symptoms, insensitivity to local anaesthetic, mitral 
valve prolapse and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), 
in which there is dizziness, hypotension and an increased heart rate on 
standing. The diagnosis of hEDS can be made if the modied Beighton 
score is 4 or above (Box 26.80) in the presence of one or more of the 
above clinical features. It is useful to distinguish hEDS from the milder 
hypermobility spectrum disorder (HSD), which is the name given to the 
syndrome where joint hypermobility is accompanied by some, but not 
all, features of hEDS.
Inclusion body myositis
Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most frequent primary myopathy 
in middle age and after. It is characterised by slowly progressive mus-
cle weakness and atrophy, with pathological changes of inammation, 
degeneration and mitochondrial abnormality in affected muscle bres. 
IBM typically presents with distal muscle weakness. In time, muscles 
atrophy. Investigation is the same as for polymyositis. There is typically 
a slightly elevated creatine kinase and myopathic changes on EMG. 
Fig. 26.66 Wrist X-ray showing a neuropathic (Charcot) joint in a patient with 
syringomyelia. Note the disorganised architecture with complete loss of the proximal 
carpal row, bony fragments and soft tissue swelling.
Fig. 26.67 Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). Anteroposterior 
X-ray of the thoracic spine showing right-sided, owing new bone joining contiguous 
thoracic vertebrae. The disc spaces are preserved.
26.80 Modied Beighton score for joint hypermobility
Clinical test
Score
Extend little nger > 90°
1 point each side
Bring thumb back parallel to/touching 
forearm
1 point each side
Extend elbow > 10°
1 point each side
Extend knee > 10°
1 point each side
Touch oor with at of hands, legs straight
1 point
Hypermobile = a score of 6 or more points out of a possible 9 for 
epidemiological studies, or 4 or more points (with arthralgia in four or more 
joints) for a clinical diagnosis of the benign joint hypermobility syndrome

[[p1121]]
1062    RHEUMATOLOGY AND BONE DISEASE 
Muscle biopsy shows abnormal bres containing rimmed vacuoles 
and lamentous inclusions in the nucleus and cytoplasm. Therapeutic 
response to glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants is poor. There is 
anecdotal report of efcacy with IVIg, but trial evidence is lacking.
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis is an uncommon proliferative disorder of 
synovium, which typically affects young adults. It is caused by a somatic 
chromosomal translocation in synovial cells that places the CSF1 gene 
downstream of the COL6A3 gene promoter. The result is local over-pro-
duction of M-CSF, which causes accumulation of macrophages in the 
joint. The presentation is with joint swelling, limitation of movement and 
local discomfort. The diagnosis can be conrmed by MRI or synovial 
biopsy. Treatment is by surgical or radiation synovectomy.
Scoliosis
Scoliosis is characterised by an abnormal lateral curvature of the spine of 
greater than 10 degrees. Scoliosis may be secondary to known disorders 
or idiopathic. In about 20% of cases, scoliosis is secondary to a neuro-
muscular disorder, such as muscular dystrophy, cerebral palsy or neuro-
bromatosis. It may also occur in association with hereditary connective 
tissue diseases, such as Marfan syndrome. Scoliosis may also develop 
in later life, usually as a result of structural changes in the spine from 
degenerative change. The term idiopathic scoliosis is used to described 
the remaining cases where there is no obvious cause. In fact, there is 
strong evidence from twin studies that idiopathic scoliosis is genetically 
mediated, in keeping with the nding that it is evident during childhood or 
adolescence. It is often asymptomatic, but it can persist into adulthood 
and may become symptomatic, associated with evolving degenerative 
changes.
The diagnosis of scoliosis can be made clinically by physical examina-
tion and conrmed by X-ray. External bracing and/or surgical intervention 
are considered in adolescents with severe deformities to correct deform-
ity or prevent progression, but the evidence base is poor. In adulthood, 
treatment is symptomatic in nature with analgesics, NSAIDs or antineu-
ropathic medications.
Spondylolysis
Spondylolysis describes a break in the integrity of the vertebral neural 
arch. The principal cause is an acquired defect in the pars interarticul-
aris due to a fracture, mainly seen in gymnasts, dancers and runners, in 
whom it is an important cause of back pain. Spondylolisthesis describes 
the condition in which a defect causes slippage of a vertebra on the 
one below. This may be congenital, post-traumatic or degenerative. 
Rarely, it can result from metastatic destruction of the posterior ele-
ments. Uncomplicated spondylolysis does not cause symptoms, but 
spondylolisthesis can lead to low back pain aggravated by standing and 
walking. Occasionally, symptoms of nerve root or spinal compression 
may occur. The diagnosis can be made on oblique X-rays of the lum-
bar spine, but MRI may be required if there is neurological involvement. 
Advice on posture and muscle-strengthening exercises is required in 
mild cases. Surgical fusion is indicated for severe and recurrent low back 
pain. Surgical decompression is mandatory prior to fusion in patients with 
signicant lumbar stenosis or symptoms of cauda equina compression.
Chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis
Chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis (CNO) is characterised by pain, 
swelling and osteosclerosis of affected bones. It may target a single bone 
or multiple bones when it is called chronic recurrent multifocal osteo-
myelitis (CRMO). The conditions can occur in the absence of other fea-
tures or be part of the synovitis–acne–pustulosis–hyperostosis–osteitis 
(SAPHO) syndrome. These disorders often target the clavicles and bones 
of the anterior chest wall but other bones may be affected, including the 
mandible and lower limb bones. SAPHO syndrome may be part of a 
spectrum of autoinammatory bone disease that includes chronic recur-
rent (sterile) multifocal osteomyelitis in children and adolescents. Other 
features of SAPHO include a pustular rash affecting the palms and soles 
of the feet, enthesitis, spondylodiscitis, sacroiliitis and synovitis of periph-
eral joints. These disorders tend to present in children or young adults. 
Radionuclide bone scans show increased uptake in affected bones with 
osteosclerosis and bone expansion on X-rays and CT scans. Various 
treatments have been used, including glucocorticoids, DMARDs, bis-
phosphonates, anakinra and anti-TNF-α, with most success arising from 
biologic use. The cause is unknown, but has been suggested to be an 
autoinammatory process triggered by a micro-organism.
Trigger nger
This occurs as the result of stenosing tenosynovitis in the exor ten-
don sheath, with intermittent locking of the nger in exion. It can arise 
spontaneously or in association with inammatory diseases such as RA. 
Symptoms usually respond to local glucocorticoid injections, but surgical 
decompression is occasionally required.
Further information
Journal articles
Campion EW. Calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:2575–2578.
Gossec L, Smolen JS, Ramiro S, etal. European League Against Rheumatism 
(EULAR) recommendations for the management of psoriatic arthritis with 
pharmacological therapies: 2015 update. Ann Rheum Dis 2016;75:499–510.
Guo Q, Wang Y, Xu D, etal. Rheumatoid arthritis: pathological mechanisms and 
modern pharmacological therapies. Bone Res 2018;6:15.
Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, etal. 2018 Update of the EULAR 
recommendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2020;79:19–30.
Hui M, Carr A, Cameron S, etal. The British Society for Rheumatology Guideline 
for the Management of Gout. Rheumatology 2017;56:e1–e20. https://doi.
org/10.1093/rheumatology/kex156.
Ralston SH, Corral-Gudino L, Cooper C, etal. Diagnosis and management 
of Paget’s disease of bone in adults: a clinical guideline. J Bone Miner Res 
2019;34(4):579–604.
Smolen JS, Landewé RBM, Bijlsma JWJ, etal. EULAR recommendations for the 
management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and biological disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2019 update. Ann Rheum Dis 2020;79: 
685–699.
Taurog JD, Avneesh C, Colbert RA. Ankylosing spondylitis and axial 
spondyloarthritis. N Engl J Med 2016;374:2563–2567.
Zhang W, Doherty M, Pascuale E, etal. EULAR recommendations for calcium 
pyrophosphate deposition. Part II Management. Ann Rheum Dis 2011;70: 
571–575.
Websites
4s-dawn.com/DAS28 Calculator for this measure of activity in rheumatoid 
arthritis.
asas-group.org Repository of resources to aid assessment of spondyloarthritis.
basdai.com/BASDAI.php BASDAI calculator for assessing ankylosing spondylitis.
omim.org Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM): genetic diseases.
shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp and qfracture.org/ Fracture risk assessment tools.
sign.ac.uk Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network 142 – Management of 
osteoporosis and the prevention of fragility fractures (2020 update).
thefreelibrary.com Information on drug-induced myopathies.
vasculitis.org/ Vasculitis resources from the European Vasculitis Society.
Patient organisations
ARMA arma.uk.net/membership/ A UK-based umbrella organisation for numerous 
patient-advocacy groups covering a wide area of musculoskeletal disease. 
Extensive weblinks. 
NRAS nras.org.uk/useful-links/category/international-links A UK-based patient-
run, patient-advocacy organisation for people with RA. There are weblinks to 
many international RA groups including in India, the United States, Canada and 
South Africa. 
IOF iofbonehealth.org/ US-based globally active organisation promoting the 
detection, management and education of osteoporosis. 

[[p1122]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 26.1. Which of the following statements about classical disease 
modifying antirheumatic drugs (cDMARDs) are true?
 A. Leunomide has a short half-life and clears from the body 
quickly when it is stopped
 B. Sulfasalazine stains contact lenses yellow
 C. A patient’s thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) genetic 
polymorphism should be checked before prescribing myco-
phenolate mofetil
 D. Systemic glucocorticoids can cause a rebound psoriasis 
are when stopped after a treatment course for psoriatic 
arthritis
 E. Methotrexate is safe to take throughout pregnancy
Answer: B and D.
A is False – leunomide has a long half and takes many months to 
clear from the body when stopped. Excretion of leunomide can be 
expedited by a short course of cholestyramine. B is True – urine can be 
yellow-stained also. C is False – TPMT is checked before azathioprine is 
prescribed. 1 in 300 people have a homozygous TPMT allele genotype 
which leads to very slow drug metabolism, which increases the risk of 
azathioprine toxicity markedly. D is True. E is False – methotrexate needs 
to be stopped 3 months before conception.
 26.2. Which of the following statements about biologic disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs (bDMARDs/‘biologics’) are true?
 A. Biologics are carcinogenic
 B. Ustekinumab is an antibody to p40, which is a subunit 
shared by the cytokines IL-23 and IL-12. It acts as an inhib-
itor of both IL-12 and IL-23 signalling and is indicated in 
adults with psoriatic arthritis
 C. Like all anti-TNF-α therapies, etanercept can be used in axial 
spondyloarthritis patients to also control associated Crohn’s 
disease
 D. All anti-TNF-α bDMARDs should be stopped in the third 
trimester since they all cross the placenta and can cause 
immunosuppression in the neonate
 E. In ANCA-positive vasculitis, a single cycle of rituximab 
(anti-CD20) treatment may last for up to 18 months
Answer: B and E.
A is False – biologics are not carcinogenic, but patients who develop 
cancer while on treatment may exhibit accelerated progression of the 
tumour due to suppression of the immune response. B is True. C is False – 
anti-TNF-α therapies generally are effective in enteropathic arthritis, but 
etanercept should be avoided as it has no efcacy in IBD. D is False – 
most should be stopped but an exception is certolizumab, which does 
not cross the placenta and can be used safely throughout pregnancy. E 
is True.
 26.3. In general, infections that affect the musculoskeletal system 
are not common but their effects can be severe. Which of the 
following statements about infections are true?
 A. Overall the risk of death from septic arthritis is 1%
 B. Gonococcal septic arthritis is generally a polyarthritis
 C. Diabetes is a particularly important risk factor for osteomyeli-
tis, accounting for about 30% of cases
 D. Where TB of a joint is suspected uid should be drawn and 
analysed by microscopy, culture and PCR
 E. Spine involvement (Poncet’s disease) is rare in cases of 
musculoskeletal TB
Answer: C and D.
A is False – overall, septic arthritis still has a mortality of about 10% 
despite advances in antimicrobial therapy. B is False – gonococcal 
infection can present with a migratory arthralgia, low-grade fever and 
tenosynovitis, which may precede the development of an oligo- or 
mono arthritis. Painful pustular skin lesions may also be present. C is 
True. D is True – culture of synovial uid is positive in between 20% and 
40% of cases, but examination of synovial uid or synovial tissue by 
PCR can yield the diagnosis more rapidly, with positive results in more 
than 95% of culture-positive cases and 50%–60% of culture-negative 
cases. E is False – Poncet’s disease occurs in about 50% of cases of 
musculoskeletal TB.

[[p1123]]
Dermatology
27
SH Ibbotson
Clinical examination in skin disease 1064
Functional anatomy and physiology 1066
Investigation of skin disease 1068
Presenting problems in skin disease 1069
Lumps and lesions 1069
Rash 1071
Blisters 1071
Itch 1072
Photosensitivity 1074
Leg ulcers 1076
Abnormal pigmentation 1077
Hair and nail abnormalities 1077
Acute skin failure 1077
Principles of management of skin disease 1078
General measures 1078
Topical treatments 1078
Phototherapy and photochemotherapy 1079
Systemic therapies 1080
Dermatological surgery 1081
Non-surgical treatments 1082
Skin tumours 1082
Malignant tumours 1083
Benign skin lesions 1087
Common skin infections and infestations 1088
Bacterial infections 1088
Viral infections 1091
Fungal infections 1092
Infestations 1093
Acne and rosacea 1094
Eczemas 1096
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly eruptions 1099
Lichenoid eruptions 1103
Urticaria 1103
Bullous diseases 1105
Toxic epidermal necrolysis 1105
Immunobullous diseases 1106
Pigmentation disorders 1108
Decreased pigmentation 1108
Increased pigmentation 1109
Hair disorders 1109
Nail disorders 1110
Skin disease in general medicine 1111
Conditions involving cutaneous vasculature 1111
Connective tissue disease 1112
Granulomatous disease 1113
Porphyrias 1113
Abnormal deposition disorders 1114
Genetic disorders 1114
Reactive disorders 1114
Drug eruptions 1115

[[p1124]]
1064    DERMATOLOGY
Clinical examination in skin disease
Involvement of face
Central
Hairline
Cheeks and nasal bridge:
‘butterfly’ distribution
Sparing of light-protected sites,
e.g. behind ears, under chin
Overall description of
individual lesions
Discrete, grouped, confluent,
reticulate (lace-like), linear
Observation
If symmetrical
        Extensor, e.g. psoriasis 
        Flexor, e.g. eczema
Involvement of hands,
including nail folds and finger
webs
The patient must be undressed, with
make-up and dressings removed,
and examined in good lighting.
Consider the following:
 Age
 General health
 Distress
 Scratching
Distribution of rash
Symmetrical vs asymmetrical
Proximal vs distal vs facial
Localised vs widespread
Eye involvement
e.g. Conjunctivitis/blepharitis
in rosacea or eyelash loss in
alopecia areata
General medical examination
Including lymph nodes and
other systems as indicated
Involvement of axillae/groins
e.g. hidradenitis suppurativa
Oral and genital involvement
Nail involvement
Psoriatic changes in nails
and peri-ungual involvement
Palmoplantar pustulosis
Magnifying lens image of
benign naevus
Morphology of rash
Monomorphic or polymorphic
Detailed morphology of individual lesions
Use a magnifying lens in good lighting to assist
Use correct terminology (see definitions throughout text) 
Reticulate (lacy) network on
buccal mucosa in lichen
planus. May also be genital
involvement
Joint involvement
e.g. Psoriatic arthritis
Examination of scalp
Hair loss
Scalp changes
Alopecia
areata
Arthritis, plaque psoriasis and
psoriatic nail dystrophy
2
3
1
14
13
11
12
10
9
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
3

[[p1125]]
Clinical examination in skin disease    1065
27
B
A
C
To find the PASI score, add together:  (A) Sum for each part  (B) % of that part involved  (C) % weighting of that body part
Minimum = 0; maximum = 72
Four body parts are each scored
individually
Each of the four body parts is scored:
  Redness (erythema)   
0–4
  Thickness (induration)   
0–4
  Scaling (desquamation)  
0–4
The area of each involved
body part is scored:
10%
20%
30%
40%
   0      0% 
   1      < 10%
   2      10–29%
   3      30–49%
   4      50–69%
   5      70–89%
   6      90–100%
Plaque
Blisters/bullae
Pustule
Macule/patch
Papule
Nodule
 Onset and course
 Exacerbating/relieving
   factors
 Past history of skin
   disease, atopy or
   autoimmune disease
 Social history,
   occupation, recreation
 Psychological impact,
   gauged by health-
   related life quality
   indices
 Always take a detailed
   drug and allergy
   history
 Include all systemic
   and topical drugs,
   and over-the-counter
   preparations
It is tempting to examine the skin first. This is a mistake; take a history, then examine the skin and the rest of the patient. 
1. History-taking
2. Drug/allergy history
 General examination,
   incl. peripheral
   lymph nodes, may be
   indicated/important
 Skin diseases may
   have systemic features
   (e.g. cardiovascular
   disease in psoriasis);
   many systemic
   diseases have
   dermatological
   features (e.g. diabetes)
5. General examination
3. Examination of skin
 Examine skin, hair,
   nails and mucous
   membranes
 Is it a rash or a lesion?
 Distribution and
   morphology important
   for rash
 Use of a magnifying
   lens and/or
   dermatoscope may be
   invaluable
 Site, size and detailed
   morphology of a lesion
   are essential factors
   to elicit
4. Closer inspection
6. Define type of lesion using correct terminology 
Helps in differential diagnosis and allows colleagues to visualise the process. Other definitions are provided in the chapter.
Macule: circumscribed flat
area of colour change ≤ 1 cm
diameter; patch: > 1 cm
Discrete elevation ≤ 1 cm
diameter 
Like papule but deeper (into
dermis or subcutaneous layer),
> 1 cm diameter 
Raised area > 1 cm diameter
with flat top
Large (> 1 cm diameter) fluid-
filled blister
Vesicle
Small (≤ 1 cm diameter) fluid-
filled blister
Visible accumulation of pus
in blister 
Petechiae/purpura
Petechiae: tiny macules due
to extravascular blood in
dermis; purpura: larger, may
be palpable
7. Score activity 
Tools for objective assessment of disease severity, such as the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), are important
in assessing severity and treatment responses.
Include:

[[p1126]]
1066    DERMATOLOGY
Diseases affecting the skin are common, and important because 
the absence of normal skin function, as well as sometimes being life- 
threatening, can severely impair quality of life. This may be exacerbated 
by the fact that people with skin disease can suffer the effects of stigma, 
often brought about by the ill-informed understanding of others with 
respect to skin diseases, particularly as regards visually disguring skin 
changes or the belief that they are contagious.
Skin diseases affect all ages and there are more than 2000 different 
types and presentations. Assessment of the skin is valuable in the man-
agement of anyone presenting with a medical problem and, conversely, 
assessment of the other body systems is important when managing 
primary skin diseases. This chapter concentrates on common skin dis-
eases and those that are important components of general medical 
conditions. Skin infections, including those related to the human immu-
nodeciency virus (HIV), tuberculosis, leprosy (Hansen’s disease) and 
syphilis, are also discussed in Chapters 14, 17, 13 and 15, respectively.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The skin covers just under 2 m2 in the average adult. The outer layer 
is the epidermis, a stratied squamous epithelium consisting mainly of 
keratinocytes. The epidermis is attached to, but separated from, the 
underlying dermis by the basement membrane. The dermis is less cellu-
lar and supports blood vessels, nerves and epidermal-derived append-
ages (hair follicles and sweat glands). Below it is the subcutis, consisting 
of adipose tissue.
Epidermis
In most sites, the epidermis is only 0.1–0.2 mm thick, except on the 
palms or soles, where it can extend to several millimetres. Keratinocytes 
make up approximately 90% of epidermal cells (Fig. 27.1). The main 
proliferative compartment is the basal layer. Keratinocytes synthesise 
a range of structural proteins, such as keratins, loricrin and laggrin 
(lament aggregating protein), which play key roles in maintaining the 
skin’s barrier function. Keratinocytes are also responsible for synthesis 
of vitamin D under the inuence of ultraviolet B (UVB) light. There are 
more than 50 types of keratin and their expression varies by body site, 
site within the epidermis and disease state. Mutations of certain keratin 
genes can result in blistering disorders and ichthyosis (characterised by 
scale without major inammation). As keratinocytes migrate from the 
basal layer, they differentiate, producing a variety of protein and lipid 
products. Keratinocytes undergo apoptosis in the granular layer before 
losing their nuclei and becoming the attened corneocytes of the stra-
tum corneum (keratin layer). The epidermis is a site of lipid production, 
and the ability of the stratum corneum to act as a hydrophobic barrier 
is the result of its ‘bricks and mortar’ design; dead corneocytes with 
highly cross-linked protein membranes (‘bricks’) lie within a metaboli-
cally active lipid layer synthesised by keratinocytes (‘mortar’). Terminal 
differentiation of keratinocytes relies on the keratin laments being 
aggregated and this is, in part, mediated by laggrin. Mutations of the 
laggrin gene are found in icthyosis vulgaris and in some patients with 
atopic eczema.
The skin is a barrier against physical stresses and infections. Cell-to-
cell attachments must be able to transmit and dissipate stress, a function 
performed by desmosomes. Diseases that affect desmosomes, such as 
pemphigus, result in blistering due to keratinocyte separation.
The remaining 10% of epidermal cells are:
 Langerhans’ cells: these are dendritic, bone marrow-derived cells 
that circulate between the epidermis and local lymph nodes. Their 
prime function is antigen presentation to lymphocytes. Other dermal 
antigen-presenting dendritic cells are also present.
 Melanocytes: these occur predominantly in the basal layer and are 
of neural crest origin. They synthesise the pigment melanin from 
tyrosine, package it in melanosomes and transfer it to surrounding 
keratinocytes via their dendritic processes.
 Merkel cells: these occur in the basal layer and are thought to play a 
role in signal transduction of ne touch. Their embryological deriva-
tion is unclear.
Basement membrane
The basement membrane (see Fig. 27.1) is an anchor for the epider-
mis and allows movement of cells and nutrients between dermis and 
epidermis. The cell membrane of the epidermal basal cell is attached 
to the basement membrane via hemi-desmosomes. The lamina lucida 
lies immediately below the basal cell membrane and is composed pre-
dominantly of laminin. Anchoring laments extend through the lamina 
lucida to attach to the lamina densa. This electron-dense layer con-
sists mostly of type IV collagen; from it extend loops of type VII colla-
gen, forming anchoring brils that fasten the basement membrane to 
the dermis.
Dermis
The dermis is vascular and supports the epidermis structurally and nutri-
tionally. It varies in thickness from just over 1 mm on the inner forearm 
to 4 mm on the back. Fibroblasts are the predominant cells but others 
include mast cells, mononuclear phagocytes, T lymphocytes, dendritic 
cells, neurons and endothelial cells. The acellular part of the dermis con-
sists mainly of collagen I and III, elastin and reticulin, synthesised by bro-
blasts. Support is provided by an amorphous ground substance (mostly 
glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulphate), whose 
production and catabolism are altered by hormonal changes and ultravi-
olet radiation (UVR). Based on the pattern of collagen brils, the super-
cial dermis is termed the ‘papillary dermis’, and the deeper, coarser part 
is the ‘reticular dermis’.
Epidermal appendages
Hair follicles
There are 3–5 million hair follicles, epidermal invaginations that develop 
during the second trimester. They occur throughout the skin, with the 
exception of palms, soles and parts of the genitalia (glabrous skin). The 
highest density of hair follicles is on the scalp (500–1000/cm2). Newborns 
are covered with ne ‘lanugo’ hairs, which are usually non-pigmented 
and lack a central medulla; these are subsequently replaced by vellus 
hair, which is similar but more likely to be pigmented. By contrast, scalp 
hair becomes terminal hair, which is thicker with a central medulla, is 
usually pigmented and grows longer. At puberty, vellus hairs in hormo-
nally sensitive regions, such as the axillary and genital areas, become 
terminal hairs.
Human hairs grow in a cycle with three phases: anagen (active hair 
growth), catagen (transitional phase) and telogen (resting phase). The 
duration of each phase varies by site. On the scalp, anagen lasts several 
years, catagen a few days and telogen around 3 months. The length of 
hair at different sites reects the differing lengths of anagen.
Sebaceous glands
Sebaceous glands are epidermal downgrowths, usually associated with 
hair follicles and composed of modied keratinocytes. The cells of the 
sebaceous gland (sebocytes) produce a range of lipids, discharging the 
contents into the duct around the hair follicle. Sebum excretion is under 
hormonal control, with androgens increasing it (as do progesterones, to 
a lesser degree) and oestrogens reducing it. In animals, sebum is impor-
tant for hair waterproong but its role in humans is unclear.
Sweat glands
Eccrine sweat glands develop in the second trimester and are 
also epidermal invaginations found all over the body. Their coiled 
ducts open directly on to the skin surface. They play a major role in 

[[p1127]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1067
27
Anchoring filament
(laminin 332)
Basement membrane
Epidermis
Desmosome
(desmoglein-1 and 3,
desmoplakin)
Tonofilaments
(keratins 5 and 14)
Hemi-desmosome
(BP230, type XVII collagen,
α6β4 integrin, plectin)
Anchoring fibrils
(collagen VII)
Basal keratinocyte
Basal cell membrane
Lamina lucida
(laminin-1)
Lamina densa
(type IV collagen)
Sublamina densa
Epidermis
Dermis
Stratum corneum
(keratin layer)
Granular layer
Prickle
cell layer
Basal layer
Hair shaft
Langerhans'
cell
Melanocyte
Keratinocytes containing
keratins 1 and 10
Keratinocytes containing
keratins 5 and 14
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutis
Eccrine sweat duct
Superficial vascular
plexus
Sebaceous gland
Hair sheath
Eccrine sweat gland
Deep vascular plexus
Hair matrix
Dermal papilla
Subcutaneous
vessel
Fig. 27.1 Structure of normal skin.
thermoregulation and, unusually, are innervated by cholinergic bres 
of the sympathetic nervous system. Eccrine glands of the palms and 
soles are innervated differently and are activated in the ‘ght or ight’ 
response. Apocrine sweat glands are restricted to the axillae and the 
mammary and genital areas, are connected to hair follicles and are not 
involved in thermoregulation.
Nails
Fingernail growth commences at approximately 8 weeks of gestation 
and is complete by 32 weeks. Toenails develop slightly later. The anat-
omy of the nail apparatus is described later in the chapter.
Blood vessels and nerves
Human skin has a plentiful blood supply, arranged in supercial and 
deep plexuses consisting of arterioles, arterial and venous capillaries, 
and venules. The upper plexus in the papillary dermis communicates 
with the lower plexus at the junction between the dermis and the subcu-
tis. Capillary loops arise from terminal arterioles in the horizontal papillary 
plexus. Blood vessels are supplied by sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic nerves, with the relative contributions of the pathways differing 
by site. Sympathetic signals are important in mediating autonomic-
induced vasoconstriction. The blood supply of skin is far greater than 

[[p1128]]
1068    DERMATOLOGY
that required for normal skin physiology and reects the importance of 
skin in thermoregulation.
Functions of the skin
The skin has many functions, all of which can be affected by 
disease (Box 27.1). Skin changes associated with ageing are shown in 
Box 27.2
Investigation of skin disease
Magnifying glass
A hand-held or freestanding magnifying lens used under good lighting 
conditions (ideally daylight) is valuable for examination of the skin.
Wood’s light
Wood’s light is a long-wavelength UVA/short-wavelength visible (violet) 
light source that can be used in various ways. In hypopigmentation, such 
as in vitiligo, it can help in appreciating the extent of disease. In pig-
mented conditions, such as melasma, it can determine whether pigmen-
tation is mainly epidermal (sharp cut-off under Wood’s lamp) or mixed 
epidermal and dermal (ill-dened cut-off). Wood’s lamp can also be used 
to help with the diagnosis of some fungal infections because of their 
characteristic uorescence.
Dermatoscopy and diascopy
Dermatoscopy (also known as dermoscopy and epiluminescence 
microscopy) is increasingly performed with hand-held dermato-
scopes. What makes dermatoscopy unique is the fact that it allows 
visualisation through contact of a glass plate on the instrument with 
a liquid lm applied to the skin, or through special optics to allow 
non-contact dermatoscopy, enabling deeper structures to be seen 
without interference from reection and refraction of light in the 
epidermis.
Diascopy is simply pressing on the lesion with a glass slide. This 
provides some of the effect of dermatoscopy, but is mainly used to 
remove blood from vascular lesions to make the appearance of the 
lesion clearer. Granulomatous skin diseases may have a character-
istic appearance under diascopy, such as in lupus vulgaris (cutane-
ous tuberculosis), in which ‘apple jelly nodules’ are typically seen on 
diascopy.
Skin biopsy
Skin biopsy is a pivotal investigation in dermatology and can be used 
in a range of dermatological presentations. In the most common sce-
nario, a skin biopsy is undertaken in order to obtain tissue on which 
to perform standard histopathology. However, tissue may also be sub-
jected to a variety of staining and culture techniques, including immu-
nostaining. Histopathological examination of skin biopsies is especially 
useful for tumour diagnosis. When a dermatologist or pathologist with 
dermatopathology expertise is involved, it can also assist in the diag-
nosis of inammatory skin diseases. It is rare for histopathology of a 
previously undiagnosed inammatory skin disease to provide a diag-
nosis on its own; clinico-pathological correlation is critical. Most biop-
sies are stained with haematoxylin and eosin but other stains may be 
useful in special situations, such as for fungal hyphae, iron or mucin. 
Direct immunouorescence can also be undertaken on a fresh skin 
biopsy, allowing antigen visualisation using uorescein-labelled anti-
bodies; this is especially important in the diagnosis of autoimmune 
bullous disorders or connective tissue disease, such as cutaneous 
lupus.
27.2  Skin changes in old age
 Chronological ageing: due to the intrinsic ageing process.
 Photo-ageing: due to cumulative ultraviolet radiation (UVR) exposure and 
superimposed on intrinsic ageing.
 Typical changes: include atrophy, laxity, yellow discoloration, wrinkling, 
dryness, irregular pigmentation, and thinning and greying of hair.
 Causes: age-related alterations in structure and function of the skin, cumulative 
effects of environmental insults, especially UVR and smoking, cutaneous 
consequences of disease in other organ systems.
 Consequences: reduction in immune and inammatory responses, reduction 
in absorption and clearance of topical medications, reduced healing, 
increased susceptibility to irritants, dermatitis, adverse drug effects (including 
topical glucocorticoid-induced atrophy and purpura) and diseases such as 
skin cancer.
27.1 Functions of the skin
Function
Structure/cell involved
Protection against:
Chemicals, particles, desiccation
Stratum corneum
Ultraviolet radiation
Melanin produced by 
melanocytes and transferred to 
keratinocytes
Stratum corneum 
hyperproliferation
Antigens, haptens
Langerhans’ cells, lymphocytes, 
mononuclear phagocytes, mast 
cells, dermal dendritic cells
Microorganisms
Stratum corneum, Langerhans’ 
cells, mononuclear phagocytes, 
mast cells, dermal dendritic 
cells
Maintenance of uid balance
Prevents loss of water, electrolytes and 
macromolecules
Stratum corneum
Shock absorber
Strong, elastic and compliant covering
Dermis and subcutaneous fat
Sensation
Specialised nerve endings 
mediating pain and withdrawal
Itch leading to scratch and 
removal of a parasite
Metabolism
Predominantly keratinocytes
Detoxication of xenobiotics, retinoid 
metabolism, isomerisation of urocanic 
acid
Temperature regulation
Eccrine sweat glands and blood 
vessels
Protection, and ne manipulation of 
small objects
Nails
Hormonal
Steroidogenesis, testosterone synthesis 
and conversion to other androgenic 
steroids
Hair follicles, sebaceous glands
Conversion of thyroxine (T4) to 
triiodothyronine (T3)
Keratinocytes
Conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to 
vitamin D
Keratinocytes
Pheromonal
Importance unknown in humans
Apocrine sweat glands, possibly 
sebaceous glands
Psychosocial, grooming and sexual 
behaviour
Appearance, tactile quality of 
skin, hair, nails

[[p1129]]
Presenting problems in skin disease    1069
27
Microbiology
Bacteriology
Bacterial swabs may identify a causative infective agent. However, 
organisms identied from the skin surface may not be the cause of the 
skin disease but instead may simply reect colonisation of skin that has 
already been damaged by a primary skin disease.
Virology
A number of techniques, including immunouorescence and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR), are available to diagnose herpes simplex or herpes 
zoster viruses from vesicle uid.
Mycology
Scale, nail clippings (or scrapings of crumbly subungual hyperkeratosis) 
and plucked hairs can be examined by light microscopy. If potassium 
hydroxide and a simple light microscope are available, this can be per-
formed in any outpatient clinic. Microbiology laboratories will also rou-
tinely undertake microscopy and culture for fungi and yeasts.
Patch testing
Patch testing is the investigation of choice for delayed, cell-mediated, 
type IV hypersensitivity reactions to topical agents, which clinically man-
ifest as dermatitis. Potential allergens (see Box 27.23) are applied as 
patches to the back under occlusion for 48 hours, in vehicles and at 
concentrations that minimise false-positive and false-negative reactions. 
After 48 hours the patches are removed and patch-test readings are 
undertaken at time points of up to 7 days after patch-test application, 
with the most typical time point being at 96 hours. When interpreting 
patch test readings, it is important to determine the clinical relevance of 
any allergic reactions before giving avoidance advice.
Photopatch testing is similar to patch testing but investigates delayed 
hypersensitivity reactions to a topically applied agent (usually a sun-
screen or topical non-steroidal anti-inammatory drug (NSAID)) after the 
absorption of UVR. It involves applying substances in duplicate and irra-
diating one set with UVR (typically UVA, 5 J/cm2), readings then being 
conducted in a similar manner to patch testing.
Prick tests and specic immunoglobulin E testing
Prick tests are used to investigate cutaneous type I (immediate) hyper-
sensitivity reactions to various antigens such as pollen, house dust mite 
or dander. The skin is pricked with commercially available stylets through 
a dilution of the appropriate antigen solution. Alternatively, specic immu-
noglobulin E (IgE) levels to antigens can be measured in serum. If chal-
lenge tests are undertaken for patients with suspected allergy, these 
must be performed under controlled conditions due to the potential risk 
of triggering a severe reaction. More details of IgE testing are provided 
in Chapter 4
Phototesting
Phototesting is extremely valuable in the assessment of suspected pho-
tosensitivity. The mainstay investigation is monochromator phototesting, 
which involves exposing the patient’s back to increasing doses of irra-
diation using narrow wavebands across the solar spectrum and then 
assessing responses at each waveband, using the minimal erythema 
dose (MED) as the endpoint. This is the dose required to cause just per-
ceptible skin reddening (erythema) and is compared with values for the 
normal population. If a patient has reduced MEDs (develops erythema at 
lower doses than healthy subjects), this indicates abnormal photosen-
sitivity. Thus, monochromator phototesting can be used to determine 
whether a patient is abnormally photosensitive, which wavebands are 
involved and how sensitive the patient is. Provocation testing can be 
performed with a broadband (usually UVA) source to induce rash at a test 
site (most useful for polymorphic light eruption) and is a helpful diagnostic 
test. Provocation testing to a variety of light sources, including articial 
compact uorescent lamps, may also be indicated, the latter being most 
relevant in patients with severe photosensitivity.
Patients who are referred for phototherapy will also commonly undergo 
an MED test, in which they are exposed to a series of test doses of the 
light source that will be used therapeutically (often narrowband UVB); the 
MED is determined 24 hours later (or 72–96 hours for the psoralen–ultra-
violet A (PUVA) minimal phototoxic dose. This allows treatment regimens 
to be individualised, based on a patient’s erythemal responses. The MED 
can also detect abnormal photosensitivity, and represents a safety meas-
ure prior to starting a course of phototherapy.
Blood tests
Although most patients presenting with a skin problem do not need blood 
tests as part of their investigations, there are many systemic diseases that 
can present with skin features and, indeed, blood tests may also be indi-
cated in the investigation of primary skin disease. A wide range of possible 
investigations may be required and some examples include haemoglobin, 
iron studies and thyroid function tests in pruritus or hair loss; autoantibody 
screening if lupus is suspected; measurement of porphyrins for skin fragility 
and hypertrichosis; and hepatitis screening in lichen planus. These diverse 
examples emphasise the importance of considering an underlying systemic 
disease when assessing a patient with a dermatological presentation.
Imaging
Imaging techniques are not typically required but X-rays, ultrasound, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) may 
occasionally be indicated in specic situations, such as in metastatic mel-
anoma or in a patient presenting with a diagnosis of cutaneous sarcoid.
Presenting problems in skin disease
The major presentations in dermatology are outlined below. Detail of the 
underlying disorders is mostly provided in the disease-specic sections 
further on in the chapter.
Lumps and lesions
The term lump or lesion is typically used to describe a papule or nodule, 
although sometimes may refer to a macule or plaque. A new or changing 
lump is one of the key dermatology presentations.
Clinical assessment
Detailed history-taking and examination are essential:
 Change: Is the lump new or has there been a change in a pre-exist-
ing lesion? What is the nature of the change – size, colour, shape or 
surface change? Has change been rapid or slow? Are there other 
features – pain, itch, inammation, bleeding or ulceration (denition
of ‘ulcer’: an area from which the epidermis and at least the upper 
part of the dermis have been lost – see Fig. 27.9)?
 Patient: What is the patient’s age? Are they fair-skinned and freck-
led? Have they got multiple naevi? Has there been much sun 
exposure? Have they used sunbeds or lived and worked in sunny 
climates? Have they used photoprotection? Have they had skin 
cancer before or is there a family history of skin cancer? What medi-
cations are they taking? Are they immunosuppressed?
 Site: Is it on a sun-exposed or covered site? The scalp, face, upper 
limbs and back in men, and face, hands and lower legs in women, 
are the most chronically sun-exposed sites.
 Are there other similar lesions? These might include actinic kera-
toses (see Fig. 27.14) or basal cell papillomas (see Fig. 27.18).

[[p1130]]
1070    DERMATOLOGY
 Morphology: Tenderness, size, symmetry, regularity of border, colour, 
surface characteristics and the presence of features such as crust 
(denition: dried exudate of blood or serous uid – see Fig. 27.20), 
scale (denition: a ake arising from the stratum corneum; any con-
dition with a thickened stratum corneum can cause scaling – see Fig. 
27.14) and ulceration must be assessed. Stretching the skin and using 
a magnifying lens can be helpful, such as for detecting the raised, 
pearled edge of a basal cell carcinoma (see Fig. 27.12).
 Dermatoscopy: This can be used to detect the presence of abnor-
mal vessels, such as in basal cell carcinoma or the characteristic 
keratin cysts in basal cell papillomas. It is invaluable for assessing 
pigmented and vascular lesions (Fig. 27.2).
Is it a melanocytic naevus or a malignant melanoma?
This is a common clinical scenario and one that it is critical to resolve 
correctly.
 The precise nature of the change should be determined (as above). 
Listen to the patient and pay attention to subtle changes, as people 
know their skin well.
 If the patient has other pigmented lesions, then these should be 
examined too, as they may be informative. For example, if the 
presenting lesion looks different from the others, then suspicion of 
melanoma is increased; conversely, if the patient has multiple basal 
cell papillomas, this may be reassuring – although do not be falsely 
reassured.
 Is there a positive family history of melanoma? A suspicious naevus 
in a patient with a rst-degree relative with melanoma probably war-
rants excision.
The ABCDE ‘rule’ is a guide to the characteristic features of melanoma 
(Box 27.3 and see Figs. 27.2 and 27.16), although melanomas should 
ideally be diagnosed before the diameter is greater than 0.5  cm. Loss of 
normal skin markings in a pigmented lesion may be suggestive of mela-
noma. Conversely, normal skin markings and ne hairs dispersed evenly 
over a lesion are reassuring but do not exclude melanoma. The Glasgow 
seven-point checklist is another useful guide:
 major features: change in size, shape and colour
 minor features: diameter >0.5  cm, inammation, oozing, bleeding, 
itch or altered sensation.
Patients with one major or one minor feature should be referred for 
further evaluation.
Investigations and management
If a benign diagnosis, such as basal cell papilloma, is made on clinical 
grounds, then the patient can be reassured and the lesion either left 
or treated: for example, with cryotherapy. If there are concerns about 
A
D
C
B
Fig. 27.2 Dermatoscopy.
lacunae of this benign angioma and the patient was reassured.
27.3  ABCDE features of malignant melanoma
 Asymmetry
 Border irregular
 Colour irregular
 Diameter >0.5 cm
 Elevation irregular
(+ Loss of skin markings)

[[p1131]]
Presenting problems in skin disease    1071
27
the diagnosis or malignancy is suspected, then skin biopsy in order to 
obtain a tissue diagnosis is the usual approach. An incisional biopsy 
may be indicated, although if the lesion is small, excision may be most 
appropriate. If signicant concern exists about the possibility of malig-
nant melanoma, initial excision with a 2 mm margin would usually be 
undertaken prior to more denitive management once histology was 
conrmed. Further management of a changed lesion would, of course, 
depend on histological analysis of the diagnostic biopsy.
Rash
A rash is the other common presentation in dermatology. The main cat-
egories of scaly rashes are listed in Box 27.4. The most common type 
of rash presentation is maculopapular. Diagnosis can often be made on 
clinical grounds, although a biopsy may be required.
Clinical assessment
Important aspects of the history include:
 Age at onset and duration of rash. Atopic eczema often starts in 
early childhood and psoriasis between 15 and 40 years, and both 
may be chronic. Infective or drug-induced rashes are more likely to 
be of short duration and the latter to occur in relation to drug inges-
tion. Duration of individual lesions is also important, as in urticaria, 
for example, where lesions will come and go over short periods of 
time and do not persist beyond 24 hours.
 Body site at onset and distribution. Flexural sites are more typically 
involved in atopic eczema, and extensor surfaces and scalp in 
psoriasis. Symmetry is often indicative of an endogenous disease, 
such as psoriasis, whereas asymmetry is more common with exog-
enous causes, such as contact dermatitis or infections like herpes 
zoster.
 Itch. Eczema is usually extremely itchy and psoriasis may be less so.
 Preceding illness and systemic symptoms. Guttate psoriasis may be 
precipitated by a β-haemolytic streptococcal throat infection; almost 
all patients with infectious mononucleosis treated with amoxicillin 
will develop an erythematous maculopapular eruption; a history of 
chancre at the site of inoculation may be elicited in a presentation of 
secondary syphilis; malaise and arthralgia are common in drug erup-
tions and vasculitis.
The morphology of the rash and the characteristics of individual 
lesions are important (see Box 27.4).
Investigations and management
It is important to have a short differential diagnosis based on clinical 
assessment in order to direct investigations. For example, in psoriasis, 
no investigations may be needed and initial management with patient 
counselling and topical therapies may sufce. If the diagnosis is unclear, 
then a diagnostic skin biopsy and other targeted investigations based on 
the clinical picture may be required. An initial management plan should 
also be implemented. For example, in a child presenting with a rash that 
has features suggestive of impetigo, skin and nasal swabs should be 
performed and, once these have been taken, topical or systemic anti-
biotics should be introduced, depending on clinical extent of disease, 
and management should be adjusted accordingly, dependent on inves-
tigation ndings and clinical course. In contrast, if a patient presents 
with a maculopapular rash shortly after introduction of a new drug, then 
drug withdrawal, diagnostic biopsy, full blood count, including eosinophil 
count, and liver and renal function tests, in parallel with topical emollients 
and glucocorticoids, may be indicated.
Blisters
A blister is a uid-lled collection in the skin. The term vesicle is used for 
small lesions and bulla for larger lesions. Blistering occurs due to loss of 
cell adhesion within the epidermis or subepidermal region (see Fig. 27.1). 
The clinical presentation depends on the site or level of blistering within 
the skin, which in turn reects the underlying cause. There are a limited 
number of conditions that present with blisters (Box 27.5):
27.4  Causes and clinical features of common scaly rashes
Diagnosis
Distribution
Morphology
Associated signs
Atopic eczema (p.1096)
Face and exures
Poorly dened erythema, scaling
Vesicles
Lichenication if chronic
Shiny nails
Infra-orbital crease
‘Dirty neck’ (grey–brown discoloration)
Psoriasis (p. 1099)
Extensor surfaces
Lower back
Well-dened
Erythematous plaques
Silvery scale
Nail pitting, onycholysis
Scalp involvement
Axillae and genital areas often affected
Joint involvement
Köbner phenomenon (p. 1103)
Pityriasis rosea (p. 1102)
‘Fir tree’ pattern on trunk
Well-dened
Small, erythematous plaques
Collarette of scale
Herald patch
Drug eruption (p. 1115)
Widespread
Macules and papules
Erythema and scale
Exfoliation
Possible mucosal involvement or 
erythroderma
Pityriasis versicolor (p. 1093)
Upper trunk and shoulders
Hypo- and hyper-pigmented scaly patches
Lichen planus (p. 1103)
Distal limbs
Flexural aspect of wrists
Lower back
Shiny, at-topped, violaceous papules
Wickham’s striae
White, lacy network on buccal mucosa
Nail changes
Scarring alopecia
Köbner phenomenon
Tinea corporis (p. 1092)
Asymmetrical
Often isolated lesions
Erythematous, often annular plaques
Peripheral scale (sometimes pustules)
Expansion with central clearing
Possible nail, scalp, groin involvement
Secondary syphilis (p. 377)
Trunk and proximal limbs
Palms and soles
Red macules and papules, which become ‘gun-
metal’ grey
History of chancre
Systemic symptoms, e.g. malaise and fever

[[p1132]]
1072    DERMATOLOGY
27.5  Causes of acquired blisters
Localised
Generalised
Vesicular
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster
Impetigo
Pompholyx
Eczema herpeticum*
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Acute eczema
Bullous
Impetigo
Cellulitis
Stasis oedema
Acute eczema
Insect bites
Fixed drug eruption
Toxic epidermal necrolysis*
Erythema multiforme
Stevens–Johnson syndrome*
Bullous pemphigoid
Pemphigus*
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Lupus erythematosus
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Pseudoporphyria
Drug eruptions
*Usually with mucosal involvement too.
Think of
immunobullous causes
Bullous pemphigoid,
pemphigus, linear IgA
disease, bullous lupus
Systematic approach to the
diagnosis of blistering diseases
Exclude infection
Herpes simplex,
varicella zoster,
Staphylococcus aureus
Consider common
diseases in which
blisters are uncommon
Peripheral oedema,
cellulitis, allergic contact
dermatitis, other eczemas
Remember blisters
in drug eruptions
Fixed drug eruptions,
erythema multiforme,
vasculitis, TEN
Fig. 27.3 A systematic approach to the diagnosis of blistering diseases. (TEN = toxic epidermal necrolysis)
27.6  Primary skin diseases causing pruritus
Generalised pruritus
 Scabies
 Eczemas
 Pre-bullous pemphigoid
 Urticarias
 Xeroderma of old age
 Psoriasis
Localised pruritus
 Eczemas
 Lichen planus
 Dermatitis herpetiformis
 Pediculosis
 Tinea infections
directed investigations, such as incisional diagnostic skin biopsy for 
histology and direct immunouorescence, indirect immunouorescence 
and other targeted blood tests or skin swabs. Management should be 
based on the likely diagnosis and begin in parallel with investigations, 
until the diagnosis is conrmed.
Itch
Itch describes the unpleasant sensation that leads to scratching or rub-
bing. The terms ‘itch’ and ‘pruritus’ are synonymous; however, ‘pruritus’ 
is often used when itch is generalised. Itch can arise from primary cuta-
neous disease or be secondary to systemic disease, which may cause 
itch by central or peripheral mechanisms. Even when the mechanism is 
peripheral, there are not always signs of primary skin disease.
The nerve endings that signal itch are in the epidermis or near the 
dermo-epidermal junction. The underlying mechanisms of itch are not 
fully understood. Transmission is by unmyelinated slow-conducting C 
bres through the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus and then the cor-
tex. Aδ bres also seem to be involved in transmitting signals to the spinal 
cord, and the heat-sensitive transient receptor potential (TRP) channels 
1–4 are important. There is an inhibitory relationship between pain and 
itch. Scratching may relieve the symptom of itch after the sensation has 
ceased and this is either by stimulation of ascending sensory pathways 
that inhibit itch-transmitting neurons at the spinal cord (Wall’s ‘gate’ 
mechanism), or by direct damage to cutaneous sensory nerves.
The mechanisms of itch in most systemic diseases remain unclear. 
The itch of kidney disease, for example, may be mediated by circulat-
ing endogenous opioids. The clinical observation that peritoneal dialysis 
helps reduce itch more frequently than haemodialysis is consistent with 
this, with smaller molecules generally being dialysed more readily if the 
peritoneal membrane is used rather than a dialysis machine membrane.
Clinical assessment
It is important to determine whether skin changes are primary (a process 
in the skin causing itch) or secondary (skin changes caused by rubbing 
and scratching because of itch). This requires a thorough history and 
examination, sometimes with investigations, to exclude systemic dis-
ease. Many common primary skin disorders are associated with itch (Box 
27.6). If itch is not connected with primary skin disease, other causes 
 Intact blisters are not often seen if the split is high in the epidermis 
(below the stratum corneum), as the blister roof is so fragile that it 
ruptures easily, leaving erosions (denition: an area of skin denuded 
by complete or partial loss of the epidermis). This occurs in pem-
phigus foliaceus, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (see Fig. 
27.21) and bullous impetigo.
 If the split is lower in the epidermis, then intact accid blisters and 
erosions may be seen, as occurs in pemphigus vulgaris and toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (see Fig. 27.41).
 If the split is subepidermal, then tense-roofed blisters are seen. This 
occurs in bullous pemphigoid (see Fig. 27.42), epidermolysis bullosa 
acquisita and porphyria cutanea tarda (see Fig. 27.53).
 If there are foci of separation at different levels of the epidermis, 
such as may occur in eczema, then multilocular bullae made up of 
coalescing vesicles can occur.
Clinical assessment
Detailed history-taking and examination are critical. A history of onset, 
progression, mucosal involvement, drugs and systemic symptoms 
should be sought. Clinical assessment of the distribution, extent and 
morphology of the rash should be made. The Nikolsky sign is useful: 
sliding lateral pressure from a nger on normal-looking epidermis can 
dislodge and detach the epidermis in conditions with intra-epidermal 
defects, such as pemphigus and toxic epidermal necrolysis. A system-
atic approach to diagnosis is required (Fig. 27.3).
Investigations and management
Investigations and initial management will be guided by the clinical pres-
entation and differential diagnosis, and are described in more detail 
under the specic diseases. For example, an initial approach may include 

[[p1133]]
Presenting problems in skin disease    1073
27
should be considered (Box 27.7). These include liver diseases (mainly 
cholestatic diseases, such as primary biliary cholangitis), malignancies 
(generalised itch may be the presenting feature of lymphoma), haema-
tological conditions (generalised itch in chronic iron deciency or water 
contact-provoked (aquagenic) intense itch in polycythaemia), endocrine 
diseases (including hypo- and hyperthyroidism), chronic kidney disease 
(in which severity of itch is not always clearly associated with plasma 
creatinine concentration) and psychogenic causes (such as in ‘delusions 
of infestation’). Itch is common in pregnancy and may be due to one of 
the pregnancy-specic dermatoses. Making a correct diagnosis is par-
ticularly important in pregnancy, as some disorders can be associated 
with increased fetal risk (Box 27.8).
Investigations and management
Investigations should be directed towards nding an underlying cause and 
there will be a different approach for itch with rash, as opposed to itch with 
no signs of primary skin disease (Fig. 27.4). If there are no signs of primary 
skin disease, investigations should be undertaken to exclude systemic 
disease or iatrogenic causes. Psychogenic itch should be considered only 
if organic disease has been ruled out. There are no consistently effective 
therapies to suppress itch, and so establishing the underlying cause is crit-
ical. If a clear-cut diagnosis cannot be made, non-specic approaches can 
be used for symptom relief. These include sedation, often with H1-receptor 
antihistamines, along with emollients and counter-irritants (such as topical 
menthol-containing preparations). UVB phototherapy is useful for gener-
alised itch due to a variety of causes but the only randomised controlled 
study of efcacy is in chronic kidney disease. Other treatments include 
low-dose tricyclic antidepressants (probably through similar mechanisms 
to those involved when these drugs are used for chronic pain) and opi-
ate antagonists. If a psychogenic itch is considered likely, antidepressants 
and/or cognitive behavioural therapy may be effective. Itch of any cause 
can be severe and its potentially major adverse effects on quality of life are 
not always fully appreciated. Assessments of impact on quality of life, such 
as Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) scores, are essential.
27.7  Secondary causes of pruritus
Medical condition
Cause of pruritus
Treatment*
Liver disease
Central opioid effect
Elevation in bile salts 
may contribute
Naltrexone
Colestyramine 
Rifampicin
Sedative antihistamines 
UVB
Renal failure
Unknown; uraemia 
contributes
UVB
Oral activated charcoal
Haematological disease
Anaemia
Iron deciency
Iron replacement
Polycythaemia rubra 
vera
Unknown (often 
aquagenic pruritus)
Lymphoma 
Leukaemia
Myeloma
Unknown
Endocrine disease
Diabetes mellitus
Infections such as 
candidiasis and tinea
Treatment of infection
*In addition to specic treatment of the primary condition and symptomatic treatments, such as emollients. (5-HT  = 5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; UVB = ultraviolet B)
Medical condition
Cause of pruritus
Treatment*
Thyrotoxicosis
Unknown
Hypothyroidism
Unknown
Carcinoid syndrome
5-HT-mediated
HIV infection
Infection, infestation 
Eosinophilic folliculitis
Treatment of infection 
Local corticosteroids, UVB
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Anti-pityrosporal treatment
Unknown
UVB
Malignancy
Unknown
Psychogenic
Unknown
Psychotherapy, anxiolytics, 
antidepressants
27.8  Causes of pruritus in pregnancy
Diagnosis
Pregnancy, gestation and features
Treatment
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (pruritic 
urticarial papules and plaques, PUPP)
Typically rst pregnancy and uncommonly recurs
during third trimester and after delivery
Polymorphic urticated papules and plaques, start in 
striae
Chlorphenamine, emollients
Topical glucocorticoids
Acute cholestasis of pregnancy
Third trimester and commonly recurs in subsequent 
pregnancies
Abnormal liver function tests
Increased fetal and maternal risk
Emollients
Chlorphenamine
Colestyramine
UVB
Early delivery
Pemphigoid gestationis
Any stage, often second trimester and commonly 
recurs in subsequent pregnancies
Urticated erythema, blistering initially periumbilical
Characteristic histology and immunouorescence
Topical or oral glucocorticoids
Prurigo gestationis
Second trimester
Excoriated papules
Emollients
Topical glucocorticoids
Chlorphenamine
UVB
Pruritic folliculitis
Third trimester
Sterile pustules on trunk
Topical glucocorticoids
UVB
(UVB = ultraviolet B)

[[p1134]]
1074    DERMATOLOGY
 UVC (200–280 nm), which is absorbed by ozone and does not reach 
the Earth’s surface.
 UVB (280–315 nm), which constitutes less than 10% of UVR 
exposure but is around 1000-fold more potent than UVA and so 
accounts for the erythemal ‘sunburning’ effects of sunlight.
 UVA (315–400 nm), which is the most abundant UVR component 
reaching the Earth’s surface.
The arbitrary division between UVB and UVA regions is more often 
considered to be at 320 nm by photobiologists, and the UVA region 
can be further subdivided into UVA2 (320–340 nm) and UVA1 (340–
400 nm). UVA2 behaves biologically more like UVB, and UVA1 can be 
used therapeutically for several skin conditions, such as morphoea 
and eczema.
Patients with photosensitivity diseases can be abnormally sensitive to 
UVB, UVA, visible light (over 400 nm) or, commonly, a combination of 
wavebands. UVB is absorbed by window glass, whereas UVA and visible 
light are transmitted through glass.
Investigate for
underlying causes of itch
(Box 27.7)
Itch
(pruritus)
Itch
plus rash
Primary
skin disease
Diagnose and manage
underlying skin disease
(Box 27.6)
Only secondary
changes of
excoriation due
to itch
Itch,
no rash
Fig. 27.4 An overall approach to the investigation and management of itch 
(pruritus).
Fig. 27.5 Sunburn. Acute exposure to ultraviolet radiation results in an erythemal 
response that peaks 12–24 hours later. Sensitivity depends on the individual’s 
constitutive skin phototype.
27.9  The photosensitivity and photo-aggravated diseases
Cause
Condition
Clinical features
Immunological
(previously known as 
idiopathic)
Polymorphic light 
eruption (PLE)
Seasonal, itchy, papulovesicular rash on photo-exposed sites; face and back of hands often spared. Often 
hours of UVR exposure needed to provoke; lasts a few days; affects about 20% in Northern Europe, more 
common in young women
Chronic actinic 
dermatitis (CAD)
Chronic dermatitis on sun-exposed sites. Most common in older adult males. Predominantly UVB, but also 
often UVA and visible light photosensitivity. Most also have contact allergies
Solar urticaria
Immediate-onset urticaria on photo-exposed sites. Usually UVA and visible light photosensitivity. Can occur at any 
age
Actinic prurigo
Uncommon, presents in childhood. Often familial, with strong HLA association. Some similarities to PLE, 
although scarring occurs
Hydroa vacciniforme
Rare childhood photodermatosis. Varioliform scarring
Drugs (variety of 
mechanisms)
Phototoxicity
Usually UVA (and visible light) photosensitivity
Most common. Exaggerated sunburn and exfoliation. Many drugs such as thiazides, tetracyclines, 
uoroquinolones, quinine, NSAIDs
Pseudoporphyria
NSAIDs, retinoids, tetracyclines, furosemide are examples
Photoallergy
Usually to topical agents, particularly sunscreens and NSAIDs
Metabolic
Porphyrias
Pellagra
Mainly porphyria cutanea tarda and erythropoietic protoporphyria 
Photo-exposed site dermatitis due to tryptophan deciency (see Fig. 22.14)
Photogenodermatoses
Xeroderma 
pigmentosum
Rare. Defect in DNA excision repair, abnormal photosensitivity, photo-ageing and skin cancer. There may be 
neurological features
Photo-aggravation of 
pre-existing conditions
Lupus erythematosus
Can also be drug-induced (see Box 27.36)
Erythema multiforme
Rosacea
(HLA = human leucocyte antigen; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs; UVA/UVB = ultraviolet A/B; UVR = ultraviolet radiation)
Photosensitivity
Cutaneous photosensitivity is an abnormal response of the skin to UVR 
or visible radiation. The sun is the natural source but patients may also 
be exposed to articial sources of UVR through the use of sunbeds 
and/or phototherapy. Chronic UVR exposure increases skin cancer 
risk and photo-ageing. Acute exposure can induce erythema (redness) 
as a normal response (Fig. 27.5). However, abnormal photosensitivity 
occurs when a patient reacts to lower doses than would normally cause 
a response, either with a heightened erythemal reaction or the devel-
opment of a rash. Photo-aggravated skin diseases are exacerbated by 
sunlight but not caused by it. The main photosensitive and photo-ag-
gravated diseases are listed in Box 27.9.
Sunlight consists mainly of visible light, and the UVR component is 
divided into three wavebands (Fig. 27.6), according to the Commission 
Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE):

[[p1135]]
Presenting problems in skin disease    1075
27
Clinical assessment
Taking a careful history is essential, as the patient may not have the rash 
when assessed. Seasonal pattern and distribution of rash are impor-
tant. Key sites are the face (particularly nose, cheeks and forehead), 
top of ears, neck (Fig. 27.7), bald scalp, back of hands and forearms. 
Sparing is often seen under the chin and nose, behind the ears, on the 
upper eyelids and the distal digits – as we normally walk about with our 
eyes open and ngers exed! It can be misleading if there is covered 
site involvement. Patients who are sensitive to UVA and visible light may 
be affected through clothing. These patients commonly experience per-
ennial symptoms and may not be aware of the association with day-
light exposure. Other photosensitivity diseases, such as actinic prurigo 
or chronic actinic dermatitis, may also involve covered sites. Sparing of 
habitually exposed sites, such as the face and back of hands, occurs 
most commonly in polymorphic light eruption (PLE) and is called the 
‘hardening phenomenon’. Importantly, some conditions, such as solar 
urticaria, develop rapidly after sunlight exposure, whereas others, such 
as cutaneous lupus, can take several days to evolve.
Investigations and management
If photosensitivity is suspected, the patient should be referred to a special-
ist centre for assessment and investigation, usually involving monochro-
mator phototesting. Other investigations will often include provocation, 
patch or photopatch testing and screening for lupus and the porphyrias. 
Rarely, investigations such as human leucocyte antigen (HLA) typing in 
suspected actinic prurigo, or DNA excision repair functional activity or 
genotyping in suspected xeroderma pigmentosum, may be required.
Management depends on the cause. If there is a phototoxic drug or chem-
ical cause, this must be identied and addressed: for instance, by stopping 
the drug or treating the porphyria. Counselling in regard to sun avoidance is 
essential: keeping out of direct sun in the middle of the day, covering up with 
clothing, wearing hats with a wide brim and careful use of high-factor sun-
screens. Paradoxically, in some conditions, particularly PLE and solar urti-
caria, phototherapy can be used to induce ‘hardening’, which is a term used 
to describe the process by which phototherapy cross-links structures in the 
skin; in these circumstances the mechanism of desensitisation is unclear. 
Other approaches may be necessary, depending on disease and severity, 
and may include antihistamines (useful in two-thirds of patients with solar urti-
caria) and systemic immunosuppression (sometimes required in the immu-
nological photodermatoses, such as chronic actinic dermatitis). Patients with 
photosensitivity are at risk of vitamin D deciency due to reduced vitamin D 
synthesis by the skin and often require vitamin D supplements.
Sunscreens
Sunscreens can be divided into two categories: chemical sunscreens, 
which absorb specic wavelengths of UVR, and physical sunscreens, 
which reect UVR and the shorter visible wavelengths (see Fig. 27.6). 
Sunscreens are now highly sophisticated and most offer protection 
against UVB and most UVA wavelengths. If a patient is abnormally pho-
tosensitive to the longer wavelengths of UVA and the visible part of the 
spectrum (for example, in cutaneous porphyrias and solar urticaria), 
then conventional sunscreens are not benecial and specic reectant 
200 nm
290 nm
320 nm
400 nm
Atmospheric ozone
Window glass
Behavioural avoidance, shelter, clothing
Sunscreens
γ-rays
X-rays
UVC
UVB
UVA
Visible
Infrared
Sunburn (erythema)
Pigmentation
Skin cancer
Skin ageing
Porphyria
Most photodermatoses
Most drug photosensitivity
Skin disorders
and the main 
wavelengths
involved
UVR absorbers
or reflectors
Wavelength
760 nm
UVA2
Grenz rays
UVA1
Fig. 27.6 The electromagnetic spectrum. The action spectrum is not well dened for many conditions and, for some, is approximate and may vary between patients. 
The action spectrum for non-melanoma skin cancer mirrors that for erythema. The action spectrum for melanoma is not known but includes UVA and UVB. Photoprotection 
measures vary, depending on condition, although the mainstay always includes behavioural modication, clothing cover and appropriate sunscreen choices. (UV = ultraviolet; 
UVR = ultraviolet radiation)
Fig. 27.7 Chronic actinic dermatitis. Note the sharp cut-off and sparing behind 
the ear in the shadow cast by the earlobe (Wilkinson’s triangle).

[[p1136]]
1076    DERMATOLOGY
sunscreens are required. Historically, these agents were less cosmeti-
cally acceptable due to visible light reection, but current formulations, 
some of which are tinted, have reduced this problem.
Sunscreen protection levels are described by sun protection factor 
(SPF). This is the ratio of the dose of UVR required to produce skin ery-
thema in the presence and absence of the sunscreen. A sunscreen of 
SPF20 means that it would take 20 times as long for a person to develop 
sunburn in the presence of the sunscreen, as compared to not using it. 
Therefore, SPF is really a sunburn protection factor and is not a good 
guide to how well a sunscreen will perform in protecting against other 
reactions (such as skin pain in erythropoietic protoporphyria or UVR-
induced immunosuppression). SPF values are determined under exper-
imental conditions whereas, in practice, people tend to use 25%–33% 
of the amount of sunscreen required to achieve the stated SPF and it 
is easy to be lulled into a false sense of security of believing that higher 
levels of sun protection will be achieved than in reality will be the case. 
Patient counselling is therefore important with regard to adequate appli-
cation of sunscreen. Importantly, there is no such thing as a complete 
‘sunblock’ as sunscreens offer, at best, partial protection and are no sub-
stitute for modifying behaviour and covering up.
Leg ulcers
Leg ulcer is not a diagnosis, but a symptom of an underlying disease 
in which there is complete loss of the epidermis, leaving dermal layers 
exposed. Ulcers on the lower leg are frequently caused by vascular dis-
ease but there are other causes, as summarised in Box 27.10
Clinical assessment
A detailed history of the onset and course of leg ulceration and pre-
disposing conditions should be elicited. The site and surrounding skin 
should be assessed. Varicose veins are often present, although not 
inevitably. Assessment of the venous and arterial vasculature and neur-
ological examination are critical. The site of ulceration may also help to 
indicate the underlying primary cause (Fig. 27.8). Full clinical examination 
is essential as the ulcer may be arising in the context of systemic disease, 
such as vasculitis.
Leg ulceration due to venous disease
Varicose veins, a history of deep venous thrombosis and obesity are pre-
disposing factors. Incompetent valves in the deep and perforating veins 
of the lower leg result in retrograde ow of blood to the supercial sys-
tem, and a rise in capillary pressure (‘venous hypertension’). Pericapillary 
brin cufng occurs, leading to impairment of local tissue oxygenation 
and homeostasis.
The rst symptom in venous ulceration is often heaviness of the legs, 
followed by oedema. Haemosiderin pigmentation, pallor and rmness of 
surrounding skin, and sometimes venous/gravitational eczema subse-
quently develop. This progresses to lipodermatosclerosis – rm indura-
tion due to brosis of the dermis and subcutis, which may produce the 
well-known ‘inverted champagne bottle’ appearance. Ulceration, often 
precipitated by trauma or infection, follows. Venous ulcers typically occur 
on the medial lower leg (Fig. 27.9).
27.10  Causes of leg ulceration
Venous hypertension
 Sometimes following deep vein thrombosis
Arterial disease
 Atherosclerosis
 Vasculitis
 Buerger’s disease
Small-vessel disease
 Diabetes mellitus
 Vasculitis
Haematological disorders
 Sickle-cell disease
 Cryoglobulinaemia
 Spherocytosis
 Polycythaemia
 Myeloma
 Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia
 Immune complex disease
Neuropathy
 Diabetes mellitus
 Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
 Syphilis
Tumour
 Squamous cell carcinoma
 Basal cell carcinoma
 Malignant melanoma
 Kaposi’s sarcoma
Trauma
 Injury
 Factitious
Anterior
Posterior
Venous
Vasculitis
Arterial
Neuropathic
Fig. 27.8 Causes of lower limb ulceration. The main types of leg ulcer tend to 
affect particular sites.
Fig. 27.9 Patient with chronic venous insufciency who has chronic venous 
stasis skin changes and venous ulceration. From  Braddom RL, Chan L, Harrast 
MA. Physical medicine and rehabilitation, 4th edn. Elsevier; 2011.

[[p1137]]
Presenting problems in skin disease    1077
27
Complications of venous leg ulceration include bacterial colonisation 
and infection, and contact allergic dermatitis to topical medicaments, 
dressings and bandages. Lipodermatosclerosis may cause lymphoe-
dema and hyperkeratosis; rarely, a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) may 
develop in a long-standing venous ulcer (Marjolin’s ulcer).
Leg ulceration due to arterial disease
Deep, painful, punched-out ulcers on the lower leg, especially the shin 
and foot and in the context of intermittent claudication, are likely to be due 
to arterial disease. Risk factors include smoking, hypertension, diabetes 
and hyperlipidaemia. The foot is cold and dusky, and the skin atrophic 
and hairless. Peripheral pulses are absent or reduced. In these circum-
stances a vascular surgical assessment should be sought urgently.
Leg ulceration due to vasculitis
Vasculitis can cause leg ulceration either directly through epidermal 
necrosis due to damage to the underlying vasculature, or indirectly due 
to neuropathy.
Leg ulceration due to neuropathy
The most common causes of neuropathic ulcers are diabetes and lep-
rosy. Microangiopathy also contributes to ulceration in diabetes. The 
ulcers occur over weight-bearing areas, such as the heel. In the pres-
ence of neuropathy, protection of skin from trauma is essential to prevent 
ulceration.
Investigations
Appropriate investigations include:
 Full blood count to detect anaemia and blood dyscrasias.
 Urea and electrolytes to assess renal function.
 Urinalysis for glycosuria.
 Bacterial swab if there is a purulent discharge, rapid extension, 
cellulitis, lymphangitis or sepsis. This can guide antibiotic therapy 
for secondary infection but pathogenic bacteria are not always the 
same as those identied from the ulcer surface.
 Doppler ultrasound to assess arterial circulation. An ankle systolic 
pressure to brachial systolic pressure index (ABPI) of below 0.8 
suggests signicant arterial disease and a vascular surgery opinion 
should be sought. However, arterial calcication, such as in diabe-
tes, can produce a spuriously high ABPI. Pulse oximetry may also 
be useful, although ABPI is the preferred investigation if feasible.
Management
General advice on exercise, weight loss and smoking cessation is impor-
tant in all cases. Specic management depends on making the correct 
diagnosis to identify the cause(s) of ulceration. Underlying factors, such as 
diabetes or anaemia, must be treated. Oedema must be reduced by leg 
elevation and, if there is no arterial compromise, graduated compression 
bandaging from toes to knees to enhance venous return and improve 
healing. Compression bandaging is effective for individuals with an ABPI 
of more than 0.8 but should be avoided if the ABPI is less than 0.8.
If the ulcer is purulent, weak potassium permanganate soaks may 
help, and exudate and slough can be removed with normal saline 
or clean water. Dressings do not themselves heal leg ulcers, but 
can reduce discomfort and odour and, by reducing colonisation by 
potential pathogens, may reduce the frequency of secondary infec-
tion. A variety of dressings may be used, including non-adherent and 
absorbent (alginates, hydrogels, hydrocolloids) types. The frequency 
of dressing changes varies; heavily exudative ulcers may need daily 
dressings, whereas changes once weekly may sufce for drier ulcers. 
Occasionally, leeches may be used topically for ulcers with heavy 
adherent exudate.
Surrounding eczema should be suppressed with a topical glucocor-
ticoid. Commonly, this is venous eczema, but there should be a low 
threshold for referral for patch testing, as contact allergy to topical appli-
cations is common. Systemic antibiotics are indicated only if there is 
evidence of infection, as opposed to colonisation. Various techniques 
of split-thickness grafting (such as pinch and mince grafts) may hasten 
healing of clean ulcers but do not reduce recurrence risk. Leg ulcers can 
be very persistent but with accurate diagnosis and optimal management, 
healing is usually achievable. Symptomatic relief, including oral analge-
sics and sometimes chronic pain management, is important. Once the 
ulcer has healed, ongoing use of compression hosiery is advised to limit 
the risk of recurrence.
Abnormal pigmentation
Loss of skin pigmentation (depigmentation), reduction in pigmentation 
(hypopigmentation) and increased pigment (hyperpigmentation) are 
features of a variety of disorders. A detailed history and examination, 
including use of a Wood’s light, are required to establish the diagnosis. 
Investigations will depend on the presentation. For example, micros-
copy of skin scrapings should be undertaken if hypopigmentation is 
associated with inammation and scaling; screening for autoimmune 
disease may be required if vitiligo is suspected; and investigation for 
endocrine disease or the porphyrias may be appropriate in hyperpig-
mentation. Further details of the specic conditions are discussed later 
in this chapter.
Hair and nail abnormalities
Many conditions affect the skin appendages, particularly hair and nails. 
Conditions causing hair loss (alopecia) are listed in Box 27.31. Nail 
changes may be a marker for systemic disease, such as iron deciency, 
or be a feature of certain skin conditions, such as psoriasis.
Acute skin failure
Acute skin failure is a medical emergency. Several conditions can cause 
widespread and acute failure of many skin functions (see Box 27.1), 
including thermoregulation, uid balance control and barrier to infection. 
Many of these conditions involve widespread dilatation of the dermal 
vasculature and can provoke high-output cardiac failure; they are also 
associated with increased protein loss from the skin and often from the 
gut. Many lead to acute skin failure by causing erythroderma (erythema 
affecting at least 90% of the body surface area), although severe auto-
immune blistering diseases and the spectrum of Stevens–Johnson syn-
drome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) disease can produce acute skin 
failure without erythroderma.
Clinical assessment
Detailed history-taking and full examination are required. Particular 
attention should be paid to drug history, chronology and history of any 
preceding skin disease. Eczema, psoriasis, drug eruptions and cutane-
ous T-cell lymphoma (Sézary syndrome) are among the diseases that 
can either present with, or progress to, erythroderma. Other causes 
include the psoriasis-like condition pityriasis rubra pilaris, and rare types 
of ichthyosis. Erythroderma may occur at any age and is associated with 
severe morbidity and signicant mortality (see Fig. 27.36D). Older people 
are at greatest risk, especially if they have comorbidities. Erythroderma 
may appear suddenly or evolve slowly. In dark skin, the presence of pig-
mentation may mask erythema, giving a purplish hue.
Erythrodermic patients are usually systemically unwell with shivering 
and hypothermia, secondary to excess heat loss. However, they may 
also be pyrexial and unable to lose heat due to damage to sweat gland 
function and sweat duct occlusion. Tachycardia and hypotension may 
be present because of volume depletion. Peripheral oedema is common 
in erythroderma, owing to low albumin and high-output cardiac failure. 
Lymph nodes may be enlarged, either as a reaction to skin inammation 
or, rarely, due to lymphomatous inltration.

[[p1138]]
1078    DERMATOLOGY
Investigations and management
Investigations are required to establish the underlying cause and to iden-
tify systemic involvement, such as hypoalbuminaemia, deranged liver 
and renal function and electrolyte imbalance. Skin biopsy may be neces-
sary if the cause is unclear. Regardless of the cause, important aspects 
of the management of erythroderma include supportive measures to 
ensure adequate hydration, maintenance of core temperature and ade-
quate nutrition. Insensible uid loss can be many litres above normal 
losses. Protein may be lost directly from the skin and through the gut 
because of the protein-losing enteropathy that often accompanies con-
ditions such as erythrodermic psoriasis. To reduce the risks of infection, 
any intravenous cannulae should be sited in peripheral veins, if possible. 
In the initial management of acute erythroderma, urinary catheterisation 
is often required (for patient comfort and accurate uid balance moni-
toring) but catheters should be removed as soon as possible. Frequent 
application of a simple ointment emollient (such as white soft parafn/
liquid parafn mix) is usually appropriate.
Principles of management of skin disease
General measures
General measures that apply in all skin diseases include establishment 
of the correct diagnosis, removal of precipitating or aggravating factors, 
use of safe, effective treatments and consideration of the patient holisti-
cally, taking into account the impact of the disease on quality of life and 
the person’s support network. The psychological impact of chronic skin 
diseases should not be under-estimated and it is important to remember 
that psychiatric illness can also manifest as a skin disease, such as in 
delusions of infestation or trichotillomania. Careful clinical assessment is 
essential and any management strategy must also include approaches 
to address the psychological well-being of the patient.
Topical treatments
Topical treatments are rst-line therapy for most skin diseases, many 
of which can be treated effectively by topical agents alone. Selection of 
the appropriate active drug/ingredient and vehicle is essential. Ointments 
are preferred to creams for dry skin conditions, such as chronic ecze-
mas, as they are more hydrating and contain fewer preservatives than 
creams, and so allergy risk is reduced. However, patients nd creams 
easier to apply and so adherence may be better. Gels and lotions can 
be easier to use on hair-bearing sites. The molecular weight and lipid–
water coefcient of a drug determine its skin penetration, with larger, 
water-soluble, polar molecules penetrating poorly. In skin disease, if the 
stratum corneum is impaired – as in eczema – increased drug absorption 
occurs. Occlusion under dressings also increases absorption. Drugs can 
be used in different potencies or concentrations, or in combination with 
other active ingredients, and many are available in more than one formu-
lation. The properties of different vehicles are listed in Box 27.11. Overall, 
adherence to topical treatments can be problematic, so it is essential for 
patients to know exactly what is required of them and for regimens to be 
kept as simple as possible. Emollients, topical glucocorticoids and other 
selected key topical therapies that are widely used in a diverse range of 
skin conditions are detailed below. For the more disease-specic thera-
pies, detailed descriptions are included in the disease sections.
Emollients
These are mainstays in the treatment of eczema, psoriasis and many other 
conditions, and are used to moisturise, lubricate, protect and ‘soften’ skin. 
They are essentially vehicles without active drug and are available in many 
formulations: creams, ointments, gels and bath, shower and soap substi-
tutes. White soft parafn is the most effective and is widely used.
Topical glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids are available in a variety of formulations, potencies 
and strengths, most commonly as creams and ointments (Box 27.12). 
Selection of the correct product depends on the condition being treated, 
body site and duration of expected use. Mild topical glucocorticoids are 
used in delicate areas, such as the face or genitals, and close supervision 
of glucocorticoid use at these sites is required. In contrast, very potent 
glucocorticoids may be required under occlusion for chronic resistant 
disease such as nodular prurigo.
Adverse cutaneous effects of chronic glucocorticoid use include 
atrophy (denition: an area of thin, translucent skin caused by loss of 
27.11  Characteristics of vehicles used in topical treatments
Vehicle
Denition
Use
Site
Cosmetic acceptability
Risk of contact 
sensitisation
Creams
Emulsions of oil and water (aqueous 
cream)
Acute presentations
Cooling, soothing
Well absorbed
Mild emollients
All sites, including 
mucous membranes 
and exures, but not 
hair-bearing areas
Very good
Helps adherence
Signicant, due 
to preservatives, 
antimicrobials and often 
lanolin
Ointments
Greasy preparations
Insoluble in water (white soft parafn)
Soluble (emulsifying ointment)
Chronic dry skin 
conditions
Occlusive and emollient
Hydrating
Mildly anti-inammatory
Avoid hair-bearing 
areas and exures
Moderate
Low
Lotions
Water-based
Liquid formulation
Often antiseptic and astringent 
(potassium permanganate)
Cooling effect
Cleans the skin and 
removes exudates
Large areas of the skin 
and the scalp
Good, but can sting if in 
an alcoholic base
Rare
Gels
Thickened lotions
Hydrophilic and hydrophobic bases
For specic sites
Hair-bearing areas and 
the face
Good
Low
Pastes
Semi-solid preparations consisting of 
nely powdered solids suspended in 
an ointment
Occlusive, protective
Hydrating
Circumscribed skin 
lesions, (psoriasis, 
lichen simplex 
chronicus)
Any area of skin
Often used in 
medicated bandages
Moderate
Moderate

[[p1139]]
Principles of management of skin disease    1079
27
epidermis, dermis or subcutaneous fat – Fig. 27.10), striae (denition: 
linear, atrophic, pink, purple or white bands caused by connective tissue 
changes – Fig. 27.10), petechiae and purpura (denition: haemorrhagic 
macules or papules caused by extravasated blood) and telangiectasiae 
(denition: visible dilatations of small cutaneous blood vessels – see 
Fig. 27.12A), increased risk of infection and systemic absorption, caus-
ing Cushingoid features and suppression of the hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal axis. However, under-treatment with glucocorticoids is more 
common than over-treatment in routine clinical practice. In general, the 
lowest potency of glucocorticoid should be used for the shortest period 
to gain control of the disease; this can be achieved by initial use of a more 
potent glucocorticoid, with reduction in potency or frequency of applica-
tion as control is gained. Tolerance or tachyphylaxis can develop with 
chronic use, so intermittent courses of treatment are advised. Caution is 
required with glucocorticoids in psoriasis, as rebound, unstable or pus-
tular psoriasis can occur with sudden cessation of use. Nevertheless, 
glucocorticoids are invaluable for many sites, particularly the exures. 
Topical glucocorticoids are often formulated in combination with antisep-
tics, antibiotics or antifungals, and their controlled use may be appro-
priate in infected eczema or exural psoriasis. Intralesional injections of 
glucocorticoids can be used in a variety of indications, including nod-
ular prurigo, keloid scar (denition of ‘scar’: replacement of normal 
structures by brous tissue at the site of an injury, although keloid scar 
describes a pathological process extending beyond the site of injury), 
acne cysts and alopecia areata.
Anti-infective agents
Antiseptics should be considered before antibiotics, as they cover a wide 
range of organisms and help to reduce the risk of antibiotic resistance. 
Antibiotics can be used either for their anti-infective properties or for their 
anti-inammatory properties. Topical antiviral and antifungal agents are 
also widely used for a range of mild skin infections.
Calcineurin inhibitors
The topical calcineurin inhibitors tacrolimus and pimecrolimus can be 
used to treat eczema and a variety of other conditions, through local 
cutaneous immunosuppression.
Immune response modiers
Topical imiquimod was introduced for the treatment of anogenital warts 
but can be used for a diverse range of other skin diseases, including 
actinic keratosis, Bowen’s disease, basal cell carcinoma, lentigo maligna, 
cutaneous lupus and common and planar warts. Its mechanism of action 
is via stimulation of endogenous Th2 immune responses and release of 
cytokines, including interferon-gamma (IFN-γ). It can cause signicant 
inammation, requiring dose adjustments, but subclinical disease may 
respond to treatment.
Dressings
A ‘wound’ covering is called a dressing. Box 27.13 shows the indica-
tions for their use. The active agent, vehicle and ‘wound’ type should 
be considered. Wet lesions should be treated with wet dressings. Paste 
bandages can be used in conjunction with topical emollients and gluco-
corticoids to soothe and cool, ease pruritus and scratching, and reduce 
inammation. Dressings for venous leg ulcers are described later in this 
chapter.
Phototherapy and photochemotherapy
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) treatments (most commonly, narrowband 
ultraviolet B and psoralen–ultraviolet A (PUVA)) are used in the man-
agement of many different diseases. The best evidence for their efcacy 
is in psoriasis, atopic eczema, vitiligo and chronic urticaria, although 
there is also evidence that UVB is helpful in treating generalised itch 
associated with chronic kidney disease and a range of other diverse 
skin conditions.
Psoralens are natural photosensitisers found in a number of plants. 
They intercalate between the strands of DNA and, on excitation with 
UVA, cross-link the DNA strands. Psoralens are therefore prodrugs that 
are activated only in skin that is exposed to UVA. Psoralens can also be 
applied topically in a bath before irradiation with UVA (bath PUVA) or can 
27.12 Potencies and strengths of commonly used topical 
glucocorticoid preparations*
Mild
 Hydrocortisone 0.5%, 1%, 2.5%
 Hydrocortisone 1% and fusidic acid 2% (Fucidin H)
Moderate
 Clobetasone butyrate 0.05% (Eumovate)
 Betamethasone valerate 0.025% (Betnovate-RD)
 Fluocinolone acetonide 0.00625% (Synalar 1:4)
Potent
 Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (Betnovate)
 Betamethasone valerate 0.1% and clioquinol 3% (Betnovate-C)
 Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% (Synalar)
 Hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1% (Locoid)
 Mometasone furoate 0.1% (Elocon)
Very potent
 Clobetasol propionate 0.05% (Dermovate)
*UK proprietary names are given in brackets.
Fig. 27.10 Striae and atrophy induced by excess prolonged potent topical 
glucocorticoid use.
27.13 Indications for dressings
 Protection
 Symptomatic relief from pain or itch
 Maintenance of direct application of topical treatment
 Possible improvement in healing time
 Reduction of exudate
 Reduction of odour

[[p1140]]
1080    DERMATOLOGY
be applied in creams or gels for localised topical PUVA. PUVA is a more 
complex treatment than UVB and has more adverse effects; in particular, 
cumulative exposure to PUVA increases the risk of skin cancer, particu-
larly squamous cell carcinoma. Therefore, PUVA is generally used for 
poor responders to UVB, or in diseases such as plaque-stage cutaneous 
T-cell lymphoma or pityriasis rubra pilaris, where it is the phototherapy of 
rst choice. Phototherapy or PUVA may be offered as a whole-body or 
localised treatment.
Longer-wavelength UVA1 (340–400 nm) is also used for several con-
ditions, particularly the brosing skin diseases such as morphoea, where 
efcacy has been shown and there is a lack of other well-proven ther-
apies. The evidence base for its place in the management of several 
diseases, such as eczema, is not fully proven and availability of UVA1 is 
mainly through tertiary referral centres with expertise in photodermatol-
ogy and phototherapy.
Systemic therapies
General information is provided here for drugs used in a range of skin 
diseases; details of other drugs are provided in disease-specic sections.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are widely used for their anti-infective properties, particularly 
for staphylococcal and streptococcal skin infections. In these indications, 
the correct antibiotic should be selected, based on bacterial sensitiv-
ity and patient factors. As examples, oral ucloxacillin may be indicated 
for clinically infected eczema, intravenous ucloxacillin for cellulitis, and 
clarithromycin for a patient with a staphylococcal carbuncle who is pen-
icillin-allergic. Optimal therapeutic doses and courses must be chosen, 
based on local antimicrobial prescribing guidelines. Several antibiotics, 
such as tetracyclines, erythromycin and co-trimoxazole are used pre-
dominantly for their anti-inammatory effects in indications such as acne 
vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Antihistamines
A range of H1- and H2-receptor antagonists are used in dermatology. 
For diseases in which histamine in the skin is relevant (such as urticaria), 
non-sedating antihistamines should be given: for example, fexofena-
dine or cetirizine. For pruritic conditions such as eczema, the sedating 
effect of antihistamines like hydroxyzine or chlorphenamine is important. 
However, antihistamines are widely used in older patients for the symp-
tom of pruritus due to a variety of causes such as xeroderma, metabolic 
impairment, malignancy or concomitant drugs. Sedating antihistamines 
should be used with caution in older patients, as they may increase the 
risk of falls and accidents in the home, with disastrous consequences. 
Careful choice of drug and dose is therefore essential. Leukotriene 
receptor antagonists, such as montelukast, may be added to antihista-
mine regimens, for additional mast cell stabilising effects.
Retinoids
Oral retinoids are used in a range of conditions, including acne, psoriasis 
and other keratinisation disorders. They promote differentiation of skin 
cells and have anti-inammatory effects. Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) 
is widely used for moderate to severe acne. Acitretin can be effective in 
psoriasis and other keratinisation disorders, such as ichthyosis, as can 
alitretinoin (9-cis-retinoic acid) in hand and foot eczema and bexarotene 
in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Adverse effects of retinoids include dryness of the skin and mucous 
membranes, abnormalities in liver function or hepatitis, increase in serum 
triglycerides (levels should be checked before and during therapy) and 
mood disturbances. Alitretinoin and bexarotene can cause hypothyroid-
ism. Systemic retinoids are teratogenic and must be prescribed along 
with a robust form of contraception. Females must have a negative 
pregnancy test before, during and after therapy, and pregnancy must 
be avoided for 2 months after stopping isotretinoin and 2 years after 
stopping acitretin.
Immunosuppressants
Systemic glucocorticoids, particularly prednisolone, are widely used in 
inammatory skin diseases, such as eczema, immunobullous disease 
and connective tissue disorders. Methotrexate, azathioprine and myco-
phenolate mofetil are effective in eczema and psoriasis either alone or as 
glucocorticoid-sparing agents. Further details on the mechanism of action, 
adverse effects and monitoring requirements for these agents are provided 
in Chapter 26 (see Box 26.33). Hydroxycarbamide is an alternative immu-
nosuppressant to methotrexate in psoriasis, but is not licensed for this 
indication and appears to be less effective than methotrexate. The risk of 
myelosuppression is greater. Dimethyl fumarate is also used off label in the 
treatment of psoriasis. Ciclosporin has a rapid onset of action and is effective 
in inducing clearance of psoriasis and eczema. Monitoring of blood pressure 
and renal function is required. Ciclosporin should be used only with caution 
after phototherapy, particularly PUVA, because of the increased risk of skin 
cancer. Long-term use of ciclosporin is not advised. Dapsone is an immuno-
modulator and may be used in diseases in which neutrophils are implicated, 
such as dermatitis herpetiformis. Haemolysis, methaemoglobinaemia and 
hypersensitivity can occur, and monitoring is required. Hydroxychloroquine 
is of particular value in cutaneous lupus.
Biologic and other advanced therapies
Major advances in the treatment of inammatory skin diseases have 
been made in recent years through increased understanding of patho-
physiology, the identication of new molecular targets for drug design 
and the introduction of biological treatments and small molecules 
that target specic signalling pathways involved in the inammatory 
response. Biologic treatments work by binding to and neutralising pro-in-
ammatory cytokines or components of their receptors whereas small 
molecule inhibitors target intracellular signalling pathways situated down-
stream of cytokine receptors.
Multiple biologics are available for the treatment of severe or treatment-re-
sistant psoriasis. These include multiple inhibitors of tumour necrosis fac-
tor alpha (TNF-α) (adalimumab, certolizumab, etanercept and iniximab), 
ustekinumab, which inhibits interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23 by binding to the 
p40 component of both cytokines; guselkumab, which is a specic inhibitor 
of IL-23; ixekizumab and secukinumab, which are inhibitors of IL-17; and 
brodalumab, which inhibits the IL-17 receptor (Fig. 27.11).
Dupilumab is an antibody that targets the IL-4 receptor alpha chain 
subunit, which is common to both IL-4 and IL-13 receptors. It has 
been shown to be efcacious in the treatment of severe atopic der-
matitis resistant to standard therapies. Tralokinumab and lebrikizumab 
are specic inhibitors of IL-13 which are also showing promise in the 
treatment of severe atopic dermatitis but these are not yet licensed for 
clinical use (Box 27.14). Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed 
against immunoglobulin E (IgE), which is used in severe asthma, also 
has a role in the treatment of urticaria and some patients with atopic 
dermatitis. Small molecule targeted synthetic immunosuppressives have 
also been developed. Apremilast inhibits phosphodiesterase-E4 (PDE-4) 
reducing cytokine production by immune cells and is used in psoriasis. 
Crisaborole, another PDE-4 inhibitor, is under development for the treat-
ment of psoriasis. Baricitinib and upadacitinib, which inhibit Janus acti-
vated kinase (JAK) enzymes that are involved in signalling downstream of 
several cytokine receptors, are also used in psoriasis and atopic dermati-
tis. Rituximab, which binds to CD20 causing depletion of B cells, is used 
in pemphigus vulgaris. Intravenous immunoglobulin, pooled from donor 
plasma, may be used in the treatment of dermatomyositis and occasion-
ally may be indicated in other dermatological diseases. More detail on 
the dosages, mechanism of action and adverse effects of these agents 

[[p1141]]
Principles of management of skin disease    1081
27
involved in regulating production of IL-17 and other cytokines in the skin. 
Tumour targeted kinase inhibitors and biologics directed against CTLA-4 
and the programmed cell death (PD1) pathways which are used in the 
treatment of melanoma are discussed later in this chapter.
Dermatological surgery
Most dermatological surgical procedures are performed under local 
anaesthetic. Knowledge of local anatomy is essential, particularly the loca-
tions of vessels and nerves. In certain sites, such as the ngers, soles of 
the feet and the nose, local cutaneous nerve blocks are useful. Some sites 
are associated with particular risks, such as keloidal scarring on the upper 
trunk of young patients, unsightly scars over the scapulae, and poor heal-
ing and risk of ulceration following procedures on the lower legs.
Excision biopsy
This involves surgical removal of the lesion followed by histological exam-
ination. The most common indication is suspicion of malignancy. The 
lesion and line of excision should be marked out and the margin of exci-
sion decided before the procedure. It is important to excise down to the 
appropriate anatomical plane. Depending on body site, a range of proce-
dures can minimise the resulting defect. Healing by secondary intention 
may also achieve good cosmetic results.
Curettage
Curettage involves using a small, spoon-shaped implement (curette), not 
only as a denitive treatment but also to obtain histology. Curettage does 
not preserve tissue architecture very well, however, and it may be difcult 
to distinguish between dysplasia and invasive malignancy. It can be an 
effective treatment for basal cell papilloma, actinic keratosis, intra-epider-
mal carcinoma and supercial basal cell carcinoma.
Fig. 27.11 Biologic and targeted therapies in inammatory skin diseases.
Biologic treatments for inammatory rheumatic diseases work by targeting key cytokines 
or their receptors involved in regulating the immune response. (IL = interleukin; Th = 
T-helper cell subtype; TNFα = tumour necrosis factor alpha; TNFi = inhibitor of tumour 
necrosis factor alpha; PDE4 = phosphodiesterase E4; JAK = Janus activated kinase; 
PKA = protein kinase A; STAT = signal transducers and activators of transcription; 
cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate)
Dendritic
cells
IL12/IL-23
IL-23
TNF-α
TNFi
IL-17
IL-17R
Secukinumab
Ixekizumab
Ustekinumab
Guselkumab
Brodalumab
Dupilumab
Nemolizumab
Th17
Th2/Th31
Keratinocyte
Itch
IL-31
IL-4
IL-13
Macrophage
JAK
JAK inhibitors
Pro-inflammatory
genes
JAK
Cytokines
Apremilast
Cell wall
Cytokine receptor
P
P
P
P
STAT
STAT
P
P
STAT
STAT
DNA
PDE4
PKA
cAMP
AMP
IFN-γ
IL-6
IL-2
are provided in Chapter 26 (see Box 26.35). Other new treatments that 
are under development include: nemolizumab, which targets the IL-31 
receptor and improves itching in atopic dermatitis; ponesomid and n-
golimod, which target the sphingosine-1-phosphate pathway, which is 
involved in trafcking immune cells into the skin; fezakinumab, which 
inhibits IL-22, a proinammatory cytokine implicated in the pathogen-
esis of psoriasis and atopic dermatitis; and tapinarof, a small molecule 
modulator of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor which is a transcription factor 
27.14 New and emerging therapies for inammatory skin 
disease
Drug
Class and type 
of drug
Molecular 
target
Function of 
target
Indication
Tralokinumab Mab inhibitor
IL-13
Pro-inammatory 
cytokine
Atopic 
dermatitis
Lebrikizumab Mab inhibitor
IL-13
Pro-inammatory 
cytokine
Atopic 
dermatitis
Fezakinumab
Mab inhibitor
IL-22
Pro-inammatory 
cytokine
Atopic 
dermatitis
Nemolizumab Mab inhibitor
IL-31
Mediator of itch
Atopic 
dermatitis
Crisabrole
Small molecule 
inhibitor
PDE4
Regulates 
cytokine 
production by 
immune cells
Atopic 
dermatitis 
Psoriasis
Fingolomod
Small molecule 
inhibitor
S1PR
Trafcking of 
immune cells to 
the skin
Atopic 
dermatitis
Ponesimid
Small molecule 
inhibitor
S1PR
Trafcking of 
immune cells to 
the skin
Atopic 
dermatitis
Tapinarof
Small molecule 
agonist
Aryl 
hydrocarbon 
receptor
Inhibits 
production of 
inammatory 
cytokines
Atopic 
dermatitis 
Psoriasis
(Mab = monoclonal antibody)

[[p1142]]
1082    DERMATOLOGY
Shave excision
Shave excision using local anaesthetic may be used for simple and effec-
tive treatment of raised supercial benign skin lesions affecting epidermis 
and upper dermis, such as benign naevi and skin tags.
Mohs’ micrographic surgery
Mohs’ micrographic surgery is employed to ensure adequate tumour 
excision margins, while conserving unaffected tissue. It is most com-
monly used for basal cell carcinoma.
Non-surgical treatments
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy is a destructive treatment using liquid nitrogen to cause cell-
wall and membrane destruction and cell death. Liquid nitrogen can be 
applied either with a cotton bud or, more effectively, with a spray gun. 
A wide variety of conditions can be treated but it is essential for the 
correct diagnosis to be made rst, if necessary by diagnostic biopsy. 
Cryotherapy should not be used to treat melanocytic naevi. Benign 
lesions, such as viral warts and basal cell papilloma, respond well, and 
cryotherapy can also be effective for actinic keratosis, Bowen’s disease 
or supercial non-melanoma skin cancer. Malignant indications require 
more vigorous treatment, usually with two cycles, and this is normally 
carried out in secondary care. Considerable inammation, blistering and 
pigmentary change, particularly hypopigmentation, can occur. Caution is 
required to avoid damage to tendons and nerves, especially when using 
cryotherapy on digits.
Laser therapy
Laser therapy involves treatment with monochromatic light. Skin compo-
nents (chromophores), such as haemoglobin and melanin, absorb spe-
cic wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, and these wavelengths 
can therefore be used to destroy these targets selectively and to treat 
certain skin disorders. Lasers targeting haemoglobin are employed for 
vascular abnormalities, such as spider naevi, telangiectasiae and port-
wine stains, and lasers targeting melanin can treat benign pigmentary 
disorders or pigment in tattoos or drug-induced hyperpigmentation (for 
example, secondary to minocycline). Melanin-targeted lasers can also 
be used for hair removal if the hair is pigmented. Light delivery in short 
pulses restricts damage to the treated site.
The carbon dioxide laser emits infrared light that is absorbed by water 
in tissues and can therefore be used for destructive purposes. The 
depth of effect can be controlled, such that the carbon dioxide laser is 
widely employed for resurfacing in photorejuvenation or acne scarring. 
Signicant morbidity is associated with this destructive laser, although 
this may be minimised with fractionated regimens, and general anaes-
thesia may be required.
Photodynamic therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is widely used in dermatology, predomi-
nantly for actinic keratoses, Bowen’s disease and supercial basal cell 
carcinoma.
Radiotherapy and grenz (Bucky) ray therapy
Radiotherapy can be employed for several skin conditions, including 
non-melanoma skin cancer or lentigo maligna that is not suitable for sur-
gical treatment, but its use in dermatology has declined. Scarring and 
poikiloderma can occur at treated sites, although these are minimised if 
fractionated regimens are chosen. Supercial radiotherapy is now rarely 
employed to treat benign dermatoses. Even more supercial ionising 
radiation (grenz (Bucky) rays) can be useful for localised dermatoses 
that are having severe effects on quality of life, if conventional treatments 
have been inadequate; for example, it may avoid the need for systemic 
immunosuppression in a patient with severe recalcitrant localised scalp 
psoriasis.
Skin tumours
Pathogenesis
Skin cancer is the most common malignancy in fair-skinned populations. 
It is subdivided into non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and melanoma. 
NMSC is further subdivided into the most common skin cancer, basal 
cell carcinoma (BCC), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The latter 
has precursor non-invasive states of intra-epithelial carcinoma (Bowen’s 
disease, BD) and dysplasia (actinic keratosis, AK). Melanoma is much 
less common than NMSC, but because of its metastatic risk it is the 
cause of most skin cancer deaths.
UVR is a complete carcinogen and is the main environmental risk fac-
tor for skin cancer, which is much more common in countries with high 
ambient sun exposure, such as Australia. Skin cancer risk also increases 
if an individual migrates to such a country when young, particularly if less 
than 10 years of age. Epidemiological evidence supports a close link 
between chronic UVR exposure and risk of SCC and AK, and a modest 
link between sun exposure and BCC risk. Melanoma usually arises on 
sites that are intermittently exposed to UVR, and episodes of sunburn 
and recreational sun exposure have been implicated as risk factors for 
melanoma. There is good evidence to show that sunbed exposure is also 
a risk for both melanoma and NMSC, particularly when exposure starts 
in adolescence and early adult life. Strategies to reduce sun exposure 
are therefore important for skin cancer prevention, with reliance mainly 
on behavioural modication, covering up and judicious sunscreen use. 
Indeed, there is evidence to show that sunscreen use reduces naevi 
development in children, and in adults regular sunscreen use reduces 
the risk of AK and SCC and is likely also to have preventative roles in 
melanoma and BCC development.
There are identiable genetic predispositions for some skin cancers, 
such as in xeroderma pigmentosum, an autosomal recessive condition 
caused by an inherited defect in DNA excision repair, and basal cell nae-
vus (Gorlin) syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by loss-
of-function mutations affecting the PTCH1 tumour suppressor genes, 
with consequent activation of the Hedgehog pathway. Interestingly, the 
Hedgehog pathway is also almost invariably activated in sporadic BCC, 
which usually contain somatic mutations in PTCH1 and less commonly in 
the SMO gene, which lies in the same signalling pathway. The genetics of 
SCC are heterogeneous and less clearly dened, with several mutations 
and pathways implicated, including TP53, CDKN2A/p16, NOTCH, EGFR 
and the MAPK signalling pathways. Interestingly, many of the mutations 
seen in SCC also occur in the pre-cancers AK and BD. The genetics of 
melanoma are discussed later in this chapter.
Cutaneous immune surveillance is also critical and immunosup-
pressed organ transplant recipients have a greatly increased risk of skin 
cancer, particularly SCC. Interestingly, patients who have received high 
treatment numbers of PUVA (more than 150), which is immunosuppres-
sive, are also at increased risk of skin cancer, particularly SCC.
Although UVB can increase the risk of skin cancer, there is no evi-
dence to date that UVB phototherapy signicantly increases skin cancer 
risk. Likewise, there is no evidence that UVA1 phototherapy increases 
skin cancer risk, although ongoing vigilance is required. Ionising radia-
tion, notably radiotherapy, thermal radiation and chemical carcinogens, 
such as arsenic or coal tar, can increase NMSC risk, particularly SCC. 
A role for oncogenic human papillomaviruses in SCC development is 
also implicated, particularly in immunosuppressed patients, where viral 
DNA is detected in more than 80% of tumours. Chronic inammation 

[[p1143]]
Skin tumours    1083
27
is a risk factor for SCC, which may arise in chronic skin ulcers, discoid 
lupus erythematosus or vulgaris, and the scarring genetic skin disease 
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (see Box 27.26), in which up to 50% of 
patients develop SCC.
Malignant tumours
Basal cell carcinoma
The incidence of NMSC has increased dramatically in recent decades 
and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) accounts for more than 70% of cases. In 
Europe, the ratio of BCC to SCC is 4–5:1 in immunocompetent patients. 
It is a malignant tumour that rarely metastasises; it is thought to derive 
from immature pluripotent epidermal cells and is composed of cells with 
similarities to basal layer epidermis and appendages. Lesions typically 
occur at sites of moderate sun exposure, particularly the face, and are 
slow-growing. The incidence increases with age and males are more 
commonly affected. Lesions may ulcerate and invade locally; hence the 
term ‘rodent ulcer’.
Clinical features
Early BCCs usually present as pale, translucent papules or nodules, with 
overlying supercial telangiectatic vessels (nodular BCC). If untreated, 
they increase in size and ulcerate, to form a crater with a rolled, pearled 
edge and telangiectatic vessels (Fig. 27.12). There may be some pig-
mentation or a cystic component. A supercial multifocal type can occur, 
frequently on the trunk, and may be large (up to 10 cm in diameter); often 
there are multiple lesions. Supercial BCC usually presents as a red/
brown plaque or patch with a raised, thread-like edge, which is often 
best seen by stretching the skin; this helps to distinguish it from Bowen’s 
disease. Less commonly, a morphoeic, inltrative BCC presents as a 
poorly dened, slowly enlarging, sclerotic yellow/grey plaque.
Diagnosis and management
The diagnosis is often obvious clinically, based on the features men-
tioned above, although a diagnostic conrmatory biopsy may be required 
prior to denitive treatment. Management depends on the characteristics 
of the tumour and on patient factors, including comorbidities and patient 
wishes. Essentially, treatment will be either surgical or, in some cases, 
medical (Box 27.15). Surgical excision, ideally with a 4–5 mm margin, is 
the treatment of choice, with a cure rate of approximately 95%. Curettage 
and cautery may also be effective for selected lesions. Management of 
inltrative morphoeic BCC and/or lesions at difcult sites, such as around 
the eye, may require more complex techniques, such as Mohs’ micro-
graphic surgery, to ensure adequate tumour excision margins, while 
conserving unaffected tissue. This involves processing of frozen sections 
of all margins in stages (usually on the same day) until all the tumour is 
removed. The procedure is time-consuming (so can be difcult for older, 
frail patients) and requires particular surgical and pathology skills, but is 
associated with the highest long-term cure rates, with 98%–99% clear 
at 5-year follow-up.
If a surgical approach is used for management of BCC and the primary 
tumour is not completely excised, re-excision may be required, although 
follow-up may be appropriate as not all tumours that are incompletely 
excised recur. However, this is not recommended for tumours at high-
risk sites or for inltrative morphoeic BCC, where complete excision is 
advisable. Cryotherapy may be effective for BCC but can cause blistering 
and scarring, so is best suited to small, supercial lesions at low-risk sites.
Radiotherapy can be invaluable for large BCC lesions in frail patients 
but is less commonly used because of the risk of scarring.
Medical therapies can be used to treat low-risk BCC, particularly 
when surgery is not appropriate for a patient. Topical immunomodu-
lators, such as imiquimod, are effective for low-risk BCC and may be 
particularly useful for patients who are not able to attend a hospital clinic 
setting but are able to apply a topical preparation at home over a 6-week 
period. Imiquimod usually induces a prominent inammatory reaction 
and patients should be advised that dose adjustments may be required. 
Topical 5-uorouracil can also be effective for low-risk small lesions of 
supercial BCC, although this usually provokes an intense inammatory 
reaction. Intralesional interferon-alfa2b has been used for BCC but mul-
tiple treatments and high cost preclude its regular use.
PDT is an effective treatment for low-risk, predominantly super-
cial BCC, as well as AK and BD. Usually, topical porphyrin PDT is 
employed, which involves application of a porphyrin prodrug to the 
lesion to be treated. The prodrug is taken up and converted by the 
cell’s haem cycle to protoporphyrin IX, a photosensitiser. This is 
Fig. 27.12 Basal cell carcinoma.
showing the raised, rolled edge.
27.15 Management of non-melanoma skin cancer and 
pre-cancer
Basal cell carcinoma
 Excision results in the lowest recurrence rates
 Mohs’ micrographic surgery is effective for high-risk BCC
 Medical treatments are often appropriate for low-risk supercial tumours in 
patients with comorbidities
 Cryotherapy and topical 5-uorouracil can be used for supercial BCC
 Topical photodynamic therapy and topical imiquimod are both effective in 
supercial BCC
 BCC in patients with Gorlin syndrome should not be treated with radiotherapy
 Hedgehog pathway inhibitors can induce clinical response in patients with 
advanced inoperable BCC
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Excision is the treatment of choice for invasive SCC
 Most recurrences or metastases occur within 5 years
 Medical management is not usually considered for invasive SCC
Carcinoma in situ (Bowen’s disease)
 For single/few lesions on good healing sites, cryotherapy, curettage, 
photodynamic therapy, topical imiquimod and 5-uorouracil are options
 For multiple lesions and/or poor healing sites such as the lower leg, 
photodynamic therapy, where feasible, is the treatment of choice, although 
topical 5-uorouracil or imiquimod are alternative treatments
Actinic keratosis
 For single/few lesions on good healing sites, cryotherapy, curettage and 
5-uorouracil + salicylic acid are options. especially if hyperkeratotic
 For multiple lesions/eld change, topical 5-uorouracil, conventional or daylight 
photodynamic therapy, imiquimod or diclofenac in hyaluronic acid gel may be 
effective

[[p1144]]
1084    DERMATOLOGY
photochemically activated by visible (normally red) light, usually deliv-
ered by a light-emitting diode (LED), in the presence of oxygen, causing 
the production of reactive oxygen species, which cause destruction of 
treated tissue. The photosensitiser is taken up preferentially by dis-
eased skin, and adverse effects in normal skin are minimised. PDT 
is at least as effective as cryotherapy and surgery for supercial BCC 
and may be preferred at sites of poor healing, such as the lower leg, 
or where cosmetic outcome is important. PDT is not as effective as 
surgery for long-term clearance of nodular BCC but can be considered 
if surgery is not appropriate. Pain during irradiation may occur during 
PDT, although adjustments to the irradiation regime can reduce dis-
comfort and treatment is usually well tolerated. PDT is typically under-
taken in the outpatient clinic setting and is well suited to frail patients 
and those unable to undertake treatment with topical agents at home.
Rarely, advanced BCC may be locally invasive or even metastasise. 
Major advances have been made in targeted drug development, and 
Hedgehog pathway inhibitors, such as vismodegib and sonidegib, 
can be used effectively for disease control and palliation in this setting, 
although there may be signicant associated drug-induced toxicity.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a malignancy that arises from epi-
dermal keratinocytes and is the second most common skin cancer, 
occurring most frequently in older adult males and smokers. There is a 
close association between cumulative UVR exposure and SCC risk, with 
most SCC lesions occurring on chronically sun-exposed sites in light-
skinned populations and often arising at sites of eld-change carcino-
genesis, with coexistent precursors of AK and BD commonly evident. 
In the immunosuppressed patient population, such as organ transplant 
recipients, SCC is the most common skin cancer and its incidence is 
dramatically increased, particularly in association with the duration 
of immunosuppression and the degree of sun exposure and damage 
accrued pre-transplant. The risk of SCC is also increased in HIV infec-
tion. Furthermore, SCC arising in the immunosuppressed is more likely 
to behave aggressively or to metastasise.
Clinical features
The tumours usually occur on chronically sun-exposed sites, such as 
bald scalp, tops of ears, face and back of hands. The clinical presenta-
tion may be diverse, ranging from rapid development of a painful ker-
atotic nodule in a pre-existing area of dysplasia (Fig. 27.13) to the de 
novo presentation of an erythematous, inltrated, often-warty nodule or 
plaque that may ulcerate. The clinical appearance depends on histolog-
ical grading; well-differentiated tumours more often present as dened 
keratotic nodules (Fig. 27.13A), whereas poorly differentiated tumours 
tend to be ill dened and inltrative, and may ulcerate. SCC has met-
astatic potential; some tumours, such as those on lips and ears and in 
immunosuppressed patients, behave more aggressively and are more 
likely to metastasise to draining lymph nodes.
Management
Early diagnosis is important and complete surgical excision is the usual 
treatment of choice (see Box 27.15). Standard excision with a 4–6 mm 
margin is advised and the cure rate is approximately 90%–95%. Mohs’ 
surgery is an option but is used less frequently for SCC than for BCC. 
High-risk SCC should be treated aggressively, with a wider margin of 
excision of at least 6 mm where feasible. This may include larger, thicker 
lesions, tumours at sites where metastases are more likely, such as the 
ear, lip or non-sun-exposed sites, and those occurring in the immuno-
suppressed and/or with histology showing the tumour to be poorly differ-
entiated, with evidence of lymphatic, vascular or perineural involvement 
or a high mitotic index. Such patients and those with metastatic dis-
ease require management via a multidisciplinary team. In patients who 
are at high risk for further SCC, systemic retinoids may have a role in 
reducing the rate of SCC development, but rapid appearance of tumours 
occurs on drug cessation. Occasionally, curettage and cautery may be 
appropriate if the tumour is small and low-risk and either surgical exci-
sion is contraindicated or the patient is unwilling to proceed with exci-
sion. Radiotherapy may be indicated if surgical excision is not feasible. 
Cryotherapy and topical non-surgical therapies are not usually used in 
invasive SCC because of risk of recurrence and metastasis.
Actinic keratosis
Actinic keratoses (AK) are scaly, erythematous lesions arising on chron-
ically sun-exposed sites. Histology shows dysplasia, although the diag-
nosis of typical AK is usually made on clinical grounds (Fig. 27.14). 
They are common in fair-skinned people who have had signicant sun 
exposure, are often multiple and increase with age. The prevalence is 
much higher in Australia than in the UK and some surveys have shown 
a prevalence of more than 50% in those over 40 years old. The rate of 
progression to SCC is less than 0.1% and spontaneous resolution is 
possible. However, SCC can also arise de novo and without progression 
from AK. Increase in size, ulceration, bleeding, pain or tenderness can be 
indicative of transformation into SCC.
Fig. 27.13 Squamous cell carcinoma.
An SCC arising from an area of epidermal dysplasia.
Fig. 27.14 Actinic keratosis. Close-up of a hyperkeratotic AK on the ear.

[[p1145]]
Skin tumours    1085
27
Management
Several treatments are available for AK (see Box 27.15). Emollients 
and photoprotection, including high-factor sunscreens, may sufce for 
mild disease. Single or low numbers of lesions of AK can be effectively 
treated with cryotherapy. Hyperkeratotic lesions may be treated with the 
antimetabolite 5-uorouracil, combined with salicylic acid, or may require 
curettage and cautery.
Multiple lesions require eld-directed therapy; 5-uorouracil is widely 
used in this setting as an effective initial therapeutic approach and topi-
cal imiquimod is an alternative. Diclofenac in a hyaluronic acid gel base 
can also be used topically for low-grade maintenance control of AK, the 
rationale for its use being the over-expression of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 
in AK lesions. PDT is widely used for eld-change multiple AK, with high 
efcacy rates; it is at least as effective as cryotherapy or 5-uorouracil. The 
relative selectivity of treatment allows subclinical disease to be treated, 
while sparing normal skin. A regimen using daylight to activate the photo-
sensitiser is increasingly and widely used for extensive mild AK, with high 
efcacy rates, comparable to hospital-based PDT but without the need 
for specialised equipment and allowing patients to be treated at home.
Bowen’s disease
Clinical features
Bowen’s disease (BD) is the name given to an intra-epidermal carcinoma 
that usually presents as a slowly enlarging, erythematous, scaly plaque 
on the lower legs of fair-skinned older women (Fig. 27.15) but other sites 
can also be involved. It can be confused with eczema or psoriasis, but is 
usually asymptomatic and does not respond to topical glucocorticoids. 
It may also be hard to distinguish from supercial BCC. Transformation 
into SCC occurs in 3% or less.
Diagnosis
Incisional biopsy is usually undertaken to conrm the diagnosis. This 
shows an intra-epidermal carcinoma with no invasion through the base-
ment membrane. Histology may also be obtained by curettage but this 
does not allow distinction from invasive SCC to be made, due to loss of 
tissue orientation and architecture.
Management
While curettage or excision may be appropriate in some settings, 
non-surgical therapies are generally preferred (see Box 27.15), especially 
on the lower legs. PDT, in particular, may be advantageous for BD on 
the lower leg because of relative selectivity of treatment and sparing of 
normal tissue, thus reducing the risk of poor healing and ulceration at this 
vulnerable site. Given the low risk of malignant transformation, the option 
of no active treatment may also be appropriate for some frail patients with 
multiple co-morbidities.
Cutaneous lymphomas
The most common form of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma is mycosis 
fungoides (MF). This can persist for years in patch and plaque stages, 
often resembling eczema or psoriasis. Only sometimes does it progress 
through to nodules and nally a systemic stage, Sézary syndrome. B-cell 
lymphomas, on the other hand, usually present as nodules or plaque-like 
tumours. The diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma requires a high 
index of suspicion, particularly in patients thought to have unusual recal-
citrant forms of eczema or psoriasis.
Treatment is symptomatic and there is no evidence that it alters prog-
nosis. In the early stages of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, systemic or local 
glucocorticoids may be indicated; alternatively, narrowband UVB photo-
therapy (for patch-stage MF) or PUVA (for plaque-stage MF) may be used. 
Once lesions have moved beyond plaque stage, localised radiotherapy, 
electron beam radiation, the synthetic retinoid bexarotene, interferon-alfa, 
extracorporeal photopheresis and systemic anti-lymphoma chemotherapy 
regimens may be needed. Management of advanced disease invariably 
requires a multidisciplinary team approach, with collaboration between 
dermatologists, pathologists and haematological oncologists.
Melanoma
Melanoma is a malignant tumour of epidermal melanocytes. While only 
4% of skin cancers are melanomas, they account for 80% of skin cancer 
deaths. There has been a steady rise in the incidence of melanoma in 
fair-skinned populations over recent decades, with the highest incidence 
in Australasia. Primary prevention and early detection are essential, as 
therapy for advanced and metastatic disease, whilst being a rapidly 
evolving eld, remains challenging and unsatisfactory.
Pathophysiology
Risk factors for melanoma include fair skin, freckles, red hair, number 
of naevi and sunlight exposure. The type of sunlight exposure is under 
debate but intermittent exposure, such as recreational time in the sun, 
sunburn and sunbed use, is implicated. Patients with multiple atypical 
naevi (dysplastic naevus syndrome) and fair-skinned people, often with 
variant alleles in the melanocortin-1 gene, are at increased risk of mela-
noma. A family history of melanoma increases the risk but a strong family 
history is unusual. Rarely, autosomal dominant inheritance of melanoma 
with incomplete penetrance can occur due to mutations in CDKN2A, 
which encodes the p16 tumour suppressor protein. In these patients, 
the lifetime risk of melanoma is more than 50%. Several other suscep-
tibility genes and potential genetic targets for therapeutic intervention in 
advanced disease have also been identied.
Clinical features
Melanoma can occur at any age and site and in either sex, but typically 
affects the leg in females and back in males. It is rare before puberty. The 
classication of invasive malignant melanoma is shown in Box 27.16. 
Early lesions may be in situ and pre-invasive before becoming invasive 
melanoma with metastatic potential. Any change in naevi or development 
of new lesions should be assessed to exclude malignancy and, for this, 
the dermatoscope is invaluable (see Fig. 27.2). Real-time non-invasive 
imaging techniques are being investigated as tools to assist in diagnosis 
but are largely experimental. If there is any doubt, excision is advised.
Supercial spreading melanoma
Supercial spreading melanoma (SSM) is the most common type in light-
skinned populations. It usually presents as a slowly enlarging, macu-
lar, pigmented lesion, with increasing irregularity in shape and pigment; 
this supercial, radial growth phase can last for approximately 2 years. 
Subsequently, the lesion may become palpable and this is indicative 
of a vertical growth phase, with dermal invasion; when this occurs, 
the tumour has the potential to invade lymphatics and vessels and to 
become metastatic (Fig. 27.16A). Approximately 50% of melanomas 
arise from a pre-existing naevus.
Nodular melanoma
Nodular melanoma is most common in the fth and sixth decades, par-
ticularly in men and on the trunk (Fig. 27.16B). This may account in part 
Fig. 27.15 Intra-epidermal carcinoma (Bowen’s disease). The lower leg is a 
common site and lesions are often treated non-surgically.

[[p1146]]
1086    DERMATOLOGY
for the increased mortality rates from melanoma in men, as these are 
tumours with greater metastatic risk. They often present as a rapidly 
growing nodule that may bleed and ulcerate. Nodular melanomas may 
be heavily pigmented, or relatively amelanotic and erythematous, and be 
confused with benign vascular lesions. A rim of pigmentation may, how-
ever, be seen under the dermatoscope. Lesions may develop de novo or 
from a pre-existing naevus or SSM.
Lentigo maligna melanoma
This arises from a prolonged pre-invasive phase termed lentigo maligna. 
It occurs as a very slowly expanding, pigmented, macular lesion, usu-
ally on photo-exposed head and neck sites of older patients; histology 
shows in situ changes only. This phase may last for several years before 
a nodule of invasive melanoma develops in a proportion of cases (lentigo 
maligna melanoma).
Acral lentiginous or palmoplantar melanoma
This accounts for only approximately 10% of melanomas in light-skinned 
races and is more common in dark-skinned people, in whom it is respon-
sible for 50% of cases. This indicates that UVR exposure may not be 
implicated in acral melanoma risk.
Subungual melanoma
This form of melanoma is rare. It may present as a painless, proximally 
expanding streak of pigmentation arising from the nail matrix, and 
progresses to nail dystrophy and involvement of the adjacent nail fold 
(Hutchinson’s sign).
Diagnosis and management
The diagnosis is made by excision biopsy of a suspicious lesion. The 
initial biopsy should include a 2 mm margin, followed up where possi-
ble by wider excision if the diagnosis is conrmed. Occasionally, radi-
otherapy or imiquimod may be used for lentigo maligna, if surgery is 
not feasible. The Breslow thickness of the tumour (the maximal depth 
from epidermal granular cell layer to deepest tumour cells) is critical for 
management and prognosis. The presence of ulceration may lead to 
under-estimation of the Breslow thickness and may also adversely affect 
prognosis. The mitotic rate and the presence or absence of any evidence 
of lymphovascular or perineural involvement should also be ascertained. 
The clinical staging of melanoma extent is essential, in order to establish 
whether disease is primary and localised, or if there is nodal or metastatic 
spread.
Wide excision of melanoma with a low risk of metastasis (stage 1 dis-
ease, Breslow thickness <1 mm) with a 1 cm clear margin is accepted 
practice. The margin of excision for more advanced disease is contro-
versial, although a 2–3 cm margin for thicker tumours is generally advised 
as an attempt to reduce risk of local recurrence. There is no evidence 
that more radical surgery with 4–6 cm margins is benecial. The majority 
of tumours can be excised without the need for grafting. For tumours 
with a Breslow thickness of 0.8–1 mm or more, a sentinel lymph node 
biopsy is indicated and should be considered on a case-by-case basis 
as, in addition to provision of prognostic information, a positive sentinel 
node biopsy facilitates access to adjuvant treatment with either targeted 
therapy and/or immune checkpoint inhibitors and is often required before 
entry to clinical trials of new treatments. Patients must be counselled 
about the sentinel node biopsy procedure, which is usually performed at 
the time of wider excision. It involves injection of radio-labelled blue dye 
at the site of the primary melanoma, allowing identication of the draining 
‘sentinel’ node by radioscintigraphy; this sentinel node is then removed 
and examined in detail by histology, immunohistochemistry and/or PCR 
of melanocyte gene products to look for tumour deposits.
If the biopsy is positive, adjuvant therapy should be considered as 
described below and has largely replaced the need for complete local 
lymphadenectomy, which is a procedure that is associated with high 
morbidity in terms of lymphoedema and has no proven survival benet. 
Nowadays it is only undertaken if there is a high risk of bulky locoregional 
recurrence.
Localised cutaneous or nodal recurrence may be treated surgically 
and cutaneous metastases or in transit disease may be amenable to 
palliation with electrochemotherapy if there is no evidence of widespread 
metastatic disease.
There have been major advances in treatment options for advanced 
melanoma, such that patients are often now able to have extended sur-
vival, sometimes for many years. However, ultimately the overall prog-
nosis for metastatic disease remains poor and treatment options remain 
palliative, with disease control as opposed to cure. Genetic develop-
ments have facilitated the introduction of tumour-targeted treatments for 
advanced, unresectable and/or metastatic disease, such as the B-Raf
and c-Kit kinase inhibitors for patients expressing these gene muta-
tions, notably dabrafenib and vemurafenib, with demonstrable clinical 
responses. Combined BRAF and MEK targeted inhibition, with drugs 
such as trametinib, may also be used. Immune checkpoint inhibition with 
ipilimumab, which causes T-cell activation by inhibiting CTLA-4, alone or 
in combination with the programmed cell death (PD1) pathway blockers 
nivolumab or pembrolizumab, provides clinically meaningful improve-
ments in quality of life and survival to patients with advanced disease. 
Standard chemotherapy may also be used in some cases of metastatic 
disease, although outcomes are poor. Other biologic and gene therapies 
and vaccines are also being investigated. It is important for patients with 
advanced melanoma to be managed through a multidisciplinary team in 
order to optimise care, provide access to adjuvant therapy and facilitate 
their inclusion in clinical trials.
All patients should be advised regarding ongoing photoprotection, with 
sensible behaviour in the sun, covering up, wearing hats and high-fac-
tor sunscreen use. However, evidence has shown that despite patients 
with melanoma being advised to photoprotect, many follow this advice 
only for the rst year following diagnosis, thus emphasising the need for 
ongoing reinforcement of guidance with regard to photoprotection. It is 
also prudent to advise patients who are photoprotecting to optimise oral 
vitamin D through diet and/or supplements.
Prognosis
Prognosis is inuenced by several factors, including tumour characteris-
tics and thickness (Breslow thickness) and the presence or absence of 
regional, nodal or metastatic disease. Patients with in situ melanoma do 
27.16  Classication of cutaneous malignant melanoma
Melanoma without metastatic potential
 Melanoma in situ
 Lentigo maligna
Melanoma with metastatic potential
 Supercial spreading melanoma
 Nodular melanoma
 Acral lentiginous melanoma
 Subungual melanoma
 Lentigo maligna melanoma
B
A
Fig. 27.16 Supercial spreading melanoma. 
malignant melanoma with a palpable area indicative of vertical growth phase (Breslow 
Breslow thickness of 3.5 mm.

[[p1147]]
Skin tumours    1087
27
not have risk of metastasis and those with an invasive primary tumour 
of less than 1 mm Breslow thickness have more than a 90% chance of 
5-year disease-free survival, but this gure drops to approximately 50% 
for a tumour of greater than 3.5 mm thickness. Survival rates fall to less 
than 10% for those with advanced nodal or metastatic disease.
Benign skin lesions
In practice, it is often difcult to distinguish between skin cancer and a 
benign lesion on clinical grounds; if there is any doubt, biopsy and his-
tology are required. Benign melanocytic naevi and basal cell papilloma, 
in particular, can often be mistaken for melanoma, even by dermatolo-
gists. Keratoacanthoma, while benign, is also commonly considered to 
be invasive SCC on clinical grounds.
Keratoacanthoma
This benign tumour has a striking clinical presentation of rapid growth 
over weeks to months and subsequent spontaneous resolution. It is 
thought to be associated with chronic sun exposure and most com-
monly occurs on the central face. The classical appearance is of an iso-
lated dome-shaped nodule often of 5 cm or more in diameter, with a 
central keratin plug (Fig. 27.17). Clinically and histologically, the lesion 
often resembles SCC (see Fig. 27.13A). Most are treated surgically, either 
by curettage and cautery or by excision, to rule out SCC and to avoid the 
unsightly scar after spontaneous resolution.
Freckle
Histologically, a freckle (ephelis) consists of normal numbers of melano-
cytes, but with focal increases in melanin in keratinocytes. They are most 
common on sun-exposed sites in fair-skinned individuals, particularly chil-
dren and those with red hair, and on the face. There is a familial tendency. 
Clinically, freckles are brown macules that darken following UVR exposure.
Lentigo
A lentigo (plural lentigines) consists of increased numbers of melano-
cytes along the basement membrane, but without formation of the nests 
that occur in melanocytic naevi. These lesions usually occur at sites of 
chronic sun exposure (see the background skin changes in Fig. 27.13A), 
become more common with age, and are often referred to as ‘liver spots’ 
or ‘age spots’. They can vary in colour from light to very dark brown. 
Distinction from melanoma is essential and histology may be required.
Haemangiomas
Benign vascular tumours or hamartomas are common and include 
Campbell de Morgan spots (see Fig. 27.18), which present as pink/red 
papules on the upper half of the body. They can sometimes be difcult to 
distinguish from melanocytic lesions, particularly if they are thrombosed 
or occur on particular sites, such as the lip or genitalia. The dermato-
scope is helpful for this (see Fig. 27.2).
Basal cell papilloma
Basal cell papillomas (also known as seborrhoeic warts or keratoses) 
are common, benign epidermal tumours (Fig. 27.18). They may be at, 
raised, pedunculated or warty-surfaced, and can appear to be ‘stuck 
on’. They occur in both sexes and with increasing age, and are most 
common on the face and trunk. The colour may vary from yellow to 
almost black and the surface may seem ‘greasy’, with pinpoint kera-
tin plugs visible, particularly with a magnifying lens. If there is no doubt 
about the diagnosis, they can be left alone or treated by cryotherapy or 
curettage if they are cosmetically troublesome. If there is a suspicion of 
melanoma, excision or diagnostic biopsy should be undertaken.
Melanocytic naevi
Melanocytic naevi (moles) are localised benign clonal proliferations of 
melanocytes. It is thought that they may arise as the result of abnor-
malities in the normal migration of melanocytes during development. It 
is quite normal to have 20–50, although, interestingly, individuals with 
red hair have fewer. Genetic and environmental factors are implicated. 
Monozygotic twins have higher concordance in naevi numbers than dizy-
gotic twins. Individuals who have had greater sun exposure have higher 
numbers of naevi. Most melanocytic naevi appear in childhood and early 
adult life, or during pregnancy or oestrogen therapy. The onset of a new 
mole is less common after the age of 25 years. Congenital melanocytic 
naevi occur at or shortly after birth.
Clinical features
Acquired melanocytic naevi are classied according to the microscopic 
location of the melanocyte nests (Fig. 27.19). Junctional naevi are usu-
ally macular, circular or oval, and mid- to dark brown. Compound and 
intradermal naevi are nodules because of the dermal component, and 
may be hair-bearing. Intradermal naevi are usually less pigmented than 
compound naevi. Their surface may be smooth, cerebriform, hyperker-
atotic or papillomatous.
Some individuals have large numbers of naevi, often at unusual sites, 
such as the scalp, palms or soles, and these may frequently appear 
‘atypical’ in terms of variability in pigmentation, size and shape. Some 
may be very dark or pink and may show a depigmented or inamed halo. 
Fig. 27.17 Keratoacanthoma.
Fig. 27.18 A typical basal cell papilloma. Note the neighbouring basal cell 
papillomas and the coincidental benign angiomas (Campbell de Morgan spots).

[[p1148]]
1088    DERMATOLOGY
If these naevi are removed, then ‘dysplastic changes’ are often seen. 
Such naevi are known to occur in some rare families with an inherited 
melanoma predisposition. However, the signicance of such changes in 
non-familial cases is unclear and there is no consensus on management 
and follow-up.
Although approximately 50% of melanomas arise in pre-existing naevi, 
most naevi do not become malignant; although a changing naevus must 
be taken seriously, most will not be melanomas. Malignant change is 
most likely in large congenital melanocytic naevi (risk may correlate with 
size of lesion) and possibly in families where there is a history of large 
numbers of atypical naevi and/or a history of melanoma.
Diagnosis and management
Melanocytic naevi are normal and do not require excision, unless malig-
nancy is suspected or they become repeatedly inamed or traumatised. 
Advice on photoprotection is important for fair-skinned individuals with 
multiple naevi.
Blue naevi
These are melanocytic naevi in which there is a proliferation of spindled 
melanocytes relatively deep within the dermis. Light scattering means 
that the pigment appears blue rather than brown. They may be difcult 
to distinguish from nodular melanoma and are therefore often excised.
Dermatobroma
A dermatobroma is a characteristically rm, often pigmented, raised 
lesion, most commonly found on the lower legs. Its aetiology is unclear, 
although a reactive process secondary to insect bites or trauma is one 
hypothesis. There is frequently a ring of pigment around the lesion and 
dimpling when the skin is pinched, reecting epidermal tethering.
Acrochordon
Acrochordons, or skin tags, are benign pedunculated lesions; they are 
most common in skin exures and usually have a very characteristic clinical 
appearance. However, they may sometimes be confused with melanocytic 
naevi. Treatment is not required unless there is diagnostic doubt or they are 
causing symptoms, such as irritation, or for cosmetic reasons. Cryotherapy 
or snip or shave excision may be appropriate in that situation.
Lipoma
Lipomas are benign tumours of adipocytes that are characteristically soft 
and lie more deeply in the skin than epidermal tumours; they are usually 
diagnosed easily on clinical grounds. A variant, angiolipoma, is typically 
painful. Treatment is not required unless there is diagnostic doubt or they 
are symptomatic or cosmetically troublesome, in which case a diagnos-
tic biopsy or surgical excision may be required.
Common skin infections and infestations
Bacterial infections
Impetigo
Impetigo is a common and highly contagious supercial bacterial skin 
infection. There are two main presentations: bullous impetigo, caused 
by a staphylococcal epidermolytic toxin, and non-bullous impetigo (Fig. 
27.20), which can be caused by either Staphylococcus aureus or strep-
tococci, or both together. Staphylococcus spp. are the most common 
agents in temperate climates, whereas streptococcal impetigo is more 
often seen in hot, humid areas. All ages can be affected but non-bul-
lous disease particularly affects young children, often in late summer. 
Outbreaks can arise in conditions of overcrowding and poor hygiene or 
in institutions. A widespread form can occur in neonates. Predisposing 
factors are minor skin abrasions and the existence of other skin condi-
tions, such as infestations or eczema.
In non-bullous impetigo, a thin-walled vesicle develops; it rapidly rup-
tures and is rarely seen intact. Dried exudate, forming golden crusting, 
arises on an erythematous base. In bullous disease, the toxins cleave 
desmoglein-1, causing a supercial epidermal split and the occurrence 
of intact blisters with clear to cloudy uid, which last for 2–3 days. The 
face, scalp and limbs are commonly affected but other sites can also be 
involved, particularly if there are predisposing factors such as eczema. 
Lesions may be single or multiple and coalesce. Constitutional symp-
toms are uncommon. A bacterial swab should be taken from blister uid 
or an active lesion before treatment commences. Around one-third of 
the population is a nasal carrier of Staphylococcus, so swabs from the 
nostrils should also be obtained.
In mild, localised disease, topical treatment with mupirocin or fusidic 
acid is usually effective and limits the spread of infection. The use of topical 
antiseptics and soap and water to remove infected crusts is also helpful. 
Staphylococcal carriage should be treated, with mupirocin topically to the 
nostrils, if swabs are positive. In severe cases, an oral antibiotic, such as 
ucloxacillin or clarithromycin, is indicated. If nephritogenic streptococci 
are isolated then systemic antibiotics should be considered to reduce 
the risk of streptococcal glomerulonephritis. Underlying disease, such as 
infestations, must be treated and cross-infection minimised. Scarring does 
not occur but there may be temporary dyspigmentation.
Junctional
Compound
Intradermal
Fig. 27.19 Classication of melanocytic naevi. Classication is based on 
microscopic location of the nests of naevus cells.
Fig. 27.20 Non-bullous impetigo.

[[p1149]]
Common skin infections and infestations    1089
27
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is a potentially serious 
exfoliating condition occurring predominantly in children, particularly 
neonates (Fig. 27.21). It is caused by systemic circulation of epidermo-
lytic toxins from a Staph. aureus infection. The same toxins are impli-
cated in bullous impetigo, which is a localised form of SSSS. The focus 
of infection may be minor skin trauma, the umbilicus, urinary tract or 
nasopharynx. The child presents with fever, irritability and skin tender-
ness. Erythema usually begins in the groin and axillae, and around the 
mouth. Blisters and supercial erosions develop over 1–2 days and can 
rapidly involve large areas, with severe systemic upset. Bacterial swabs 
should be obtained from possible primary sites of infection. A skin snip 
should also be taken for urgent histology. This is a sample of the super-
cial peeling skin removed by ‘snipping with scissors’, without the need 
for local anaesthetic. It shows a split beneath the stratum corneum, and 
differentiates SSSS from toxic epidermal necrolysis, in which the whole 
epidermis is affected (see Fig.27.41). Systemic antibiotics and inten-
sive supportive measures should be commenced immediately. Bacterial 
swabs from nostrils, axillae and groins should be taken from family mem-
bers to exclude staphylococcal carriage. Although the acute presenta-
tion of SSSS is often severe, rapid recovery and absence of scarring are 
usual, as the epidermal split is supercial.
Toxic shock syndrome
This condition is characterised by fever, desquamating rash, circulatory 
collapse and multi-organ involvement. It is caused by staphylococcal 
toxins and early cases were thought to arise with tampon use. Intensive 
supportive care and systemic antibiotics are required.
Ecthyma
Ecthyma is caused by either staphylococci or streptococci, or both 
together, and is characterised by adherent crusts overlying ulceration. 
It occurs worldwide but is more common in the tropics. In Europe, it 
occurs more frequently in children. Predisposing factors include poor 
hygiene, malnutrition and underlying skin disease, such as scabies. It 
is commonly seen in drug abusers, and minor trauma can predispose 
to lesion development. Management approaches are similar to impetigo 
as ecthyma can be considered as a deeper version of impetigo. Crust 
removal, antiseptics and systemic antibiotics may be required.
Folliculitis, furuncles and carbuncles
Hair follicle inammation can be supercial, involving just the ostium of 
the follicle (folliculitis), or deep (furuncles and carbuncles).
Supercial folliculitis
The primary lesions are follicular pustules and erythema. Supercial folli-
culitis is often infective, caused by Staph. aureus, but can also be sterile 
and caused by physical (for example, traumatic epilation) or chemical (for 
example, mineral oil) injury. Staphylococcal folliculitis is most common in 
children and often occurs on the scalp or limbs. Pustules usually resolve 
without scarring in 7–10 days but can become chronic. In older children 
and adults, they may progress to a deeper form of folliculitis. The condi-
tion is often self-limiting and may respond to irritant removal and antisep-
tics. More severe cases may require topical or systemic antibiotics and 
treatment of Staph. aureus carrier sites.
Deep folliculitis (furuncles and carbuncles)
A furuncle (boil) is an acute Staph. aureus infection of the hair follicle, 
usually with necrosis. It is most common in young adults and males. It is 
usually sporadic but epidemics occasionally occur. Malnutrition, diabe-
tes and HIV predispose, although most cases arise in otherwise healthy 
people. All body sites can be involved but neck, buttocks and anogenital 
areas are commonly affected areas. Infection is often associated with 
chronic Staph. aureus carriage in the nostrils and perineum, and may be 
due to resistant strains, such as methicillin-resistant organisms (MRSA). 
Friction caused by tight clothing may be contributory. Initially, an inam-
matory follicular nodule develops and becomes pustular, uctuant and 
tender. Crops of lesions sometimes occur. There may be fever and mild 
constitutional upset. Lesions rupture over days to weeks, discharge pus, 
become necrotic and leave a scar.
If a deep Staph. aureus infection of a group of contiguous hair follicles 
occurs, this is termed a carbuncle and is associated with intense deep 
inammation (Fig. 27.22). This usually occurs in middle-aged men, often 
A
B
Fig. 27.21 Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
examination of a frozen section of skin snip. (A) From Savin JA, Dahl M, Hunter JAA. 
Clinical dermatology, 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell; 2002
Fig. 27.22 Staphylococcal carbuncle.

[[p1150]]
1090    DERMATOLOGY
with predisposing conditions such as diabetes or immunosuppression. A 
carbuncle is an exquisitely tender nodule, usually on the neck, shoulders 
or hips, associated with severe constitutional symptoms. Discharge, 
necrosis and scarring are usual. Bacterial swabs must be taken and 
treatment is with anti-staphylococcal antibiotics, e.g. ucloxacillin, and 
sometimes incision and drainage.
Other staphylococcal toxins may also be pathogenic. For example, 
Panton–Valentine Leukocidin (PVL)-producing Staph. aureus can cause 
recurrent abscesses (denition: localised collections of pus in cavities) 
and may be difcult to eradicate.
Cellulitis and erysipelas
Cellulitis is inammation of subcutaneous tissue, due to bacterial infec-
tion (Fig. 27.23). In contrast, erysipelas is bacterial infection of the der-
mis and upper subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 27.24), although in practice it 
may be difcult to distinguish between them. These conditions are most 
commonly caused by group A streptococci but culture of swabs from 
affected sites is often negative. There is frequently a source of organism 
entry, such as an ear infection, varicose eczema/ulcer or tinea pedis, and 
swabs should also be taken from these sites. Diabetes and immunosup-
pression are predisposing factors. The patient usually has malaise, fever 
and leucocytosis, and streptococcal serology will often be positive. The 
face (erysipelas) and legs (cellulitis) are most often affected and the site 
is hot, painful, erythematous and oedematous. Blistering often occurs 
and may be haemorrhagic. Regional lymphadenopathy is common. 
Erysipelas typically has a well-dened edge due to its more supercial 
level of involvement, whereas cellulitis is typically ill dened. Treatment 
is usually with intravenous ucloxacillin, with clarithromycin, clindamy-
cin and vancomycin as alternatives for penicillin-allergic patients. Milder 
cases may be treated with oral antibiotics. If cases are untreated, seque-
lae include lymphoedema, cavernous sinus thrombosis, sepsis and 
glomerulonephritis.
Mycobacterial infections
Mycobacterium leprae infection may involve the skin and its manifes-
tations will be inuenced by host immunity, patients with high levels of 
immunity presenting with paucibacillary tuberculoid leprosy and those 
with low immune resistance developing multibacillary lepromatous 
leprosy. Hypopigmented or erythematous patches, with associated 
altered or lost sensation, or skin thickening, nodules and inltration 
should raise suspicion of a diagnosis of leprosy. The skin may also 
be an extrapulmonary site of involvement in tuberculosis, usually due 
to infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Skin manifestations 
depend on the route of infection, previous sensitisation and host 
immunity. There may be a variety of cutaneous features, including the 
red–brown scarring inammatory plaques seen in lupus vulgaris due 
to direct skin inoculation; scrofuloderma, which describes the skin 
changes overlying lymph nodes or joints infected with tuberculosis; 
and the reactive nodular and ulcerated changes seen in patients with 
high levels of immune response, notably the tuberculids and erythema 
induratum (Bazin’s disease). On diascopy, an ‘apple jelly’ appearance is 
typically seen, indicating the granulomatous nature of skin involvement. 
Granulomas evident on skin biopsy should certainly raise suspicion of 
a diagnosis of mycobacterial infection. Culture of organisms may be 
tricky but PCR can assist with diagnosis. Patients should be thoroughly 
investigated for signs of tuberculosis at pulmonary or other extrapul-
monary sites. Reactivation of latent tuberculosis is a particular concern 
for patients receiving treatment with immunosuppressants and biologic 
agents, particularly TNF-α antagonists for conditions such as psoriasis. 
Vigilance is required in screening and workup of such patients prior to 
consideration of these therapeutic agents. Management of tuberculosis 
is discussed in Chapter 17
Other mycobacterial skin infections may occur, such as 
Mycobacterium marinum, typically seen in those who clean tropical 
sh tanks. Sporotrichoid spread of granulomatous nodules from the 
site of inoculation along lymphatics is typical; granulomatous changes 
are seen on histology and resolution usually occurs with a prolonged 
course of antibiotics such as doxycycline or minocycline. Resolution 
may also take place spontaneously or after destructive therapies, such 
as cryotherapy.
Leishmaniasis
This protozoan infection may be restricted to the skin or there may be 
systemic features depending on the species, which occur in different 
geographical areas. The clinical features and management of this condi-
tion are discussed in Chapter 13
Necrotising soft tissue infections and anthrax
These conditions are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13
Erythrasma
Erythrasma is a mild, chronic, localised, supercial skin infection caused 
by Corynebacterium minutissimum, which is part of the normal skin ora. 
Warmth and humidity predispose to this infection, which usually occurs 
in exures and toe clefts. It is asymptomatic or mildly itchy and lesions 
are well dened, red–brown and scaly. C. minutissimum has character-
istic coral-pink uorescence under Wood’s light. Microscopy and culture 
of skin scrapings can conrm the diagnosis but are not usually needed 
if Wood’s light examination is positive. A topical azole (clotrimazole or 
miconazole) or fusidic acid is usually effective. Oral erythromycin can 
be used for extensive or resistant disease. Antiseptics can be used to 
prevent disease recurrence.
Fig. 27.23 Severe right orbital cellulitis. There is proptosis, chemosis, reduced 
ocular motility and reduced vision. From Yanoff M, Duker JS. Ophthalmology, 5th edn. 
Elsevier; 2019.
Fig. 27.24 Erysipelas. From  Schwarzenberger K, Werchniak A, Ko C. General 
dermatology. Elsevier; 2009.

[[p1151]]
Common skin infections and infestations    1091
27
Pitted keratolysis
This is another supercial skin infection caused by Corynebacterium and 
Streptomyces spp., and possibly other organisms, producing charac-
teristic circular erosions (‘pits’) on the soles. It is usually asymptomatic. 
The bacterium can be identied in skin scrapings and typically occurs in 
association with hyperhidrosis, which must be treated to prevent recur-
rence. Treatment is as for erythrasma.
Other bacterial skin infections
Syphilis and the non-venereal treponematoses are discussed in Chapter 
15. There has been a marked increase in incidence of syphilis. Skin signs 
may be subtle; for example, secondary syphilis may be misdiagnosed 
as pityriasis rosea. Lesions on palms, soles and mucosae should raise 
suspicion. Microscopic identication of the spirochaete may be possible 
and syphilitic serology should be undertaken using enzyme immuno-
assay or PCR-based techniques, depending on availability. Lyme dis-
ease can also cause a skin rash; the clinical features and management 
are described in Chapter 13
Viral infections
Herpesvirus infections
The cutaneous manifestations of the human herpesviruses are described 
in more detail in Chapter 13. Topical antivirals may sufce for prophylaxis 
or treatment of mild viral disease, such as herpes simplex cold sore virus 
infection. Systemic antivirals are indicated for signicant viral skin dis-
ease. For example, systemic aciclovir should be prescribed for eczema 
herpeticum (see Fig. 13.15C).
Papillomaviruses and viral warts
Viral warts are extremely common and are caused by the DNA human 
papillomavirus (HPV). There are over 90 subtypes, based on DNA 
sequence analysis, causing different clinical presentations. Transmission 
is by direct virus contact, in living or shed skin, and is encouraged by 
trauma and moisture, such as in swimming pools. Genital warts are 
spread by sexual activity and show a clear relationship with cervical and 
intra-epithelial cancers of the genital area. HPV-16 and 18 appear to 
inactivate tumour suppressor gene pathways and lead to squamous 
cell carcinoma of the cervix or intra-epithelial carcinoma of the genital 
skin. Vaccinations are available against HPV-16 and 18 and are recom-
mended for females and males aged 12–13 years, before they become 
sexually active, with the objective of offering protective effects against 
cervical, genital, anal and some head and neck malignancies. The rela-
tionship between skin HPV and skin cancer is unclear. Individuals who 
are systemically immunosuppressed – after organ transplantation, for 
example – have greatly increased risks of skin cancer and HPV infection 
but a causal link is not certain.
Clinical features
Common warts are initially smooth, skin-coloured papules, which become 
hyperkeratotic and ‘warty’. They are most common on the hands (Fig. 27.25) 
but can occur on the face, genitalia and limbs, and are often multi-
ple. Plantar warts (verrucae) have a slightly protruding rough surface 
and horny rim, and are often painful on walking. Paring reveals capillary 
loops that distinguish plantar warts from corns. Other varieties of wart 
include:
 mosaic warts: mosaic-like sheets of warts
 plane warts: smooth, at-topped papules, usually on the face 
and backs of hands, which may be pigmented and therefore 
misdiagnosed
 facial warts: often liform
 genital warts: may be papillomatous and exuberant.
Management
Most viral warts resolve spontaneously, although this may take years and 
active treatment is therefore often sought. However, asymptomatic warts 
generally should not be treated. Viral warts are particularly problematic 
and more recalcitrant to treatment in immunosuppressed patients follow-
ing organ transplantation.
Treatments are destructive. Salicylic acid or salicylic/lactic acid com-
binations and regular wart paring for several months are the most con-
sistently effective treatments. For certain types of warts, such as liform 
facial warts, cryotherapy is generally the treatment of choice, but for 
common hand and foot warts salicylic acid wart paint should be used 
rst. Cryotherapy is usually the next step and is repeated 2–4-weekly. 
However, caution is required, particularly on the hands, as over-vigorous 
cryotherapy can lead to scarring, nail dystrophy and even tendon rup-
ture. Periungual and subungual warts can be problematic and nail cutting 
and subsequent electrodessication may help. Several other therapies 
have been used for recalcitrant warts, including topical formaldehyde, 
glutaraldehyde, podophyllotoxin, trichloroacetic acid, cantharidin, topical 
or systemic retinoids, intralesional bleomycin or interferon injections, and 
contact sensitisation with, for example, diphencyprone. Imiquimod and 
PDT may also be benecial, particularly for multiple warts in immuno-
suppressed patients, and laser therapy can have a role in some cases.
Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a DNA poxvirus skin infection. It 
is most common in children over the age of 1 year, particularly those 
with atopic dermatitis. It also occurs frequently in immunosuppressed 
patients, including those with HIV. Lesions are dome-shaped, ‘umbili-
cated’, skin-coloured papules with central punctum (Fig. 27.26). They 
Fig. 27.25 Viral wart on the nger. The capillary loops are evident within the 
warty hyperkeratosis. Periungual sites are common and more difcult to treat.
Fig. 27.26 Molluscum contagiosum. Some of the pearly lesions show characteristic 
umbilication. From Lissauer T, Carroll W. Illustrated textbook of paediatrics, 6th edn. 
Elsevier; 2022.

[[p1152]]
1092    DERMATOLOGY
are often multiple and found at sites of apposition, such as the side of 
the chest and the inner arm. Spontaneous resolution occurs but can 
take months. Prior to resolution, they often become inamed and may 
leave small, atrophic scars. Destructive therapies may be painful and risk 
scarring, and the decision not to treat is often sensible. Gentle squeezing 
with forceps after bathing can hasten resolution. If active treatment is 
needed, topical salicylic acid, potassium hydroxide, podophyllin, cantha-
ridin, trichloroacetic acid, imiquimod, cryotherapy, diathermy, curettage 
or laser treatment are therapeutic approaches that can be considered.
Orf
Orf is a parapoxvirus skin infection and is an occupational risk for those 
who work with sheep and goats. Inoculation of virus, usually into n-
ger skin, causes signicant inammation and necrosis, which typically 
resolves within 2–6 weeks. No specic treatment is required, unless there 
is secondary infection. Erythema multiforme can be provoked by orf.
Other viral exanthems
Skin rash can be a feature of various other virus infections and these are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 13
Fungal infections
Fungal skin infections can be supercial (dermatophytes and yeasts) 
or, less commonly, deep (chromomycosis or sporotrichosis); the latter 
are seen more often in tropical climates or in the immunocompromised. 
Dermatophyte infections (ringworm) are extremely common and usually 
caused by fungi of the Microsporum, Trichophyton and Epidermophyton
species. The fungi can originate from soil (geophilic) or animals (zoo-
philic), or be conned to human skin (anthropophilic). Dermatophyte 
infections usually present with skin (tinea corporis), scalp (tinea capitis), 
groin (tinea cruris), foot (tinea pedis) and/or nail (onychomycosis) involve-
ment (Fig. 27.27).
Diagnosis
Skin scrapings, hair pluckings or nail clippings must be taken from areas 
of disease activity – typically, the advancing lesion edge for skin involve-
ment, the crumbling dystrophic nail and subungual hyperkeratosis for 
nail involvement, and plucked hair from scalp or other affected hair-bear-
ing sites – in order to conrm the diagnosis by microscopy and culture.
Management
The azoles (ketoconazole, miconazole), triazoles (itraconazole, 
uconazole) and triallylamines (terbinane) are used most widely in fun-
gal skin disease. Topical antifungals such as terbinane or miconazole 
may sufce, although systemic treatment (terbinane, itraconazole or 
griseofulvin) may be required for stubborn or extensive disease and 
scalp or nail involvement. Indeed, prolonged courses of systemic treat-
ment may be needed for nail involvement. The fungistatic agent gri-
seofulvin, given orally, is usually used for fungal infection of scalp or 
nails in children in the UK, as it is the only drug licensed in children for 
this indication; outside the UK, and in adults, terbinane is usually the 
treatment of choice as it has broader range of activity and shorter treat-
ment duration. Itraconazole is also an effective alternative. In addition 
to systemic antifungals, short courses of systemic or topical glucocorti-
coid are often used in kerion on the basis of reducing inammation and 
possible hair loss. However, glucocorticoid use is controversial, with no 
good evidence of benet.
Tinea corporis
Tinea corporis should feature in the differential diagnosis of a red, scaly 
rash. Typically, lesions are erythematous, annular and scaly, with a 
well-dened edge and central clearing. There may also be pustules at 
the active edge. Lesions are usually asymmetrical and may be single 
or multiple. The degree of inammation is dependent on the organism 
involved and the host immune response. Microsporum canis (from dogs) 
and T. verrucosum (from cats) are common culprits. Ill-advised use of 
topical glucocorticoids can modify the clinical presentation and increase 
disease extension (tinea incognito).
Tinea cruris
This is extremely common worldwide and is usually caused by T. rubrum. 
Itchy, erythematous plaques develop in the groins and extend on to the 
thighs, with a raised active edge (see Fig. 27.27A).
Tinea pedis
Tinea pedis or ‘athlete’s foot’ is the most common fungal infection in 
the UK and USA, and is usually caused by anthropophilic fungi, such 
as T. rubrum, T. interdigitale and E. occosum. It typically presents as 
an itchy rash between the toes, with peeling, ssuring and maceration. 
Involvement of one sole or palm (tinea manuum) with ne scaling is char-
acteristic of T. rubrum infection. Vesiculation or blistering is more often 
seen with T. mentagrophytes
Tinea capitis
This is a dermatophyte infection of scalp hair shafts and is most common 
in children. It typically presents as an area of scalp inammation and 
scaling, often with pustules and partial hair loss (Fig. 27.27B). Infection 
may be within the shaft (endothrix, most commonly caused by T. tonsu-
rans), causing patchy hair loss with broken hairs at the surface (‘black 
dot’), little inammation and no uorescence with Wood’s light. Infection 
Fig. 27.27 Dermatophyte infections.
Trichophyton rubrum
Microsporum canis infection of 
the scalp (tinea capitis).

[[p1153]]
Common skin infections and infestations    1093
27
outside the hair shaft (ectothrix, most commonly caused by M. audouinii
(anthropophilic)) shows minimal inammation; M. canis (from dogs and 
cats) infections are more inammatory and can be identied by green 
uorescence with Wood’s light. Kerion is a boggy, inammatory area of 
tinea capitis, usually caused by zoophilic fungi such as cattle ringworm 
(T. verrucosum).
Onychomycosis
This is a fungal infection of the nail plate and the species involved are 
generally those that cause tinea capitis or tinea pedis. Onychomycosis 
usually presents with yellow/brown nail discoloration, crumbling, thicken-
ing and subungual hyperkeratosis. Usually, some nails are spared, there 
is asymmetry and toenails are more commonly involved.
Candidiasis
This is a supercial skin or mucosal infection caused by a yeast-like 
fungus, Candida albicans. Infections are usually not serious, unless the 
patient is immunocompromised, in which case deeper tissues can be 
involved. The organism has a predilection for warm, moist environments 
and typical presentations are napkin candidiasis in babies, genital and 
perineal candidiasis, intertrigo and oral candidiasis. The diagnosis can 
be conrmed by microscopy and culture of skin swabs, and treatment is 
with topical or systemic antifungals, such as azoles.
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis versicolor is a persistent, supercial skin condition caused 
by various species of the commensal yeast Malassezia, most com-
monly Malassezia globosa, but sometimes M. sympadialis or M. furfur, 
It occurs in men and women and in different races. It is found more 
frequently in warmer, humid climates, and is usually more severe and 
persistent in the immunocompromised. It is characterised by scaly, oval 
macules on the upper trunk, usually hypopigmented but occasionally 
hyperpigmented. Hypopigmentation is more obvious after sun expo-
sure and tanning. The diagnosis can be conrmed by microscopy of 
skin scrapings, showing ‘spaghetti and meatballs’ hyphae. Treatment 
with selenium sulphide or ketoconazole shampoos and topical or sys-
temic azole antifungal agents is usually effective, although recurrence 
is common because these yeasts are skin commensals, and mainte-
nance topical therapy may be required. Altered pigmentation can per-
sist for months after treatment.
Infestations
Scabies
Scabies is caused by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei. It spreads in house-
holds and environments where there is intimate personal contact. The 
diagnosis is made by identifying the scabietic burrow (denition: a linear 
or curvilinear papule, caused by a burrowing scabies mite – Fig. 27.28) 
and visualising the mite (by extracting with a needle or using a derma-
toscope). In small children, the palms and soles can be involved, with 
pustules. Pruritus is prominent. The clinical features include secondary 
eczematisation elsewhere on the body; the face and scalp are rarely 
affected, except in infants. Involvement of the genitals in males and of 
the nipples commonly occurs. Even after successful treatment, itch can 
continue and occasionally nodular lesions persist.
Topical treatment of the affected individual and all asymptomatic 
family members/physical contacts is required to ensure eradication. 
Two applications 1 week apart of an aqueous solution of permethrin or 
malathion to the whole body, excluding the head, are usually success-
ful. If there is poor adherence, immunosuppression or heavy infestation 
(crusted ‘Norwegian’ scabies), systemic treatment with a single oral dose 
of ivermectin is sometimes appropriate.
Head lice
Infestation with the head louse, Pediculus humanus capitis, is common. 
It is highly contagious and spread by direct head-to-head contact. Scalp 
itch leads to scratching, secondary infection and cervical lymphadenop-
athy. The diagnosis is conrmed by identifying the living louse or nymph 
on the scalp or on a black sheet of paper after careful ne-toothed 
combing of wet hair following conditioner application. The empty egg 
cases (‘nits’) are easily seen on the hair shaft and are hard to dislodge.
Treatment is recommended for the affected individual and any infected 
household/school contacts. Eradication in school populations is difcult 
because of poor adherence and treatment resistance. Topical treatment 
with dimeticone, permethrin, carbaryl or, less often, malathion in lotion 
or aqueous formulations may be effective and should be applied twice 
at an interval of 7–10 days. Rotational treatments within a community 
may avoid resistance. ‘Wet-combing’ (physical removal of live lice by 
regular combing of conditioned wet hair – ‘bug busting’) can sufce but 
may be less effective than pharmacological treatments. Vaseline should 
be applied to eyelashes/brows twice daily for at least a fortnight. High-
temperature washing of clothing and bedding is required. Treatment 
resistance and recurrence can be problematic.
Body lice
These are similar to head lice but live on clothing, particularly in seams, and 
feed on the skin. Poor hygiene and overcrowded conditions predispose. 
Itch, excoriation (denition: a linear ulcer or erosion resulting from scratch-
ing) and secondary infection occur. Dry-cleaning and high-temperature 
washing or insecticide treatment of clothes are required. Treatment options 
are as for head lice. For heavy infestation, oral ivermectin may be indicated.
Pubic (crab) lice
Usually, these are sexually acquired and very itchy. Management is as for 
head and body lice and whole-body treatment should be undertaken. 
Pubic hair may need to be shaved. Sexual and other close contacts 
A
B
Fig. 27.28 
in its egg, seen on light microscopy of scrapings over a burrow. Note that the mite 
has only six legs, unlike adult mites, which have eight. (A) From  Lissauer T, Carroll 
W. Illustrated textbook of paediatrics, 5th edn. Elsevier; 2018

[[p1154]]
1094    DERMATOLOGY
should also be treated and patients should also be screened for sexually 
transmitted diseases.
Acne and rosacea
Acne vulgaris
Acne is chronic inammation of the pilosebaceous units. It is extremely 
common, generally starts during puberty and has been estimated to 
affect over 90% of adolescents. It is usually most severe in later adoles-
cence but can persist into the thirties and forties, particularly in females 
(Box 27.17).
Pathogenesis
The key components are increased sebum production; colonisation of 
pilosebaceous ducts by Propionibacterium acnes, which in turn causes 
inammation; and hypercornication and occlusion of pilosebaceous 
ducts (Fig. 27.29). Severity of acne is associated with sebum excretion 
rate, which increases at puberty. Both androgens and progestogens 
increase sebum excretion and oestrogens reduce it, but most patients 
with acne have normal hormone proles. There may be a positive family 
history and there is high concordance in monozygotic twins, indicating that 
genetic factors are important, but the candidate genes are poorly dened.
Clinical features
Acne usually affects the face and often the trunk. Greasiness of the skin 
may be obvious (seborrhoea). The hallmark is the comedone (denition: 
open comedones (blackheads) are dilated keratin-lled follicles, which 
appear as black papules due to the keratin debris; closed comedones 
(whiteheads) usually have no visible follicular opening and are caused by 
accumulation of sebum and keratin deeper in the pilosebaceous ducts – 
see Fig. 27.29). Inammatory papules, nodules and cysts occur and may 
arise from comedones (Fig. 27.30). Scarring may follow deep-seated or 
supercial acne and may be keloidal.
There are also distinct clinical variants:
 Acne conglobata: characterised by comedones, nodules, 
abscesses, sinuses (denition: cavities or channels that permit the 
escape of pus or uid) and cysts, usually with marked scarring. It is 
rare, usually affecting adult males, and most commonly occurs on 
trunk and upper limbs. It may be associated with hidradenitis sup-
purativa (acne inversa) (an occlusive follicular chronic inammatory 
condition affecting apocrine glands; this predominantly affects axil-
lae, groins, perineal and perianal sites and follows a relapsing and 
remitting course and often requires complex medical and surgical 
management approaches), scalp folliculitis and pilonidal sinus.
 Acne fulminans: a rare but severe presentation of acne, associated 
with fever, arthralgias and systemic inammation, with raised neu-
trophil count and plasma viscosity. It is usually found on the trunk in 
adolescent males. Costochondritis can occur.
 Acne excoriée: self-inicted excoriations due to compulsive picking 
of pre-existing or imagined acne lesions. It usually affects adolescent 
girls, and underlying psychological problems are common.
 Secondary acne: comedonal acne can be caused by greasy cosmetics 
or occupational exposure to oils, tars or chlorinated aromatic hydrocar-
bons. Predominantly pustular acne can occur in patients using systemic 
or topical glucocorticoids, oral contraceptives, anticonvulsants, lithium 
or antineoplastic drugs, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) inhibitors. Most patients with acne do not have an underlying 
endocrine disorder but acne is a common feature of polycystic ovary 
syndrome which should be suspected if acne is moderate to severe 
and associated with hirsutism and menstrual irregularities. Virilisation 
should also raise suspicion of an androgen-secreting tumour.
27.17  Acne in adolescence
Epidemiology: acne vulgaris is most common between the ages of 12 and 
20. It often begins around 10–13 years of age, lasts 5–10 years and usually 
resolves by age 20–25.
Emotional effects: at all ages acne can have negative effects on self-esteem, 
but it is especially important to assess how it affects an adolescent. Depression 
and suicidal ideation may occur. The consequences (whether acne is objectively 
severe or not) can be devastating, leading to embarrassment, school avoidance, 
and life-long effects on ability to form friendships, attract partners, and acquire 
and keep employment.
Treatment: effective treatments aim to improve the condition, prevent 
worsening (including later scarring) and restore emotional well-being and self-
esteem.
Rupture of
obstructed
sebaceous
gland, with
release of
contents into
dermis
Increased 
sebum
secretion rate
Bacterial colonisation
of duct and release of
inflammatory mediators
Occlusion of
pilosebaceous duct
Epidermis
Sebaceous
gland
Hair follicle
Fig. 27.29 Pathogenesis of acne.
B
A
Fig. 27.30 Cystic acne in an adolescent girl. 
prolonged systemic antibiotic treatment.

[[p1155]]
Acne and rosacea    1095
27
Investigations
Investigations are not required in typical acne vulgaris. Secondary causes 
and suspected underlying endocrine disease or virilisation should be 
investigated.
Management
Mild to moderate disease
Mild disease is usually managed with topical therapy. If comedones pre-
dominate, then topical benzoyl peroxide or retinoids should be used. 
Benzoyl peroxide has both anti-comedogenic and antiseptic effects. 
It is an irritant, which may contribute to the therapeutic response, but 
this can be minimised by adjusting treatment regimens. Azelaic acid 
may also be used for mild acne and has both antimicrobial and anti- 
comedogenic action. Topical retinoids, in particular all-trans retinoic acid 
and adapalene, are widely employed for mild to moderate comedonal 
acne vulgaris. Treatment should be initially applied at low concentrations 
for short duration and increased as tolerated. Patients with mild inam-
matory acne should respond to topical antibiotics, such as erythromycin 
or clindamycin, which can be used in combination with other treatments.
For moderate inammatory acne, a systemic tetracycline should be 
used at adequate dose for 3–6 months in the rst instance (Fig. 27.30B). 
Oxytetracycline must be taken on an empty stomach, in a dose of up to 
1.5 g a day. It has a good safety prole, even with long-term use, but adher-
ence may be a challenge. Lymecycline is an alternative and is taken once 
daily, with or without food, thereby improving adherence. Doxycycline is 
another option but commonly causes photosensitivity. Minocycline is used 
less frequently, as it can cause hyperpigmentation, autoimmune hepatitis 
and drug-induced lupus, and monitoring is required. If the patient fails to 
respond, then alternatives include erythromycin or trimethoprim.
In women with acne, oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives can be 
a useful adjunct, as they are associated with a small reduction in sebum 
production. Combined oestrogen and anti-androgen (such as cyproter-
one acetate) contraceptives may provide additional efcacy, particularly 
in women with acne and hirsutism, as seen in polycystic ovary syndrome.
Patients should be referred for consideration of isotretinoin (13-cis-reti-
noic acid) if there is a failure to respond adequately to 6 months of ther-
apy with these combined systemic and topical approaches.
Moderate to severe disease
Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) has revolutionised the treatment of moder-
ate to severe acne that has not responded adequately to other therapies. 
It has multifactorial mechanisms of action, with reduction in sebum excre-
tion by over 90%, follicular hypercornication, P. acnes colonisation and 
inammation. Oral isotretinoin is usually used at a dose of 0.5–1 mg/kg over 
4 months. Sebum excretion typically returns to baseline within a year after 
treatment cessation, although clinical benet is usually longer-lasting. Many 
patients will not require further treatment, although a second or third course 
of isotretinoin may be needed. A low-dose continuous or intermittent-dose 
regimen may occasionally be considered for a longer duration in patients 
who relapse after a higher-dose regimen, and may also be benecial for 
older females with persistent acne. Combination with systemic glucocorti-
coid may be required in the short term for severe acne, in order to minimise 
the risk of disease are early in the treatment course. Thorough screen-
ing and monitoring are required, given the side-effect prole of isotretinoin, 
particularly with respect to teratogenicity and possible mood disturbance. 
Pregnancy must be avoided during treatment and for a minimum of 
2 months after drug cessation, and a strict pregnancy prevention pro-
gramme and regular pregnancy testing are required. Depression and sui-
cide have been reported in association with isotretinoin, although a causal 
role has not been established. However, pre-drug screening for depressive 
symptoms should be undertaken and mood monitored during therapy.
Other treatments and physical measures
Intralesional injections of triamcinolone acetonide may be required for 
inamed acne nodules or cysts, which can also be incised and drained, 
or excised under local anaesthetic. Scarring may be prevented by 
adequate treatment of active acne. Keloid scars may respond to intra-
lesional glucocorticoid and/or silicone dressings. Carbon dioxide laser, 
microdermabrasion, chemical peeling or localised excision can also be 
considered for scarring. UVB phototherapy or PDT can occasionally be 
used in patients with inammatory acne who are unable to use conven-
tional therapy, such as isotretinoin. There is no convincing evidence to 
support a causal association between diet and acne. The psychological 
impact of acne must not be under-estimated and should be considered 
in management decisions (see Box 27.17).
Rosacea
This chronic inammatory condition affects the central face and con-
sists of ushing, erythema, papules, pustules and telangiectasiae. The 
cause is unknown. Rosacea is distinct from acne vulgaris; sebum excre-
tion is normal and comedones are absent. The relative contribution of 
Demodex mite and cutaneous vasomotor instability to the pathogenesis 
of rosacea remains poorly dened.
Clinical features
Rosacea most commonly affects fair-skinned, middle-aged females and 
can be exacerbated by heat, sunlight and alcohol. The convexities of 
nose, forehead, cheeks and chin are typically involved (Fig. 27.31). The 
condition is heterogeneous and intermittent ushing, followed by xed 
erythema and telangiectasiae, predominates in some; in others, papules 
and pustules are prominent. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia and soft tis-
sue overgrowth of the nose (rhinophyma) can occur, particularly in males. 
Conjunctivitis and blepharitis may also occur. Facial lymphoedema can 
be an added complication.
Investigations
Usually, no investigations are required and the diagnosis is obvious clin-
ically. However, rosacea must be distinguished from acne vulgaris, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, photosensitivity disorders and seborrhoeic 
dermatitis (the latter may coexist with rosacea).
Management
Mild disease may respond to topical antimicrobials, such as metronida-
zole or azelaic acid. Topical ivermectin may be benecial in some cases, 
supporting a contributory role of Demodex in pathogenesis. Tetracycline 
or erythromycin for 3–6 months is usually effective in inammatory 
Fig. 27.31 Glandular rosacea. Showing prominent rhinophyma. From James W, 
Elston D, McMahon PJ. Andrews’ diseases of the skin clinical atlas. Elsevier; 2018.

[[p1156]]
1096    DERMATOLOGY
pustular disease resistant to topical therapy. Relapse may require inter-
mittent or chronic antibiotic use. Erythema and telangiectasiae do not 
usually respond well to antibiotics but vascular laser therapy may be 
effective. Topical vasoconstrictors, such as the α2-adrenoceptor agonist 
brimonidine, may be of benet in some cases where erythema and tel-
angiectasiae predominate. Systemic isotretinoin may be helpful in severe 
resistant disease and rhinophyma may require laser therapy or surgery.
Eczemas
The term ‘eczema’ derives from the Greek word ‘to boil’ and is synony-
mous with the other descriptive term, ‘dermatitis’. Eczema describes a 
clinical and histological pattern, which can be acute or chronic and has sev-
eral causes. Acutely, epidermal oedema (spongiosis) and intra-epidermal 
vesiculation (producing multilocular blisters) predominate, whereas with 
chronicity there is more epidermal thickening (acanthosis). Vasodilatation 
and T-cell lymphocytic inltration of the upper dermis also occur.
Clinical features
There are several patterns of eczema (Box 27.18) but the clinical fea-
tures are similar, irrespective of the cause (Box 27.19). Some subtypes 
of eczema have specic distinguishing features and these are discussed 
in more detail below.
Investigations
Bacterial and viral swabs for microscopy and culture are important in sus-
pected secondary infection. Bacterial swabs are commonly positive, par-
ticularly for staphylococci, although clinical assessment is required in order 
to ascertain whether swab results are of clinical signicance and whether 
antibiotic treatment is required. Individuals with atopic eczema have an 
increased susceptibility to herpes simplex virus (HSV) and are at risk of 
developing a widespread infection, eczema herpeticum. The presence of 
small, punched-out lesions on a background of worsening eczema sug-
gests the possibility of secondary HSV infection. Skin scrapings to rule 
out secondary fungal infection should also be considered. Total IgE and 
specic IgE tests and skin prick tests are not routinely undertaken in atopic 
eczema as they are not usually helpful, although they may occasionally 
be indicated in some cases as directed by the history. Patch tests should 
be performed if contact allergic dermatitis is suspected (see Box 27.23
below). Skin biopsy is not usually required unless there is diagnostic doubt.
Management
A general approach to the management of eczema includes advice, 
education and support, required for patients with eczema of any type 
(Fig. 27.32). Input from patient support groups, such as the National 
Eczema Society in the UK, can be very helpful. Intensive and prolonged 
treatments are often required and chronic eczema can have a major and 
devastating adverse impact on personal and family lives. Emollients and 
topical glucocorticoids are mainstays of treatment for all eczema types, 
in order to improve skin barrier function, limit transepidermal water loss 
and reduce inammation. Emollients can be used as bath additives and 
soap substitutes, and applied directly to the skin, often combined with 
antiseptics. Sedative antihistamines are useful if sleep is interrupted but 
non-sedating antihistamines are ineffective, as the itch of eczema is not 
primarily mediated by histamine.
Ointments are preferred for chronic eczema, whereas cream- or 
lotion-based treatment may be more appropriate for acute eczema (see 
Box 27.11). Treatment is once to twice daily. Hydrocortisone (1%) or 
clobetasone butyrate is generally used on the face, with more potent 
glucocorticoids restricted to trunk and limbs (see Box 27.12). A good 
strategy is to employ an intensive regimen with more potent glucocorti-
coids initially and then taper use according to response. A key principle 
is to use the least potent glucocorticoid that is effective for the shortest 
possible time. The patient should be given instructions on how much 
to apply, using the ngertip unit for guidance (a strip of glucocorticoid 
cream on distal phalanx pulp should cover two palm-size areas). It is also 
important to monitor glucocorticoid use and the easiest way to do this 
is ask the patient how long it takes them to use a specic size of gluco-
corticoid tube. The side-effects of topical glucocorticoid therapy need to 
be considered but glucocorticoid phobia and under-treatment of eczema 
are often more of a problem than over-treatment. Particular care should 
be taken on certain sites, such as the face and exures, and in children 
and older adults (see Box 27.2 and Fig. 27.10).
The clinical features of eczema inuence the choice of topical treat-
ment. For example, appropriate treatment of acute exudative eczema 
could be with potassium permanganate soaks, emollients and topical 
glucocorticoids under wet wraps. Chronic eczema may be best treated 
with a potent topical glucocorticoid in an ointment formulation and occlu-
sion with a paste bandage to ease itching and scratching.
The topical calcineurin inhibitors tacrolimus and pimecrolimus may 
be useful glucocorticoid-sparing agents for eczema, particularly on the 
face; they cause local cutaneous immunosuppression. Initial burning and 
stinging may limit use but are usually transient side-effects. Bacterial and 
viral skin infection risk may be increased due to immunosuppression. 
Caution should be employed with sun exposure and these agents should 
not be used in combination with phototherapy because of their immuno-
suppressive effects.
Atopic eczema
This is the most common subtype of eczema. The prevalence has 
increased dramatically since the early 1980s, and the disease now 
affects at least 20% of schoolchildren and 5%–10% of adults in the UK.
Pathogenesis
Generalised prolonged hypersensitivity to common environmental anti-
gens, such as pollen and house-dust mite, is the hallmark of atopy, in 
which there is a genetic predisposition to produce excess IgE. Atopic 
individuals manifest one or more of a group of diseases that includes 
asthma, hay fever, food and other allergies, and atopic eczema. Genetic 
factors play an important role in all of these conditions, supported by 
higher concordance of atopic disease in monozygotic twins compared 
with dizygotic twins. Filaggrin gene mutations increase the risk of devel-
oping atopic eczema by more than threefold, emphasising the impor-
tance of epidermal barrier impairment in this disease. Other genes are 
also likely to be implicated, with many other susceptibility loci identied, 
although these studies require further replication. Decreased skin barrier 
27.18  Classication of eczema
Endogenous
 Atopic, seborrhoeic
Exogenous
 Irritant, allergic, photo-allergic, chronic actinic dermatitis
Characteristic patterns and morphology
 Asteatotic, discoid, gravitational, lichen simplex, pompholyx
27.19  The clinical morphology of eczema
Acute
 Erythema, oedema, usually typically ill dened
 Papules, vesicles and occasionally bullae
 Exudation, ssuring
 Scaling
Chronic
 May be as above but less oedema, vesiculation and exudate
 Lichenication: skin thickening with pronounced skin markings, secondary to 
chronic rubbing and scratching
 Fissures (denition: slit-shaped deep ulcers), excoriations
 Dyspigmentation: hyper- and hypopigmentation can occur

[[p1157]]
Eczemas    1097
27
function may also allow greater penetration of allergens through the epi-
dermis, and thus cause immune stimulation and subsequent inamma-
tion. The interaction between genes and environment is important; it has 
been estimated that 60%–80% of individuals are genetically susceptible 
to the induction of IgE-mediated sensitisation to environmental allergens 
such as food and animal hair. Eczema is characterised by inltration of 
Th2 cells, which are known to play a role in activating mast cells and 
eosinophils, as well as stimulating IgE production by IgE-producing B 
cells. The therapeutic inhibition of IL-4 and IL-13 and promising trials of 
phosphodiesterase-4 and JAK inhibitors, highlights the involvement of 
these targets in atopic dermatitis pathogenesis. Emerging therapeutic 
targets for atopic eczema both in terms of targeting Th2-driven inam-
mation and skin barrier dysfunction is a rapidly evolving eld and further 
informs our understanding at a mechanistic level (see Fig. 27.34). The 
contributing roles of the microbiome are also being explored. Thus, the 
pathogenesis of atopic eczema is complex and multifactorial, involving 
an interplay of contributing factors.
Clinical features
Atopic eczema is extremely itchy and scratching accounts for many 
of the signs (Fig. 27.33). Widespread cutaneous dryness (also known 
as xeroderma or xerosis) is another feature. The distribution and char-
acter of the rash vary with age (Box 27.20). Complications are listed 
in Box 27.21
Investigations
The diagnosis of atopic eczema is made using clinical criteria (Box 
27.22). Interestingly, while most patients with atopic eczema have raised 
total IgE levels and IgE-specic antibodies, this is not a prerequisite for 
the diagnosis, as a signicant minority have normal levels of IgE.
Management
The general principles of management are as described in Figure 
27.32. Emollients and topical glucocorticoids, tar and ichthammol 
paste bandages, or wet wraps in children, are often required and are 
mainstays in improving barrier function and reducing inammation, 
although have not been shown to have a preventative effect against 
Next steps
Narrowband UVB, PUVA/UVA1
(depending on availability
and age of patient)
Initial steps
Accurate diagnosis
Establishing severity and impact
Removal of triggers and treatable
causes, such as infection, and
allergens
Education and support
of patient and family
Psychological support
General treatment approach
Emollients, topical glucocorticoids,
and calcineurin inhibitors,
sedating antihistamines
Consider bandages, wet wraps
Inpatient admission
If feasible, for intensive
inpatient care 
± Phototherapy/
± Systemic treatment
Immunosuppression
Prednisolone,
azathioprine,
ciclosporin,
methotrexate
Systemic retinoids
Acitretin or
alitretinoin for
hand eczema
For severe resistant disease
Dupilumab,
JAK inhibitors
Consider
Fig. 27.32 General management approaches: atopic eczema.
(JAK = Janus kinase; PDE = phosphodiesterase; PUVA = psoralen-
ultraviolet A; UVA1 = ultraviolet A1; UVB = narrowband ultraviolet B)
B
A
Fig. 27.33 Atopic eczema.
eczema and experienced a generalised are of disease triggered by infection. 
scratching.

[[p1158]]
1098    DERMATOLOGY
avoided in children. Localised phototherapy may be used for eczema 
on hands and feet and PUVA may be more effective in that situation. 
Systemic immunosuppression with, for example, oral glucocorticoids, 
intermittent ciclosporin, azathioprine or methotrexate may be needed 
if the response to topical therapies and phototherapy is inadequate. 
Systemic retinoids, such as acitretin or alitretinoin, may be indicated: for 
example, in hand and foot eczema.
Dupilumab, which blocks the IL-4 receptor alpha chain subunit com-
mon to both IL-4 and IL-13 receptors, is now licensed for clinical use in 
patients with severe disease, as are the JAK inhibitors baricitinib and upa-
dacitinib. The anti-IL-13 agents tralokinumab and lebrikizumab are also 
showing promise in clinical trials, as are phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors 
and other therapeutic targets (see Fig. 27.11 and Box 27.14).
Seborrhoeic eczema
This is an erythematous scaly rash affecting the scalp (dandruff), cen-
tral face, nasolabial folds, eyebrows, central chest and upper back. It is 
associated with, and may be due to, overgrowth of Malassezia yeasts. 
When severe, it may resemble psoriasis. Severe or recalcitrant sebor-
rhoeic eczema can be a marker of immunodeciency, including HIV 
infection. Topical azoles, such as ketoconazole shampoo and cream, 
often combined with mild glucocorticoid, are mainstays. Treatment often 
needs to be repeated due to disease recurrence.
Discoid eczema
Discoid eczema, which is also known as nummular eczema, is com-
mon and characteristically consists of discrete, coin-shaped eczematous 
lesions, which are often impetiginised and most commonly occur on the 
limbs of men. It is an eczema type that can be due to any chronic itchy 
condition, whether primarily of the skin or secondary to an underlying 
disease. Initial management should include topical antiseptics, in addi-
tion to emollients and topical glucocorticoids. Judicious antibiotic use 
may also be required for acute ares.
Irritant eczema
Detergents, alkalis, acids, solvents and abrasives are common irritants. 
Strong irritants have acute effects, whereas weaker irritants commonly 
cause chronic eczema, especially of the hands, after prolonged expo-
sure. Individual susceptibility varies and older adults, atopic and fair-
skinned individuals are predisposed. Irritant eczema accounts for most 
occupational cases of eczema and is a signicant cause of time off 
work. Irritant avoidance, including protective clothing (such as gloves), is 
essential. Emollients and topical glucocorticoids are indicated.
Allergic contact eczema
This occurs due to a delayed hypersensitivity reaction following contact 
with antigens or haptens. Previous allergen exposure is required for sen-
sitisation and the reaction is specic to the allergen or closely related 
chemicals. Common allergens are listed in Box 27.23
Allergy persists indenitely and eczema occurs at sites of allergen 
contact and can secondarily spread beyond this. The distribution of 
eczema can be very informative with regard to possible culprits. There 
are many recognisable patterns of sites of eczema involvement, such 
as earlobes, wrists and umbilicus due to contact with nickel in earrings, 
watches and jeans studs; hands and wrists due to rubber gloves; and 
upper eyelids due to colophony from rubbing of the eyes in nail varnish 
wearers. Oedema may also be a feature (Fig. 27.34). Allergen avoidance 
is key and may involve a change of occupation, recreational activities or 
hobbies. It is important to ensure that patients are fully informed as to 
the nature and likely occurrence of allergens and good detective work is 
required to scrutinise lifestyle and daily activities. Treatment with emol-
lients and topical glucocorticoids helps but will not sufce if there is con-
tinued allergen exposure.
27.20  Atopic eczema: distribution and character of rash
Babies and infants
 Often acute and facial involvement prominent
 Trunk involved but nappy area usually spared
Children
 Flexures: behind knees, antecubital fossae, wrists and ankles
Adults
 Face and trunk usually involved, limb involvement not restricted to exures
 Lichenication common
27.21  Complications of atopic eczema
Secondary infection
Bacterial
 Staphylococcus aureus most common
Viral
 Herpes simplex virus can cause a widespread severe eruption – eczema 
herpeticum
 Papillomavirus and molluscum contagiosum are more common in atopic 
eczema, especially if treated with topical glucocorticoids
Increased susceptibility to irritants
 Defective barrier function
Increased susceptibility to allergy
 Food allergy – mainly relevant in infants; eggs, cow’s milk protein, nuts, sh, 
wheat and soya may cause an immediate reaction with angioedema and/or 
urticaria rather than exacerbation of eczema
 Anaphylaxis in severe allergy
 Increased risk of sensitisation to type IV allergens because of impaired barrier 
function
Impact on life and health
 Poor sleep, loss of schooling, behavioural difculties, failure to thrive in children
 Impact on sleep, work, relationships, hobbies, psychology and quality of life in 
adults
27.22  Diagnostic criteria for atopic eczema
Itchy skin rash (or history of itch or rubbing from parent) and at least three of the 
following:
 History of involvement of skin creases (or cheeks if <4 years)
 History of atopic disease (asthma, hay fever) (or in a rst-degree relative if <4 years)
 Dry skin (xeroderma)
 Visible exural eczema (cheeks, forehead, outer limbs if <4 years)
 Onset in rst 2 years of life
the subsequent development of atopic eczema when used in babies. 
Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be used as glucocorticoid-sparing 
agents but should not be used in infected eczema. Secondary infec-
tion should be treated but positive skin swabs in isolation, without 
clinical evidence of infection, do not necessarily require treatment with 
antibiotics, although antiseptics would be appropriate. Sedating anti-
histamines may help to break the itch/scratch cycle. Identication and 
avoidance of allergens are important.
Phototherapy is generally the next step, if topical therapies are insuf-
cient (see Fig. 27.32). Narrowband UVB is usually the initial phototherapy 
of choice and can also be used in children. PUVA or UVA1 can also be 
used if UVB is ineffective, although mainly in adults as PUVA is generally 

[[p1159]]
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly eruptions    1099
27
(such as rubber additives). Oedema and ulceration are treated by leg 
elevation and compression bandages.
Lichen simplex
Lichenication of eczema occurs secondary to chronic rubbing and 
scratching, and lichen simplex is a localised form. Common sites include 
the neck, lower legs and anogenital region. Treatment with emollients 
and very potent topical glucocorticoids may be required, often impreg-
nated in tape or with occlusion.
Pompholyx
Intensely itchy vesicles and bullae occur on the palms, palmar surface 
and sides of the ngers and soles. Pompholyx may have several causes, 
which include atopic eczema, irritant and contact allergic dermatitis and 
fungal infection. The underlying cause must be treated or removed.
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly 
eruptions
Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a chronic inammatory, hyperproliferative skin disease. It is 
characterised by well-dened, erythematous scaly plaques, particularly 
affecting extensor surfaces, scalp and nails, and usually follows a relapsing 
and remitting course. Psoriasis affects approximately 1.5%–3% of popula-
tions of European ancestry but is less common in Asian, South American 
and African populations. It occurs equally in both sexes and at any age; 
although it is uncommon under the age of 5 years, more than 50% of 
patients present before the age of 30 years. The age of onset follows a 
bimodal distribution, with an early-onset type in the teenage or early adult 
years, often with a family history of psoriasis, a more severe disease course 
and strong HLA association. The later-onset type is typically seen between 
50 and 60 years, usually without a family history and with a less severe 
disease course.
Pathogenesis
Both genetic and environmental factors are important. Twin studies show 
concordance rates of 60%–75% and 15%–20% for psoriasis arising in 
monozygotic and dizygotic twins, respectively. The age at onset and 
severity of disease are often similar in familial cases. If one parent has 
psoriasis, the chance of a child being affected is about 15%–20%; if 
both parents have the disease, this rises to 50% and the risk is increased 
further if a sibling also has the disease.
Variants of the HLA-C region within the major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) on chromosome 6 account for almost half of the heritability of 
psoriasis. However, at least 70 other loci are implicated, with susceptibil-
ity variants that lie within or close to genes involved in regulating epider-
mal barrier function, antigen presentation, cytokine production, notably 
IL-13 and IL-23, T-cell differentiation (especially Th-1 and Th-17 subsets) 
and nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) signalling. Some of the loci that pre-
dispose to psoriasis overlap with those implicated in Crohn’s disease, 
ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis.
Environmental triggers for psoriasis are shown in (Box 27.24). Although 
the theory is controversial, stress may exacerbate psoriasis in susceptible 
individuals and psoriasis is itself a cause of psychological stress. Likewise, 
there is a higher incidence of smoking and heavy alcohol consumption 
in patients with psoriasis but it is unclear whether this is cause or effect. 
There is also an association between psoriasis and metabolic syndrome.
The histological changes of psoriasis are shown in Figure 27.35. The 
main features are:
 keratinocyte hyperproliferation and abnormal differentiation, leading 
to retention of nuclei in the stratum corneum
27.23  Common type IV delayed hypersensitivity allergens
Allergen
Source
Nickel
Jewellery, jean studs, bra clips, 
watches
Dichromate
Cement, leather, matches
Rubber chemicals
Clothing, shoes, rubber gloves, tyres
Colophony
Sticking plaster, collodion, nail varnish
Paraphenylenediamine
Hair dye, clothing, tattoos
Balsam of Peru
Perfumes, citrus fruits, shower/bath 
products
Neomycin, benzocaine
Topical medications
Parabens
Preservative in cosmetics and creams
Wool alcohols
Lanolin, cosmetics, creams
Epoxy resin
Resin adhesives, glues
Methyl- and chloromethyl-
isothiazolinone
Preservatives, with increasing 
numbers of cases of allergy reported
Fig. 27.34 Allergic contact eczema. This was caused by the application of an 
antihistamine cream. The acute eczematous reaction and bilateral periorbital oedema 
are typical.
Asteatotic eczema
This occurs in dry skin and is common in older adults. Low humidity 
caused by central heating, over-washing, diuretics and choleste rol-
lowering drugs predispose. The most common site is the lower legs, 
and a ‘crazy paving’ pattern of ne ssuring on an erythematous back-
ground is seen. Emollients are a mainstay, in combination with topical 
glucocorticoids. Patients must be advised to use caution with amma-
ble emollients and to avoid bathroom slippages related to emollients 
on oor and feet, and this is particularly relevant for older individuals.
Gravitational eczema
Gravitational or stasis eczema occurs on the lower legs and is often 
associated with signs of venous insufciency: oedema, loss of hair, indu-
ration, lipodermatosclerosis and ulceration. Emollients should be used 
and topical glucocorticoids should be applied to eczematous areas but 
not to ulcers. There is a high risk of sensitisation to topical preservatives 
(such as chlorocresol), antibiotics (such as neomycin) and bandages 

[[p1160]]
1100    DERMATOLOGY
 inammation, with a T-cell (mainly activated Th-1 and Th-17) lym-
phocytic inltrate and release of cytokines and adhesion molecules, 
such as interleukins (including IL-17, IL-23 and IL-12), TNF-α, IFN-γ
and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1
 vascular changes, with tortuosity of dermal capillary loop vessels 
and release of mediators, such as vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF).
The initiating event for psoriasis is unknown. Disordered cell prolifera-
tion is a key feature; this was previously thought to be the primary event 
but is now considered to be secondary to inammatory change. The 
transit time for keratinocyte migration, from basal layer to shedding from 
stratum corneum, is shortened from approximately 28 to 5 days, so that 
immature cells reach the stratum corneum prematurely. Proliferation rate 
is also increased in non-lesional skin but to a lesser extent. Similarly, even 
the clinically unaffected nails of patients with psoriasis grow more quickly 
than those of controls.
While immunological factors clearly play a key role in psoriasis, the 
precise mechanisms of disease initiation and the sequence of events 
that lead to psoriasis are not fully dened. Therapeutic efcacy through 
targeted biological inhibition of the effects of key cytokines, notably TNF-
α, IL-17, IL-23 and IL-12, continues to provide major insight into the 
pathogenesis of psoriasis and the pathways and mechanisms involved.
Clinical features
Psoriasis has several different presentations (Fig. 27.36).
Plaque psoriasis
This is the most common presentation and usually represents more 
stable disease. The typical lesion is a raised, well-demarcated erythe-
matous plaque of variable size (see Fig. 27.36A). In untreated disease, 
silver/white scale is evident and more obvious on scraping the surface, 
which reveals bleeding points (Auspitz sign). The most common sites are 
the extensor surfaces, notably elbows and knees, and the lower back. 
Others include:
 Scalp: involvement is seen in approximately 60% of patients. 
Typically, easily palpable, erythematous scaly plaques are evident 
within hair-bearing scalp and there is clear demarcation at or beyond 
the hair margin. Occipital involvement is common and difcult to 
treat. Less often, ne diffuse scaling may be present and difcult to 
distinguish from seborrhoeic dermatitis. Involvement of other ‘sebor-
rhoeic sites’, such as eyebrows, nasolabial folds and the pre-sternal 
area, is not uncommon and again may be confused with sebor-
rhoeic dermatitis. Temporary hair loss can occur but permanent loss 
is unusual.
 Nails: involvement is common, with ‘thimble pitting’, onycholysis 
(separation of the nail from the nail bed, see Fig. 27.36B), subungual 
hyperkeratosis and periungual involvement.
 Flexures: psoriasis of the natal cleft and submammary and axillary 
folds is usually symmetrical, erythematous and smooth, without 
scale.
 Palms: psoriasis of the palms can be difcult to distinguish from 
eczema.
Guttate psoriasis
This is most common in children and adolescents and is often the initial 
presentation (see Fig. 27.36C). It may present shortly after a strepto-
coccal throat infection and evolves rapidly. Individual lesions are drop-
let-shaped, small (usually less than 1 cm in diameter), erythematous, 
scaly and numerous. An episode of guttate psoriasis may clear sponta-
neously or with topical treatment within a few months, but UVB photo-
therapy is often required and is highly effective. Guttate psoriasis often 
heralds the onset of plaque psoriasis in adulthood.
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Generalised erythrodermic psoriasis is a medical emergency (see Fig. 
27.36D).
27.24  Exacerbating factors in psoriasis
Trauma
 Lesions can appear at sites of skin trauma, such as scratches or surgical 
wounds (Köbner isomorphic phenomenon)
Infection
 β-haemolytic streptococcal throat infections often precede guttate psoriasis 
(see Fig. 27.36C)
 Severe psoriasis may be the initial presentation of HIV infection
Sunlight
 Psoriasis may occur or worsen after sun exposure, mainly due to Köbnerisation 
at sites of sunburn or polymorphic light eruption
Drugs
 Antimalarials, β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), lithium, NSAIDs and 
TNF-α inhibitors can exacerbate psoriasis
 ‘Rebound’ are of psoriasis may occur after withdrawal of systemic 
glucocorticoids or potent topical glucocorticoids. Rebound psoriasis is often 
unstable and may be pustular
Psychological factors
 Anxiety and stress may exacerbate psoriasis in predisposed individuals
(HIV = human immunodeciency virus; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs; 
TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha)
Upper dermal
T-lymphocyte infiltrate
Irregular thickening
of epidermis
Dilated and tortuous
capillary loops
Micro-abscess
Supra-papillary
plate thinning
Hyperkeratosis
Parakeratosis
Keratin
layer
Epidermis
Dermis
Psoriasis
Normal
Fig. 27.35 The histology of psoriasis.

[[p1161]]
Psoriasis and other erythematous scaly eruptions    1101
27
Pustular psoriasis
Pustular psoriasis may be generalised or localised. Generalised pustular 
psoriasis is uncommon, unstable and life-threatening. It will often emerge 
in the context of plaque disease and the onset is usually sudden, with large 
numbers of small, sterile pustules on an erythematous background, often 
merging into sheets, with waves of new pustules in subsequent days. The 
patient is usually febrile and systemically unwell, and this must be dealt 
with as a medical emergency. Unstable pustular psoriasis may be pre-
cipitated as a rebound phenomenon following either topical or systemic 
glucocorticoid use in a patient with psoriasis. Localised pustular psoriasis 
of the palms and soles (palmoplantar pustulosis) is more common, chronic 
and closely associated with smoking; small, sterile pustules and erythema 
develop and resolve with pigmentation and scaling. A localised form of 
sterile pustulosis of a few digits (acropustulosis) can also occur. It is unclear 
whether these localised forms of pustulosis are truly psoriatic.
Arthropathy
Between 5% and 10% of individuals with psoriasis develop an inam-
matory arthropathy, which can take on a number of patterns. Joint 
involvement is more likely in patients with psoriatic nail disease. Psoriatic 
arthritis is discussed in more detail in Chapter 26
Investigations
Skin biopsy is not usually required but may be performed if there is diag-
nostic doubt. An infection screen, particularly throat swab and/or serology 
for recent streptococcal infection, may be informative in guttate psoriasis. 
Assessment of impact on life using the DLQI and disease extent using 
PASI (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index) is essential. Due to the associa-
tion of psoriasis with metabolic syndrome, comorbidities and cardiovas-
cular risk factors should be assessed and managed along usual lines. HIV 
testing should be considered in severe or recalcitrant psoriasis.
Management
Counselling about diagnosis and management of skin involvement and 
other comorbidities is paramount. Information and services must be 
available for patients. Psoriasis can have a major impact on all aspects of 
life and this must not be under-estimated. Reassurance is also needed, 
as the condition is generally not life-threatening. Advice regarding reduc-
tion in risk factors for cardiovascular disease should be given (smoking 
cessation, reduction of alcohol intake, adequate exercise and a normal 
body mass index). Associated diseases, such as hypertension and dia-
betes, should be treated.
Patients need to be involved in their own management, as the dis-
ease is usually chronic and the benet/risk prole of treatments must be 
A
C
E
D
B
Fig. 27.36 Psoriasis.
coarse pitting and separation from the nail plate (onycholysis).
From 
Wilson SF, Giddens JF. Health Assessment for Nursing Practice, 7th 
edn. Elsevier; 2022.

[[p1162]]
1102    DERMATOLOGY
discussed and tailored to individuals. The endpoint for treatment also 
needs to be discussed because complete disease clearance may not be 
practical or appropriate and patients vary considerably in their treatment 
requirements. Extent of disease and impact on quality of life must be 
taken into account. Patient adherence to topical and systemic therapies 
is essential and dependent on the treatment practicalities.
The treatment approach generally follows a stepwise progression, with 
treatment categories broadly summarised (Fig. 27.37).
Topical treatments, including emollients, are the rst-line approach. 
Vitamin D receptor agonists, such as calcipotriol, calcitriol and tacalcitol, 
are often used as rst-line topical treatment. The mechanism of action 
includes increased differentiation and reduction of proliferation, reducing 
plaque scale and thickness. Calcipotriol is most widely used and can be 
applied once to twice daily; if less than 100 g of ointment is used each week, 
there is no risk of hypercalcaemia. Vitamin D analogues can cause irritation 
but this is often temporary. Topical glucocorticoids may be required in the 
management of psoriasis, particularly at exural or facial sites, and may be 
alternated or combined with vitamin D analogues. However, safe, appro-
priately supervised and judicious use is necessary, with awareness of the 
potential risk of rebound unstable or pustular psoriasis with glucocorticoid 
over-use or sudden cessation. Dithranol and coal tar are effective and, like 
vitamin D analogues, work by increasing differentiation and inhibit-
ing proliferation. Although often effective, they are messy and time-
consuming. Modied versions of Goeckerman’s regimen (the combination 
of coal tar and UVB) are still used, but coal tar has a characteristic odour 
and can be irritant. Short-contact dithranol therapy at relatively high con-
centrations applied for 15–30 minutes can be used but causes brown 
staining of skin and purple discoloration of light hair. In recent years, efforts 
have been made to improve the tolerance of tar and dithranol preparations, 
but at reduced efcacy. Overall, the use of tar and dithranol has reduced in 
recent years but they can be highly effective in selected patients.
If topical treatment is insufcient, then UVB phototherapy or PUVA 
should usually be the next step. If the patient continues to have active 
disease or early recurrence, then the addition of systemic retinoid such 
as acitretin to UVB or PUVA can be effective. Alternatively, immunosup-
pressants, such as methotrexate or ciclosporin, may be required. For 
difcult treatment-resistant disease, fumaric acid esters, apremilast and 
biologics should be considered and biologic therapies are now widely 
used in routine dermatology practice and have had a major impact on 
the management of patients with severe or poorly responsive psoriasis 
(see Fig. 27.11 and Box 27.14).
The active component of fumaric acid ester therapy is dimethyl fuma-
rate and efcacy in psoriasis is established. Common adverse effects are 
ushing and diarrhoea. Lymphopenia is also expected at effective doses. 
Apremilast (a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor) is indicated for moderate to 
severe psoriasis resistant to standard measures (such as light-based ther-
apies, methotrexate or ciclosporin). Of the biologic agents, the anti-TNF-α
agents (adalimumab, etanercept, iniximab, certolizumab), ustekinumab 
(an inhibitor of IL-12 and IL-23), guselkumab (IL-23 inhibitor) and secuki-
numab, brodalumab, ixekizumab or bimekizumab (IL-17 inhibitors) may all 
offer high levels of efcacy.
Irrespective of the treatment chosen, individualised management 
is essential. For example, a patient with localised plaque psoriasis on 
elbows, knees and sacrum should respond to topical treatment only, 
whereas someone with guttate psoriasis is likely to need phototherapy 
as a rst-line approach because of difculties in topical drug application 
in extensive disease. A patient with extensive chronic plaque psoriasis 
and signicant arthropathy would be better suited to a systemic drug, 
such as methotrexate, than phototherapy, which would be unlikely to 
improve joint symptoms. Thus, whilst a stepwise general approach to 
management (see Fig. 27.37) may offer guidance, the correct choice for 
any given patient must be determined on an individual basis.
Pityriasis rosea
This is an acute, self-limiting exanthem that particularly affects young 
adults and occurs worldwide, with a slight female predominance. It usu-
ally presents in spring and summer, although no infective agent has been 
identied and its aetiology is unknown. It is characterised by the appear-
ance of a ‘herald patch’, an oval lesion (1–2 cm) with a pinkish (salm-
on-coloured) centre, a darker periphery and a characteristic collarette of 
scale. It is followed 1–2 weeks later by a widespread papulosquamous 
eruption, which is typically arranged in a symmetrical ‘r tree’ pattern on 
the trunk. Individual lesions also have a collarette of scale. An inverse 
variant with exural involvement can occur. Mucosal involvement is rare. 
There is a small risk of recurrence. Symptomatic relief can be achieved 
with emollients and mild topical glucocorticoids. Post-inammatory 
hyperpigmentation can supervene, particularly in darker skin types.
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica
This is rare but typically presents within the rst three decades of life. 
The aetiology is unclear but the condition is part of a spectrum and 
remits spontaneously. The more acute variety (pityriasis lichenoides 
et varioliformis acuta, PLEVA) presents as crops of papules that rap-
idly evolve with central necrosis, each attack lasting up to 3 months. 
The more chronic variety presents as a persistent, widespread, scaly 
Consider
Anti-IL-17
Brodalumab
Ixekizumab
Secukinumab
Initial steps
Accurate diagnosis
Establishing severity and impact
Removal or treatment of triggers 
Identification of comorbidities
(especially in severe disease)
Education, support,
psychological input
General treatment approach
Emollients, topical vitamin D
analogues, tars, dithranol, retinoids 
± Topical glucocorticoids
at  flexural sites
Next steps
Narrow-band UVB (or excimer laser,
if available, for localised disease),
PUVA
Inpatient admission
If feasible, for intensive
inpatient care 
± Phototherapy/PUVA
± Systemic treatment
Systemic agents
 Methotrexate,
ciclosporin,
acitretin (can add to
phototherapy or PUVA)
May consider
Fumaric acid esters/apremilast
For resistant disease
Biologics 
Anti-TNFα
Adalimumab
Certolizumab
Etanercept
Infliximab
Anti-IL-12/23
Ustekinumab
Anti-IL-23
Guselkumab
Fig. 27.37 General management approaches: psoriasis. (IL = interleukin; PUVA = 
psoralen–ultraviolet A; TNF-α = tumour necrosis factor alpha; UVB = ultraviolet B)

[[p1163]]
Urticaria    1103
27
eruption. Characteristically, lesions are brown papules with a mica-like 
scale (‘cornake’). The condition uctuates but can persist for months 
or years. Emollients, topical glucocorticoids and long-term oral erythro-
mycin can occasionally be helpful. UVB phototherapy or PUVA is usually 
effective, although recurrences are high.
Drug eruptions
It is essential to consider a drug cause in anyone presenting with an 
erythematous maculopapular or papulosquamous eruption, and a care-
ful drug history is critical. Exfoliation (‘peeling’) and post-inammatory 
hyper- or, less commonly, hypopigmentation can occur.
Other causes
Secondary syphilis, pityriasis versicolor and tinea corporis fungal infection 
can all cause an erythematous papulosquamous rash and must be consid-
ered in the differential diagnosis of erythematous papulosquamous rashes.
Lichenoid eruptions
Lichen planus
Lichen planus occurs worldwide. It typically presents as a pruritic rash; 
the mucosae, hair and nails may also be involved.
Pathogenesis
The disease probably has an autoimmune basis since there is an asso-
ciation with inammatory bowel disease, primary biliary cholangitis, auto-
immune hepatitis, hepatitis B and C, alopecia areata, myasthenia gravis 
and thymoma. There are also similarities with graft-versus-host disease 
(GVHD). Lichen planus can occasionally occur in families and possible HLA 
associations have been reported but there is no clear inheritance pattern. 
On skin biopsy, characteristic histological changes include hyperkeratosis, 
basal cell degeneration and a heavy, band-like T-lymphocyte inltrate in 
the papillary dermis, with afnity for the epidermis (epidermotropism). The 
dermo-epidermal junction has a ‘sawtooth’ appearance.
Clinical features
Lichen planus occurs in both sexes and at any age, although usually 
between 30 and 60 years. It generally presents on the distal limbs, most 
commonly on the exural aspects of the wrists and forearms (Fig. 27.38), 
and on the lower back. It is intensely itchy and lesions are violaceous, 
shiny, at-topped, polygonal papules, with a characteristic ne lacy, white 
network on the surface (Wickham’s striae). New lesions may appear at 
sites of skin trauma (Köbner phenomenon) and the rash may become 
generalised. Individual lesions may last for many months and can become 
hypertrophic and modied by scratching, particularly on the lower legs. 
The eruption usually remits over months but can become chronic, particu-
larly with hypertrophic disease. Post-inammatory pigmentary change is 
common, particularly in darker skin types. Mucous membrane involvement 
occurs in 30%–70% of patients, usually as a network of white, lacy striae 
on the buccal mucosae and tongue. These oral changes are often asymp-
tomatic and should be sought on examination. Genital and other mucosal 
surfaces can also be affected. Nail involvement occurs in about 10% and 
can range from longitudinal ridging to a destructive nail dystrophy, scarring 
(pterygium) and nail loss. Scalp involvement usually presents as an inam-
matory scarring alopecia, often with tufting of residual hairs. The classical 
presentation of lichen planus is unmistakable, but less common atypical 
variants, which include annular, atrophic, actinic, linear, bullous, follicular, 
pigmented and ulcerative types, can be a diagnostic challenge.
Investigations
A skin biopsy should be performed if there is diagnostic doubt. A care-
ful drug history must be taken, as, although the classical presentation of 
lichen planus is usually ‘idiopathic’, the main differential is a drug-induced 
lichenoid reaction (see below). Other differential diagnoses include psoria-
sis, pityriasis rosea, pityriasis lichenoides chronica and secondary syphilis. 
Screening for underlying disease, such as hepatitis, must be considered.
Management
The condition is usually self-limiting, although rarely it may persist for 
years, particularly oral lichen planus. Treatment is symptomatic and 
potent local glucocorticoids (topical, with occlusion or by injection for 
hypertrophic disease, or as oral rinse for oral involvement) may help the 
intense itch; short courses of systemic glucocorticoids are sometimes 
required for extensive disease. UVB, PUVA or UVA1 can be benecial 
and, for recalcitrant disease, retinoids or immunosuppressants, such as 
ciclosporin or methotrexate, may be needed. A low but signicant risk of 
malignant transformation exists with persistent oral and genital disease, 
so active treatment, surveillance and smoking cessation are important.
Drug-induced lichenoid eruptions
Drug-induced lichenoid reactions that are clinically and histologically dif-
cult to distinguish from idiopathic lichen planus are important to identify. 
The likely culprits are gold, quinine, proton pump inhibitors, sulphona-
mides, penicillamine, antimalarials, antituberculous drugs, thiazide diu-
retics, β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, NSAIDs, sulphonylureas, lithium and dyes in 
colour developers (see Box 27.36).
Graft-versus-host disease
In the acute stage of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), there is a distinc-
tive dermatitis associated with hepatitis. After about 3 months, chronic 
GVHD can present with a lichenoid eruption on the palms, soles, face and 
upper trunk. Progressive sclerodermatous skin thickening, associated with 
pigmentary changes, may lead to contractures and limited mobility.
Urticaria
Urticaria (‘hives’) is caused by localised dermal oedema secondary to a 
temporary increase in capillary permeability. If oedema involves subcuta-
neous or submucosal layers, the term angioedema is used.
Clinical features
Acute urticaria may be associated with angioedema of the lips, face, 
tongue, throat and, rarely, wheezing, abdominal pain, headaches and even 
anaphylaxis. Urticaria present for less than 6 weeks is considered to be 
acute, and chronic if it continues for more than 6 weeks. Individual weals 
(denition: evanescent discrete areas of dermal oedema, often centrally 
white due to masking of local blood supply by uid; weals can be papules, 
macules, patches and plaques – Fig. 27.39) last for less than 24 hours; if 
Fig. 27.38 Lichen planus. Violaceous papules on the exural aspect of the 
forearm, arising at a site of minor linear trauma (Köbner phenomenon).

[[p1164]]
1104    DERMATOLOGY
27.25  Causes of urticaria
Acute and chronic urticaria
 Autoimmune: due to antibodies that cross-link the IgE receptor on mast cells
 Allergens in foods and inhalants
 Contact allergens: latex, animal saliva
 Drugs: see Box 27.36
 Physical stimuli: heat, cold, pressure, sun, sweat, water
 Infections: intestinal parasites, hepatitis
 Others: SLE, pregnancy, thyroid disease
 Idiopathic: chronic spontaneous urticaria and angioedema
Urticarial vasculitis
 Hepatitis B, SLE, idiopathic
(IgE = immunoglobulin E; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus)
Histamine
Inflammatory mediators
 
 prostaglandins
 
 leukotrienes
 
 chemotactic cytokines
  for eosinophils and
  neutrophils
Heparin
5-hydroxytryptamine
Proteases
Aspirin
NSAIDs
Morphine
Codeine
Benzoic acid
Mast cell
Granules
High-affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI)
Antigen
Autoantibody to FcεRI and IgE
Increased
capillary
permeability
Key
IgE
4
3
2
1
Omalizumab (inhibits binding of IgE to high-affinity IgE receptor)
Fig. 27.40 Pathogenesis of urticaria. Mast cell degranulation occurs in a variety of ways. (1) Type I hypersensitivity causes degranulation. (2) Spontaneous mast cell 
degranulation in chronic urticaria. (3) Chemical mast cell degranulation. (4) Autoimmunity, with IgE antibodies directed against IgE receptors or IgE itself. Histamine and the 
leukotrienes are especially relevant mediators in urticaria. Heparin release is probably not a major factor in urticaria but plays a role in the osteoporosis that can occur in 
systemic mastocytosis. (IgE = immunoglobulin E; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs)
in challenge testing, such as eliciting dermographism or pressure testing. 
Enquiry about family history and medication, particularly ACE inhibitors, is 
important in angioedema. Examination may be unremarkable or weals may 
be evident (see Fig. 27.39). The skin should be stroked rmly with an orange 
stick in order to ascertain whether dermographism is present or not.
Mast cell degranulation and release of histamine and other vasoactive 
mediators is the basis of urticaria (Fig. 27.40). Chronic spontaneous urti-
caria (previously called ‘chronic idiopathic’ or ‘chronic ordinary’ urticaria) 
is the most common chronic urticaria and has an autoimmune patho-
genesis in some cases.
Investigations
Investigations should be guided by the history and possible causes, but 
are often negative, particularly in acute urticaria. Some or all of the fol-
lowing may be appropriate:
 Full blood count: eosinophilia in parasitic infection or drug cause.
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or plasma viscosity: elevated in 
vasculitis.
 Urea and electrolytes, thyroid and liver function tests, iron studies: 
may reveal an underlying systemic disorder.
 Total IgE and specic IgE to possible allergens: shellsh, peanut, 
house-dust mite. Particularly relevant if there is angioedema.
 Autoantibodies, particularly antinuclear factor: positive in systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and often positive in urticarial vasculitis. 
Other autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and auto-
immune hepatitis or thyroid disease, may be associated.
 Complement C3 and C4 levels: if these are low due to complement 
consumption, C1 esterase inhibitor activity should be measured.
 Infection screen: hepatitis screen and HIV may be indicated.
 Skin biopsy: if urticarial vasculitis is suspected.
 Challenge tests: to conrm physical urticarias, such as dermogra-
phism, pressure, heat, cold.
Management
Removal or treatment of any trigger is essential, although this may not 
be identied in the majority of cases. Urticaria may be precipitated by 
aspirin, NSAIDs, codeine and opioids, and it is advisable to suggest 
alternatives such as paracetamol. In chronic urticaria, non-sedating 
Fig. 27.39 Urticaria. Erythema, reecting dilated dermal vessels, and oedema 
(with upper dermal oedema obscuring the erythema centrally) are evident. Note the 
absence of epidermal changes.
they persist, urticarial vasculitis needs to be considered. Clarication of the 
duration of urticaria can be achieved by drawing around the weal and re-
assessing 24 hours later. History-taking should probe for possible causes, 
including medications (Box 27.25). Physical triggers can also be assessed 

[[p1165]]
Bullous diseases    1105
27
antihistamines, such as fexofenadine, loratadine or cetirizine, are usu-
ally benecial. If there is lack of response after 2 weeks, an alterna-
tive non-sedating antihistamine should be used and an H2-blocker, 
such as cimetidine or ranitidine, can be added. Mast cell stabilisers or 
leukotriene receptor antagonists, such as montelukast, can be used 
for more recalcitrant disease. For chronic urticaria, narrowband UVB 
phototherapy is valuable and has proven efcacy. Systemic glucocor-
ticoids are widely prescribed for urticaria but are not indicated in the 
majority of cases. If systemic glucocorticoids are used, efcacy may 
be seen only at relatively high doses and they are appropriate only for 
occasional short courses in the acute setting, usually in association 
with angioedema. Patients with a history of life-threatening anaphy-
laxis, as in peanut or wasp sting allergy, should carry a self-admin-
istered adrenaline (epinephrine) injection kit. The management of 
anaphylaxis is discussed in Chapter 9 and the management of hered-
itary angioedema is discussed in Chapter 4. The anti-IgE monoclonal 
antibody omalizumab may be effective in patients with severe recalci-
trant urticaria (Fig. 27.40).
Bullous diseases
Blistering can occur at any level in the skin and there are a variety of 
different presentations, depending on the underlying defect and level of 
involvement. Knowledge of the molecular basis of many blistering disor-
ders has advanced considerably through understanding of the basic pro-
cesses of cell adhesion and studies of rare genetic blistering disorders, 
particularly epidermolysis bullosa (Box 27.26). This section concentrates 
on primary blistering skin diseases.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a medical emergency, as the exten-
sive mucocutaneous blistering is associated with a high mortality rate. It 
is usually drug-induced (see Box 27.36), with anticonvulsants, sulphona-
mides, sulphonylureas, NSAIDs, allopurinol and antiretroviral therapy often 
implicated. Usually 1–4 weeks after drug commencement, the patient 
becomes systemically unwell and often pyrexial. Erythema and blistering 
develop, initially on the trunk but rapidly involving all skin; an early warning 
sign is cutaneous pain. Sheets of blisters coalesce and denude, and the 
underlying skin is painful and erythematous (Fig. 27.41). Gentle lateral pres-
sure on stroking the skin results in epidermal detachment (Nikolsky sign), 
demonstrating the severity of skin fragility. Mucous membrane involvement 
and blistering are usual. Blistering of skin and mucosae may be haemor-
rhagic. A disease severity score (Box 27.27) is used to predict outcome. 
The main differential diagnosis is staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, 
although the diagnosis is usually obvious in an adult patient with a culprit 
drug. There is often overlap with Stevens–Johnson syndrome and target-
oid lesions, especially on palms and soles, may be evident. Skin snip may 
allow early diagnosis. If there is diagnostic doubt, then full-thickness skin 
biopsy should be undertaken for histology and direct immunouorescence 
in order to exclude immunobullous or other diagnoses.
27.26  Classication of epidermolysis bullosa
Type
Mode of inheritance
Level of blister*
Abnormality
Simple
Autosomal dominant
Epidermal basal 
cell
Keratins 5 and 
14
Junctional
Autosomal recessive
Lamina lucida
Laminin-5 and 
α6β4 integrin
Dystrophic
Autosomal dominant 
and recessive
Dermis below 
lamina densa
Collagen VII
*See Figure 27.1
B
A
Fig. 27.41 Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
erythema, oedema and epidermal loss secondary to carbamazepine. (A) From  
Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Jorizzo J. Dermatology, 3rd edn. Elsevier; 2012.
27.27 The SCORTEN disease severity score for toxic epidermal 
necrolysis
Factor
 Age >40 years
 Heart rate >120 beats/min
 Cancer or haematological malignancy
 Involved body surface area >10%
 Blood urea >10 mmol/L (28 mg/dL)
 Serum bicarbonate <20 mmol/L
 Blood glucose ≥14 mmol/L (252 mg/dL)
Mortality rates
 0–1 factor present = 3%
 2 factors = 12%
 3 factors = 35%
 4 factors = 58%
 ≥5 factors = 90%
From Bastuji-Garin S, Fouchard N, Bertocchi M, et al. SCORTEN: a severity-of-illness score for 
toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:149–153.
Identication and discontinuation of the causative drug are essential. 
Sepsis and multi-organ failure are major risks. Intensive care in a dedicated 
dermatology ward or intensive care or burns unit is of paramount impor-
tance. Treatment is supportive, with regular sterile dressings and emollients, 
careful attention to uid balance and treatment of infection if it develops. 
Urethral and ocular involvement is common and must be looked for and 
treated symptomatically. Chronic sequelae, including ocular and urethral 
scarring and adverse psychological impact can be problematic in survivors. 
There is no conclusive evidence that intravenous immunoglobulins, sys-
temic glucocorticoids or ciclosporin improve outcomes and survival.

[[p1166]]
1106    DERMATOLOGY
27.29  Clinical and investigation ndings in the immunobullous disorders
Disease
Site of blisters
Nature of blisters
Mucous membrane 
involvement
Antigen
Circulating antibody 
(indirect IF)
Fixed antibody 
(direct IF)
Pemphigus 
vulgaris
Trunk, head
Flaccid, fragile, many 
erosions
100%
Desmoglein-1 and 
3 (120 kD)
IgG
IgG, C3 intercellular 
(epidermal)
Pemphigus 
foliaceus
Trunk
Often not present, 
multiple erosions, may 
mimic dermatitis
No
Desmoglein-1
IgG
IgG, C3 intercellular 
(epidermal)
Bullous 
pemphigoid
Trunk, exures 
and limbs
Tense, milia as blisters 
resolve
Occasional
BP-230 and 180
IgG (70%)
IgG, C3 at BMZ
Dermatitis 
herpetiformis
Elbows, lower 
back, buttocks
Excoriated and often 
not present
No
Unknown
Anti-endomysial 
and tissue 
transglutaminase
Granular IgA in 
papillary dermis
Linear IgA disease
Widespread
Tense, often annular 
conguration, ‘string of 
beads’
Frequent
Unknown
50% have low titres of 
circulating antibody
Linear IgA at BMZ
Pemphigoid 
gestationis
Periumbilical and 
limbs
Tense, milia as blisters 
resolve
Rare
Collagen XVII 
(part of hemi-
desmosome, 
BP-180)
Circulating antibodies 
to BP-180 (type 
XVII collagen) (and 
BP-230)
C3 at BMZ
Epidermolysis 
bullosa acquisita
Widespread
Tense, scarring, milia
Common (50%)
Type VII collagen
IgG (anti-type VII 
collagen)
IgG at BMZ
Bullous lupus 
erythematosus
Widespread
Tense
Rare
Type VII collagen
Anti-type VII collagen
IgG, IgA, IgM at 
BMZ
(BMZ = basement membrane zone; IF = immunouorescence; Ig = immunoglobulin)
Immunobullous diseases
There are various subtypes of immunobullous disease that affect patients 
of different ages and have clinical characteristics (Box 27.28). The key 
investigation is an elliptical biopsy taken from the edge of a recent blister 
(Box 27.29). The sample is halved: one half is put in formalin for subse-
quent histology, while the other is sent fresh for direct immunouores-
cence. Serum should also be sent for indirect immunouorescence in 
suspected immunobullous disease.
Bullous pemphigoid
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the most common immunobullous disease 
and occurs worldwide. It is a disease of older people, with an average 
age of onset of 65 years; males and females are equally affected.
Pathogenesis
The disease is caused by autoantibodies (BP-230 and BP-180) directed 
against the hemi-desmosomal BP antigens BPAg-1 (intracellular) and 
27.28  Age of onset in immunobullous skin disorders
Disease
Age
Pemphigus vulgaris
40–60 years
Pemphigus foliaceus
Any age (endemic form in parts of Brazil 
and South Africa, from adolescence on)
Bullous pemphigoid
Sixties and over
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Young, associated with coeliac disease
Linear IgA disease
Any age
Pemphigoid gestationis
Pregnant females
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Any age
Bullous lupus erythematosus
Young females of African ancestry
BPAg-2 (transmembranous type XVII collagen), respectively. Antibody–
antigen binding initiates complement activation and inammation, with 
hemi-desmosomal damage and subepidermal blistering.
Clinical features
There is often a lengthy prodrome of an itchy, urticated, erythematous 
rash prior to the development of tense bullae (Fig. 27.42A). Milia (deni-
tion: small epidermal keratin cysts) may develop due to basement mem-
brane disruption. Mucosal involvement is uncommon.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be made by skin biopsy, which shows subepidermal 
blistering with an eosinophil-rich inammatory inltrate. Direct immuno-
uorescence demonstrates the presence of IgG and C3 at the base-
ment membrane (Fig. 27.42B). Indirect immunouorescence may show 
positive titres of circulating anti-epidermal antibodies. Distinction from 
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita requires immunouorescence studies 
using the patient’s serum on salt-split skin. In BP, the immunoreactants 
localise to the epidermal side (hemi-desmosome) of split skin, whereas in 
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita they localise to the base of the split (type 
VII collagen/anchoring brils).
Management
Very potent topical glucocorticoids are effective and may be sufcient 
in frail older patients; they need to be applied to all sites, however, and 
not just lesional skin. Tetracyclines, such as doxycycline, have important 
anti-inammatory effects and may limit the use of systemic glucocorticoids. 
Doxycycline has been shown to be non-inferior to prednisolone for initial 
control of bullous pemphigoid and to have fewer long-term adverse effects, 
although most patients with extensive disease will go on to require systemic 
glucocorticoids (0.75 mg/kg/day or less), often combined with immunosup-
pressants as glucocorticoid-sparing agents. In severe refractory disease, 
other therapies, such as intravenous immunoglobulin or rituximab, are 
sometimes used but are of unproven efcacy. The condition does, however, 
often burn out spontaneously over a few years.

[[p1167]]
Bullous diseases    1107
27
B
Epidermis
Split
Dermis
A
Fig. 27.42 Bullous pemphigoid.
deposition at the basement membrane zone. (A) From James W, Elston D, Treat J, Rosenbach M, Micheletti R. Andrews’ Diseases of the skin, 13th edn. Elsevier: 2020
Pemphigus
Pemphigus is less common than BP and patients tend to be younger.
Pathogenesis
The cause is IgG1 and IgG4 autoantibodies, directed against desmogleins-1 
and 3, resulting in intra-epidermal blistering. The syndrome may occur 
spontaneously or be secondary to drugs such as penicillamine or captopril 
and underlying malignancy (paraneoplastic pemphigus). Pemphigus folia-
ceus is a very supercial form, in which antibodies are directed against des-
moglein-1 only and affect just the most supercial epidermis.
Clinical features
Skin and mucosae are usually involved, although disease may be 
restricted to mucosae only, which may be severely affected. Due to the 
higher level of split within the epidermis, the blisters are accid, eas-
ily ruptured and often not seen intact. Erosions are common and the 
Nikolsky sign is positive. The trunk is usually affected. The condition is 
associated with signicant morbidity and mortality.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be made by skin biopsy, which shows intra-epider-
mal blistering and acantholysis, with positive direct immunouorescence 
for IgG (usually IgG1 or IgG4) and C3 at the periphery of keratinocytes, 
giving a ‘chicken wire’ appearance within the epidermis. The titres of 
circulating epidermal autoantibodies can also be used to monitor disease 
activity. Investigations should screen for associated autoimmune disease 
or malignancy if paraneoplastic pemphigus is suspected.
Management
Pemphigus is more difcult to treat than BP and high-dose systemic 
glucocorticoids such as prednisolone (0.5–1.0 mg/kg/day) are usually 
required. Azathioprine and cyclophosphamide are most often used as 
glucocorticoid-sparing agents but a range of other immunosuppressants 
may be considered for severe recalcitrant disease, including methotrex-
ate, ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, intravenous immunoglobulins, 
plasma exchange, extracorporeal photopheresis and rituximab. Often, 
long-term treatment is required to prevent relapse.
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an autoimmune blistering disorder that 
is strongly associated with coeliac disease (CD). While fewer than 10% 
of individuals with CD develop DH, almost all patients with DH have evi-
dence of partial villous atrophy on intestinal biopsy, even if they have no 
gastrointestinal symptoms. It is unclear why some CD patients develop 
DH and others do not. Although DH is a bullous disease, intact vesicles 
and blisters are seldom seen, as the condition is so pruritic that excor-
iations on extensor surfaces of arms, knees, buttocks, shoulders and 
scalp may be the only signs.
The diagnosis can be made by skin biopsy, which shows subepidermal 
vesiculation in the dermal papillae and a neutrophil- and eosinophil-rich 
inltrate. Direct immunouorescence shows granular IgA in the papillary 
dermis. Anti-endomysial antibodies and tissue transglutaminase should be 
assessed and jejunal biopsy undertaken if indicated. The condition usually 
responds to a gluten-free diet but, if not, dapsone can also be used.
Linear IgA disease
This occurs in children (chronic bullous disease of childhood) and adults, 
and is usually self-limiting, although it can be active for a few years. 
Drugs, notably vancomycin, can be a secondary cause. Blisters can 
arise on erythematous, urticated or otherwise normal-looking skin and 
often form an annular conguration at the edge of the lesion: ‘clusters of 
jewels’ (herpetiform) and ‘string of beads’ (annular/polycyclic). Mucosal 
involvement is common and ophthalmology input important, as corneal 
scarring is a risk with longstanding disease. Linear IgA is seen at the 
basement membrane on direct immunouorescence and localises to 
either roof or oor of salt-split skin. Dapsone, sulfapyridine, prednisolone, 
colchicine or intravenous immunoglobulin may be effective.
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
This chronic blistering disease affects skin and mucosae, and scarring, 
hair loss and nail dystrophy may be problematic. Blisters often follow 
trauma and milia develop. It can be very difcult to distinguish from other 
immunobullous diseases, such as bullous pemphigoid. It is caused by 
an IgG antibody to type VII collagen, which provokes subepidermal blis-
tering and a mixed inammatory inltrate, although the latter may not 
be prominent. Direct immunouorescence on perilesional skin shows 
IgG and C3 at the dermo-epidermal junction and pattern analysis may 
be helpful in distinction from bullous pemphigoid. Indirect immunouo-
rescence microscopy on salt-split normal human skin typically shows 
IgG and IgA in the oor of the articially induced blister, whereas in BP 
antibody localisation would be to the roof of the blister. Epidermolysis 
bullosa acquisita is very difcult to treat, as it often does not respond 
well to immunosuppressants. Mainstays of treatment include systemic 
glucocorticoids in combination with dapsone or colchicine. Other immu-
nosuppressive approaches may be required and include ciclosporin, 
azathioprine, immunoglobulins, plasmapheresis and rituximab. The con-
dition may be associated with inammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid 
arthritis, multiple myeloma and lymphoma, and thus associated comor-
bidities should be sought.

[[p1168]]
1108    DERMATOLOGY
Porphyria cutanea tarda and pseudoporphyria
These conditions may also cause blistering (see Boxes 27.9 and 27.35). 
Porphyria is discussed in more detail in Chapter 19
Pigmentation disorders
Decreased pigmentation
Disorders causing hypopigmentation and/or depigmentation include:
 vitiligo
 albinism
 pityriasis alba: depigmented areas on the face, particularly in children, 
with or without scale and usually considered to be eczematous
 pityriasis versicolor: hypopigmentation or, less commonly, hyperpig-
mentation can occur
 idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis: multiple small areas of depigmen-
tation arising in chronically sun-exposed skin
 rarely, phenylketonuria and hypopituitarism.
Vitiligo
Vitiligo is an acquired condition affecting 1% of the population world-
wide. Focal loss of melanocytes results in the development of patches 
of hypopigmentation. A positive family history of vitiligo is relatively com-
mon in those with extensive disease, and this type is also associated 
with other autoimmune diseases. Trauma and sunburn may (through the 
Köbner phenomenon) precipitate the appearance of vitiligo. It is thought 
to be the result of cell-mediated autoimmune destruction of melanocytes 
but why some areas are targeted and others are spared is unclear.
Clinical features
Generalised vitiligo is often symmetrical and involves hands, wrists, feet, 
knees and neck, as well as areas around body orices (Fig. 27.43). The 
hair of the scalp, beard, eyebrows and lashes may also depigment. 
Segmental vitiligo is restricted to one part of the body but not necessarily 
a dermatome. The patches of depigmentation are sharply dened, and 
in light-skinned individuals may be surrounded by hyperpigmentation. 
Spotty perifollicular pigment may be seen within the depigmentation and 
is often the rst sign of repigmentation. There is no history or evidence 
of inammation within the patches, which may be helpful in distinguish-
ing vitiligo from post-inammatory hypopigmentation. Sensation in the 
depigmented patches is normal, unlike tuberculoid leprosy. Wood’s 
light examination enhances the contrast between pigmented and non-
pigmented skin. The course is unpredictable; most patches remain static 
or enlarge but a few undergo re-pigmentation spontaneously.
Management
Protecting the patches from excessive sun exposure with clothing or 
sunscreen may be helpful to avoid sunburn. Camouage cosmetics 
may be benecial, particularly in those with dark skin. In fair skin, pho-
toprotection and cosmetic cover may be all that is required. Very potent 
or potent topical glucocorticoids have limited efcacy with respect to 
repigmentation. Topical pimecrolimus or tacrolimus may also have a 
role as a glucocorticoid-sparing agent. Phototherapy with narrowband 
UVB or PUVA can also be used. Narrowband UVB is the most effective 
repigmentary treatment available for generalised vitiligo, but even very 
prolonged courses often do not produce a satisfactory outcome. The 
absence of leucotrichia (white hairs in the area of vitiligo) and the pres-
ence of a trichrome pattern (three colours – normal skin colour, hypo-
pigmentation and depigmentation) are good prognostic features. Vitiligo 
on the face, trunk and proximal limbs is more likely to respond than that 
on hands and feet. Exceptionally, depigmentation of normal non-lesional 
skin or a surgical approach with autologous melanocyte transfer, using 
a range of techniques including split-skin grafts and blister roof grafts, is 
sometimes used on dermabraded recipient skin in specic severe cases.
The impact of vitiligo differs markedly between populations. In South 
Asia the effects are more readily discernible than in light-skinned individuals 
in northern Europe. Depigmentation is also seen in leprosy, which means 
that individuals with vitiligo are often stigmatised. The emotional impact of 
vitiligo may be immense; psychological support is essential and is impor-
tant in conveying realistic expectations of possible treatment approaches.
Oculocutaneous albinism
Albinism results from a range of genetic abnormalities that lead to 
reduced melanin biosynthesis in the skin and eyes; the number of mel-
anocytes is normal (in contrast to vitiligo). Albinism is usually inherited 
as an autosomal recessive trait and there are several different types and 
presentations.
Type 1 albinism is due to a defect in the tyrosinase gene, whose prod-
uct is rate-limiting in the production of melanin. Affected individuals have 
an almost complete absence of pigment in the skin and hair at birth, with 
consequent pale skin and white hair, and failure of melanin production in 
the iris and retina. Patients have photophobia, poor vision not correctable 
with refraction, rotatory nystagmus, and an alternating strabismus associ-
ated with abnormalities in the decussation of nerve bres in the optic tract.
A second form of albinism is due to a defect in the P gene, which encodes 
an ion channel protein in the melanosome. Patients may have gross reduc-
tion of melanin in the skin and in the eyes, but may be more mildly affected 
than type 1 albinos. Establishing the subtype of albinism requires genetic 
analysis, as there is considerable phenotypic heterogeneity.
Oculocutaneous albinos are at grossly increased risk of sunburn and 
skin cancer. In equatorial regions, many die from squamous cell carcinoma 
or, more rarely, melanoma in early adult life. Interestingly, they may develop 
pigmented melanocytic naevi and freckles in response to sun exposure.
Management
Strict photoprotection, with sun avoidance (including occupational expo-
sure), clothing, hats and sunscreens, is important. Early diagnosis and 
treatment of skin tumours is essential.
Fig. 27.43 Vitiligo. Symmetrical depigmentation of the knees and lower extremities. 
The dorsal aspect of the feet and hands are particularly hard to repigment. From 
Mancini AJ, Paller AS. Hurwitz clinical pediatric dermatology, 5th edn. Elsevier; 2016.

[[p1169]]
Hair disorders    1109
27
27.30  Drug-induced pigmentation
Drug
Appearance
Amiodarone
Photo-exposed sites, slate-grey
Arsenic
Diffuse bronze pigmentation
Raindrop depigmentation
Bleomycin
Usually exural, brown
Busulfan
Diffuse brown
Chloroquine
Photo-exposed sites, blue-grey
Clofazimine
Red
Mepacrine
Yellow
Minocycline
Temples, shins, gingiva, sclera, scar sites, slate-grey
Phenothiazines
Photo-exposed sites, slate-grey
Psoralens
Photo-exposed sites, brown
Increased pigmentation
 Diffuse hyperpigmentation: most commonly due to hypermel-
anosis but other pigments may be deposited in the skin, such 
as orange discoloration with carotenaemia and bronze with 
haemochromatosis.
 Endocrine pigmentation: may occur in several conditions. Melasma 
(chloasma) describes discrete patches of facial pigmentation that 
occur in pregnancy and in some women taking oral contracep-
tives. The mechanism for this localised increased hormonal sen-
sitivity is unknown. Diffuse pigmentation, sometimes worse in the 
skin creases and mucosae, may be a feature of Addison’s disease, 
Cushing’s syndrome, Nelson syndrome and chronic renal failure 
due to increased levels of pituitary melanotrophic peptides, includ-
ing adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
 Photo-exposed site hyperpigmentation: occurs in some of the 
porphyrias but can also be drug-induced with amiodarone and 
chlorpromazine.
 Drug-induced pigmentation (Box 27.30): may be diffuse or localised. 
It is not always due to hypermelanosis but sometimes is caused by 
deposition of the drug or a metabolite.
 Focal hypermelanosis: seen in lesions such as freckles and lenti-
gines, characterised by focal areas of increased pigmentation.
Establishing the cause is important. Photoprotection may minimise the 
risk of increasing pigmentation. Topical hydroquinone preparations can 
be used for skin lightening in some types of hyperpigmentation, although 
caution is required, particularly in darker skin types.
Hair disorders
These can be subdivided into disorders that cause loss of hair (alopecia) 
or excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis and hirsutism).
Alopecia
Alopecia is characterised by loss of hair. It can be further subdivided into 
localised and diffuse, and into scarring and non-scarring subtypes (Box 
27.31).
Pathogenesis
Alopecia can be observed in association with inammatory disorders that 
cause scarring (lichen planus, discoid lupus) and others that do not cause 
scarring (tinea capitis, psoriasis, seborrhoeic eczema). These conditions 
are discussed elsewhere. Alopecia areata has an autoimmune basis and 
there is a strong genetic component, with a family history in approximately 
20% of cases. In addition to atopy, it is associated with other autoimmune 
diseases, particularly thyroid disease, and with Down syndrome. The 
cause of androgenetic alopecia is unclear but likely to be multifactorial, 
with genetic, hormonal and end-organ receptor sensitivity to the factors 
implicated. Developments in therapeutic approaches, such as JAK inhibi-
tion, will continue to provide evidence to inform our understanding of the 
pathogenesis of alopecia areata and the pathways involved.
Clinical features
Alopecia areata
This usually presents with well-dened, localised, non-inammatory, 
non-scarring patches of alopecia, usually on the scalp (Fig. 27.44). 
Pathognomonic ‘exclamation mark’ hairs are seen (broken hairs, taper-
ing towards the scalp) during active hair loss. A diffuse pattern can 
uncommonly occur on the scalp. Eyebrows, eyelashes, beard and body 
hair can be affected. Alopecia totalis describes complete loss of scalp 
hair, and alopecia universalis is complete loss of all hair. Nail pitting may 
occur. Spontaneous regrowth is usual for small patches of alopecia but 
the prognosis is less good for larger patches, more extensive involve-
ment, early onset and an association with atopy.
Androgenetic alopecia
Male-pattern baldness is physiological in men over 20 years old, although 
it can also occur in adolescent. It is also found in women, particularly 
after the menopause. Characteristically, this involves bitemporal reces-
sion initially and subsequent involvement of the crown (‘male pattern’), 
although it is often diffuse in women.
Investigations
Important investigations include full blood count, renal and liver function 
tests, iron studies, thyroid function, autoantibody screen and syphilis serol-
ogy, as several systemic diseases, particularly iron deciency and hypo-
thyroidism, can cause diffuse non-scarring alopecia. Hair pull tests may 
help to establish the ratio of anagen to telogen hairs but require expertise 
for interpretation. Scrapings and pluckings should be sent for mycology if 
there is localised inammation. Scalp biopsy and direct immunouores-
cence of scarring alopecia may conrm a diagnosis of lichen planus or 
discoid lupus erythematosus but expert interpretation is needed.
27.31  Classication and causes of alopecia
Localised
Diffuse
Non-scarring
Tinea capitis
Alopecia areata
Androgenetic alopecia
Traumatic (trichotillomania, 
traction, cosmetic)
Syphilis
Androgenetic alopecia
Telogen efuvium
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Diabetes mellitus
HIV disease
Nutritional (especially iron) deciency
Liver disease
Post-partum
Alopecia areata
Syphilis
Drug-induced: chemotherapy, retinoids
Scarring
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Lichen planopilaris
Herpes zoster
Pseudopelade
Tinea capitis/kerion
Morphoea (en coup de sabre)
Idiopathic
Developmental defects
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Radiotherapy
Folliculitis decalvans
Lichen planopilaris

[[p1170]]
1110    DERMATOLOGY
Management
Any underlying condition, such as iron deciency, should be treated and 
may result in clinical improvement. Alopecia can have a major impact on 
quality of life and psychological support is usually required. It is particu-
larly important to establish realistic expectations.
Hair may spontaneously regrow in alopecia areata and it may be appro-
priate to offer no active intervention as, while some treatments may induce 
some hair regrowth, there is no evidence that any treatment fundamentally 
alters the course of the disease. There may be some response to topical 
or intralesional glucocorticoids. PUVA or immunotherapy with diphen-
cyprone may be effective, with evidence of hair regrowth, but there is a 
risk of relapse on discontinuation of treatment. Short courses of systemic 
glucocorticoids are occasionally used in an attempt to limit acutely pro-
gressive extensive alopecia areata but should not be used in the long 
term; the risk of relapse on discontinuation is high. Ongoing trials of JAK 
inhibitors may provide future hope for patients with this difcult disease.
Some males with androgenetic alopecia may be helped by systemic 
nasteride. Topical minoxidil can be used in males and females with 
androgenetic alopecia but, if an effect is obtained, treatment must be 
continued and is expensive. In females, anti-androgen therapy, such as 
cyproterone acetate, can be used. Wigs are often appropriate for exten-
sive alopecia. Scalp surgery and autologous hair transplants are expen-
sive but can be used for androgenetic alopecia.
Hypertrichosis
Hypertrichosis is a generalised or localised increase in hair and may be 
congenital or acquired. It can be primary or secondary: for example, to 
drugs such as ciclosporin, minoxidil or diazoxide, malignancy or eating 
disorders. Laser therapy or eornithine, which inhibits ornithine decar-
boxylase and arrests hair growth while it is being used, may be helpful. 
When the hypertrichosis follows a male pattern, it is called hirsutism.
Hirsutism
Hirsutism is the growth of terminal hair in a male pattern in a female. 
The cause of most cases is unknown and, while it may occur in 
Hyponychium
Nail bed
Nail plate
Matrix
Proximal nail fold
Cuticle
Distal phalanx
Fig. 27.45 The nail plate and bed. Arrows indicate the direction of nail growth.
Fig. 27.46 Dermatomyositis Note the prominent periungual involvement. Erythema, 
dilated and tortuous capillaries in the proximal nail fold, and ragged cuticles are 
features of connective tissue disease.
Fig. 27.44 Alopecia areata. 
hyperandrogenism, Cushing’s syndrome and polycystic ovary syndrome, 
only a small minority of patients have a demonstrable hormonal abnor-
mality. Psychological distress is often signicant and oral contraceptives 
containing an anti-androgen such as cyproterone acetate, laser therapy 
or topical eornithine may be benecial.
Nail disorders
The nails can be affected by both local and systemic disease. The nail 
apparatus consists of the nail matrix and the nail plate, which arises from 
the matrix and lies on the nail bed (Fig. 27.45). The cells of the matrix 
and, to a lesser extent the bed, produce the keratinous plate.
Important information may be obtained from nail-fold examination, 
including dilated capillaries and ragged cuticles in connective tissue dis-
ease (Fig. 27.46) and the boggy inammation of paronychia. The lat-
ter commonly occurs chronically in individuals undertaking wet work, in 
those with diabetes or poor peripheral circulation, and subsequent to 
increased cosmetic nail procedures and vigorous manicuring.
Normal variants
Longitudinal ridging and beading of the nail plate occur with age. White 
transverse patches (striate leuconychia) are often caused by airspaces 
within the plate.
Nail trauma
 Nail biting/picking is a very common habit. Repetitive proximal nail-
fold trauma (often involving the thumb nail) results in transverse ridg-
ing and central furrowing of the nail.

[[p1171]]
Skin disease in general medicine    1111
27
Fig. 27.47 Subungual haematoma.
infective endocarditis, inammatory bowel disease, biliary cirrhosis 
and thyrotoxicosis; rarely, clubbing can be familial or idiopathic.
 Nail discoloration: whitening may occur in hypoalbuminaemia. ‘Half-
and-half’ nails (white proximally and red/brown distally) may be 
found in renal failure. Antimalarials and some other drugs occasion-
ally discolour nails.
Nail involvement in congenital disease
Nails can be affected in congenital diseases, such as pachyonychia con-
genita, a rare, usually autosomal dominant, condition caused by muta-
tions in differentiation-specic keratin genes 6A, 6B, 16 and 17. This 
results in palmoplantar keratoderma and gross nail discoloration and 
thickening, due to subungual hyperkeratosis, from birth.
Skin disease in general medicine
Many skin conditions present to other medical specialties. These are 
listed in Box 27.32 and the most common ones that are not discussed 
elsewhere are detailed below.
Conditions involving cutaneous vasculature
Vasculitis
Vasculitic involvement of the skin usually presents as palpable purpura 
(see Fig. 26.54). The diagnosis is conrmed by skin biopsy, along with 
histology and immunouorescence examination. Vasculitis is discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 26
Pyoderma gangrenosum
The initial lesion of pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is usually a painful, 
tender, inamed nodule or pustule, which breaks down centrally and 
rapidly progresses to an ulcer with an indurated, undermined purplish 
or pustular edge (Fig. 27.49). Lesions may be single or multiple and 
are classied as ulcerative, pustular, bullous or vegetative. PG usually 
occurs in adults and, although it may occur in isolation, is usually asso-
ciated with underlying disease, particularly inammatory bowel disease, 
inammatory arthritis, blood dyscrasias, immunodeciencies and HIV 
infection. Investigation should be made with these associations in mind. 
The diagnosis is largely clinical, as histology is not specic. Analgesia, 
treatment of secondary bacterial infection and supportive dressings are 
important. Systemic treatment with glucocorticoids, dapsone, ciclo-
sporin or other immunosuppressants is often required. Prednisolone and 
ciclosporin have been shown in a randomised controlled trial to be of 
similar efcacy and can thus both be considered in the management of 
pyoderma gangrenosum, allowing individual patient comorbidities and 
risk factors to be taken into account. Tetracyclines may be added for 
their anti-inammatory effects. There are reports of efcacy with TNF-α
(iniximab, adalimumab), IL-12/23 (ustekinumab) and IL-17 (brodalumab 
and secukinumab) inhibitors for severe recalcitrant PG, although as this 
is a rare orphan disease, evidence is relatively limited. Once healing has 
taken place, recurrences are typically only intermittent.
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 27.48 The nail in systemic disease.
 Chronic trauma from poorly tting shoes and sport can cause thick-
ening and disordered growth of the nail (onychogryphosis) and sub-
sequent ingrowing toenails.
 Splinter haemorrhages are ne, linear, dark brown longitudinal 
streaks in the plate (see Fig. 16.87). They are usually caused by 
trauma, especially if distal. Uncommonly, they can occur in nail pso-
riasis and are also a hallmark of infective endocarditis.
 Subungual haematoma is red, purple or grey–brown discoloration of 
the nail plate, usually of the big toe (Fig. 27.47). These haematomas 
are usually due to trauma, although a history of this may not be 
clear. The main differential is subungual melanoma, although rapid 
onset, lack of nail-fold involvement and proximal clearing as the nail 
grows are clues to the diagnosis of haematoma. If there is diagnos-
tic doubt, a biopsy may be needed.
Nail involvement in skin diseases
 Dermatophyte infection/onychomycosis: features are described 
earlier in the chapter in the section on skin infection.
 Psoriasis: nail involvement is common (see Fig. 27.36B).
 Eczema: nails may be shiny due to rubbing skin. Fine pitting can 
occur. If there is periungual eczema, the nail may become dystrophic, 
with thickening and transverse ridging. Paronychia is common.
 Lichen planus: there may be longitudinal ridging and thinning of the 
nail, giving a sandpaper texture (trachyonychia), erythematous streaks 
(erythronychia), subungual hyperkeratosis, pigmentation and, in severe 
cases, pterygium (splitting of nail due to central brosis and scarring, 
giving a winged appearance) and a destructive nail dystrophy.
 Alopecia areata: nail-plate pitting and trachyonychia can occur.
Nail involvement in systemic disease
The nails may be affected in many systemic diseases and important 
examples are detailed below:
 Beau’s lines: horizontal ridges/indentations in the nail plate occur 
simultaneously in all nails (Fig. 27.48B). They typically follow a sys-
temic illness and are thought to be due to temporary growth arrest 
of cells in the nail matrix; they subsequently migrate out as the nail 
grows. Normal nail growth is approximately 0.1 mm/day for ngers 
and 0.05 mm/day for toes, so the timing of the systemic upset can 
usually be estimated by the position of the Beau’s lines.
 Koilonychia: this concave or spoon-shaped nail-plate deformity is 
caused by iron deciency (Fig. 27.48C).
 Clubbing: in the early stages, the angle between the proximal nail and 
nail fold is lost. In its more established form, there may be swelling of 
the distal digits (Figs. 27.48D and E) or toes. Causes include bron-
chogenic carcinoma, asbestosis (especially with mesothelioma), sup-
purative or brosing lung disease, cyanotic congenital heart disease, 

[[p1172]]
1112    DERMATOLOGY
Other neutrophilic dermatoses
These include Sweet’s acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis and the 
neutrophilic dermatosis of rheumatoid disease, which are characterised 
by intense inammation, mainly consisting of neutrophils, around der-
mal blood vessels. There can be damage to vessels (‘vasculopathy’) but 
usually no frank vasculitis.
Pressure sores
Localised, prolonged, pressure-induced ischaemia can lead to the devel-
opment of pressure sores, which can occur in up to 30% of hospitalised 
older adults. They are associated with considerable morbidity, mortality 
and expense to health services. The main risk factors are immobility, 
poor nutrition, local tissue hypoxia – for example, with anaemia, periph-
eral vascular disease, diabetes, sepsis and skin atrophy – or barrier 
impairment, such as in eczema.
A localised area of erythema develops at sites of bony prominences 
(particularly sacrum, greater trochanter, ischial and calcaneal tuberos-
ities, and lateral malleolus). This progresses to a blister and then ero-
sion, which will develop into a deep necrotic ulcer, usually colonised by 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa if pressure is not alleviated.
Prevention is key and involves identication of at-risk patients and reg-
ular repositioning and use of pressure-relieving mattresses. Predisposing 
factors, such as anaemia and poor nutrition, should be corrected. Once 
established, signicant infection must be treated and necrotic tissue 
debrided. Dressings encourage granulation, although surgical interven-
tion may sometimes be needed.
Connective tissue disease
Lupus erythematosus
This autoimmune disorder can be subdivided into systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE) and cutaneous lupus, which includes discoid lupus erythe-
matosus (DLE) and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE). The 
features of SLE are discussed in Chapter 26 (see Box 26.63, and Boxes 
27.35 and 27.36 below). DLE typically presents as scaly red plaques with 
follicular plugging, usually on photo-exposed sites of the face, head and 
neck, which resolve with scarring and pigmentary change. If the scalp is 
involved, scarring alopecia usually occurs (Fig. 27.51). Most patients with 
DLE do not develop SLE. Patients with SCLE may have extensive cutaneous 
involvement, usually aggravated by sun exposure, with an annular, polycyclic 
or papulosquamous eruption. Systemic involvement is uncommon and the 
prognosis usually good. There is a strong association with antibodies to Ro/
SS-A antigen. A diagnosis of cutaneous lupus is conrmed by histopathol-
ogy and direct immunouorescence. Cutaneous lupus may respond to topi-
cal glucocorticoids, antimalarials or immunosuppressants. Antimalarials and 
photoprotection are important mainstays in the management of cutaneous 
lupus, and systemic immunosuppression may be required for resistant dis-
ease. Paradoxically, low-dose UVA1 phototherapy can be effective for lupus.
Systemic sclerosis
This autoimmune multisystem disease presents with severe Raynaud’s 
syndrome, digital ulcers and skin brosis. Dilated nail-fold capillaries and 
ragged cuticles are frequent. The clinical features and management are 
described in Chapter 26
Morphoea
Morphoea is a localised cutaneous form of scleroderma that can affect 
any site at any age. It usually presents as a thickened violaceous plaque, 
which may become hyper- or hypopigmented. Plaques can become 
generalised. Linear forms exist and, if in the scalp, are associated with 
scarring hair loss (en coup de sabre). There is usually no systemic involve-
ment. Topical glucocorticoids or immunosuppressants or phototherapy, 
particularly PUVA or UVA1, can be effective, and systemic immunosup-
pression may be used for resistant extensive disease.
Dermatomyositis
Dermatomyositis is a multisystem disease, predominantly affecting skin, 
muscles and blood vessels. Typical cutaneous features include a viola-
ceous ‘heliotrope’ erythema periorbitally and involving the upper eyelids, 
Fig. 27.49 Pyoderma gangrenosum. This young patient had Crohn’s disease. Note 
the cribriform pattern of re-epithelialisation, which is characteristic of this condition.
27.32  Skin problems in general medicine
Primary skin problems
 Cellulitis
 Vasculitis
 Leg ulcers
 Pressure sores
Skin involvement in multisystem disease
 Genetic: neurobromatosis, 
tuberous sclerosis
 Xanthomas
 Amyloidosis
 Porphyria
 Sarcoidosis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Systemic sclerosis
Non-specic and variable skin reactions to systemic disease
 Urticaria
 Erythema multiforme
 Annular erythemas
 Erythema nodosum
 Pyoderma gangrenosum
 Sweet syndrome
 Generalised pruritus
Skin conditions associated with malignancy
 Dermatomyositis
 Generalised pruritus
 Acanthosis nigricans
 Supercial thrombophlebitis
Skin problems associated with specic medical disorders
 Liver: generalised pruritus, pigmentation, spider naevi, palmar erythema, nail 
clubbing
 Kidney: generalised pruritus, uraemic frost, pigmentation
 Diabetes mellitus: necrobiosis lipoidica, diabetic dermopathy
 Cutaneous Crohn’s disease
Skin problems secondary to treatment of systemic disease
 Drug eruptions
Miscellaneous
 Granuloma annulare
 Morphoea

[[p1173]]
Connective tissue disease    1113
27
Fig. 27.51 Scarring inammatory alopecia. This patient had systemic lupus 
erythematosus and additional cutaneous features of scarring inammatory discoid 
lupus erythematosus.
Fig. 27.50 Dermatomyositis. Photo-aggravation in dermatomyositis.
but this can sometimes affect the upper trunk, shoulders (‘shawl sign’) 
and limbs. Linear erythematous streaks may also be observed on the 
back of hands and ngers, and papules over the knuckles (Gottron’s 
papules). Tortuous dilated nail-fold capillaries, often best seen with a der-
matoscope, and ragged cuticles are usually evident (Fig. 27.46). Photo-
aggravation of the cutaneous features is often prominent (Fig. 27.50). 
The clinical features and management are described in Chapter 26
Granulomatous disease
Granuloma annulare
This is common and may be reactive, although a trigger is usually not 
apparent. The hallmark is the presence of dermal granulomas, which are 
usually palisading and associated with alteration of dermal collagen (necro-
biosis). The condition is generally asymptomatic and may present as an 
isolated dermal lesion with a raised papular annular edge, or may be more 
generalised. An association between generalised disease and diabetes has 
been proposed but not conrmed. Lesions often resolve spontaneously. 
Intralesional glucocorticoids or cryotherapy can be used for localised dis-
ease, and UVB or UVA1 phototherapy or PUVA for generalised disease.
Necrobiosis lipoidica
This condition has some histological features in common with granu-
loma annulare, although necrobiosis predominates. The lesion has a 
characteristic yellow, waxy, atrophic appearance, often with violaceous 
edge (Fig. 27.52). Underlying blood vessels are easily seen because of 
tissue atrophy. Necrobiosis lipoidica typically appears on the shins and 
is prone to ulceration after trauma. There is a strong association with dia-
betes: most patients with necrobiosis lipoidica have or develop diabetes, 
although less than 1% of diabetic patients develop necrobiosis lipoidica. 
Treatment is difcult and includes very potent topical or intralesional glu-
cocorticoids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, PUVA or UVA1 phototherapy 
and systemic immunosuppression.
Sarcoidosis
This condition is characterised by the presence of non-caseating gran-
ulomas. The cause is unknown, although infectious and genetic factors 
have been proposed. It is usually a multisystem disease, with skin lesions 
in about one-third of patients. Cutaneous features can occur in isolation 
and include violaceous inltrated dermal plaques and nodules, which 
can affect any site but particularly digits and nose (lupus pernio), more 
generalised hyper- or hypopigmented or annular papules and plaques, 
inltrative changes in scars and erythema nodosum (see Fig. 17.57). It 
has been reported more commonly and may be more severe in those 
of African, African American or South Asian ancestry. Cutaneous dis-
ease may respond to topical or intralesional glucocorticoids, cryotherapy, 
UVA1, laser or PDT. Clinical features, investigation and management of 
systemic disease are discussed in Chapter 17
Cutaneous Crohn’s disease
Cutaneous Crohn’s disease is rare but may present as perianal and peri-
stomal inltrative plaques, lymphoedema, sinuses or stulae, and oral 
granulomatous disease. These changes are termed ‘metastatic’ Crohn’s 
and histology shows non-caseating granulomas. Reactive skin changes 
can also occur in the form of erythema nodosum and pyoderma gan-
grenosum. Treatment is of the underlying disease.
Porphyrias
The porphyrias are a diverse group of diseases, caused by reduced or 
absent activity of specic enzymes in the porphyrin–haem biosynthetic 
pathway. Due to this loss of enzyme activity, porphyrin precursors prox-
imal to the implicated enzyme step accumulate. If the accumulated 
porphyrins absorb visible light, then there will be skin features and photo-
sensitivity, which explains why some porphyrias have skin features (por-
phyria cutanea tarda) and others do not (acute intermittent porphyria). 
The most common skin presentations are photo-exposed site blistering, 
skin fragility and pain on daylight exposure.
Fig. 27.52 Necrobiosis lipoidica. Atrophic yellow plaques with violaceous edges, 
on the shins of a patient with diabetes mellitus.

[[p1174]]
1114    DERMATOLOGY
Cutaneous porphyrias: fragility and blisters
Although porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) may be genetically inherited, 
this is uncommon and acquired PCT is the most common porphyria 
worldwide. It is caused by an underlying chronic liver disease, in asso-
ciation with hepatic iron overload. The liver disease is often only diag-
nosed through investigation of the skin presentation and it is thus an 
important diagnosis not to miss. Typical features are increased skin 
fragility, blistering, erosions, hypertrichosis, scarring and milia occurring 
on light-exposed areas, particularly the backs of the hands (Fig. 27.53). 
Less common features include facial hypertrichosis, hyperpigmentation 
and morphoea-like changes. Variegate porphyria (VP) and hereditary 
coproporphyria (HCP) may be indistinguishable on skin features and 
it is important to make the correct diagnosis, as acute neurovisceral 
attacks, which may be drug-induced, can occur in VP and HCP but 
not in PCT. Pseudoporphyria may also be impossible to distinguish 
from PCT on clinical grounds but is most frequently caused by a drug 
(commonly naproxen; see Box 27.36) or by sunbed use; on investiga-
tion, porphyrins are normal. A PCT-like presentation may also be seen 
in uraemia due to renal failure, but is caused by raised porphyrins due 
to impaired elimination rather than an enzyme defect.
Management of PCT requires removal or treatment of any underly-
ing cause, which may involve venesection, iron chelation, very low-dose 
hydroxychloroquine once or twice per week and photoprotection.
Cutaneous porphyria: pain on sun exposure
Erythropoietic protoporphyria is caused by a genetic defect in the ferro-
chelatase gene that leads to ferrochelatase enzyme deciency. It is an 
important diagnosis to consider. The presentation is usually in early child-
hood, although the diagnosis is often delayed. In part this is because, 
although the baby or child cries due to immediate pain on sunlight expo-
sure, physical signs are often absent or minimal and thus a link with 
sunlight may not always be considered. The decient ferrochelatase 
activity leads to accumulation of lipid-soluble protoporphyrins in the skin, 
explaining the photosensitivity manifest as pain on daylight exposure. 
Multiple pigment gallstones, anaemia (usually only problematic if con-
sidered to be due to iron deciency) and, rarely, severe liver disease can 
occur, which may be fatal and requires liver transplantation. In addition to 
photoprotection, UVB phototherapy may be effective for the symptoms 
of photosensitivity and, more recently, the use of alpha-melanocyte-
stimulating hormone (α-MSH) analogues has been explored.
Abnormal deposition disorders
Xanthomas
Deposits of fatty material in the skin, subcutaneous fat and tendons may 
be the rst clue to primary or secondary hyperlipidaemia.
27.33  Provoking factors in erythema multiforme
Infections
 Viral: herpes simplex, orf, infectious mononucleosis, hepatitis B, HIV
 Mycoplasma and other bacterial infections
Drugs
 Sulphonamides, penicillins, barbiturates and carbamazepine
Systemic disease
 Sarcoidosis, malignancy, systemic lupus erythematosus
Other
 Radiotherapy, pregnancy
Fig. 27.53 Porphyria cutanea tarda. Skin fragility, blistering, scarring, milia and 
hypertrichosis on the back of hands and ngers in hepatitis C.
Amyloidosis
Cutaneous amyloid may present as periocular plaques in primary sys-
temic amyloidosis and amyloid associated with multiple myeloma, but is 
uncommon in systemic amyloidosis secondary to rheumatoid arthritis or 
other chronic inammatory diseases. Amyloid inltration of blood vessels 
may manifest as ‘pinch purpura’ following skin trauma. Macular amyloid 
is more common in darker skin types and appears as pruritic grey/brown 
macules or patches, usually on the back. Potent topical glucocorticoids 
can be benecial, although it is often treatment-resistant.
Genetic disorders
Neurobromatosis
This condition can present with skin lesions. More details are provided 
in Chapter 28.
Tuberous sclerosis
This is an autosomal dominant condition and two genetic loci have been 
identied: TSC1 (chromosome 9) encoding hamartin, and TSC2 (chromo-
some 16) encoding tuberin. The hallmark is hamartomas in many systems. 
The classic triad of clinical features comprises learning disability, epilepsy 
and skin lesions but there is marked heterogeneity in clinical features. Skin 
changes include pale oval (ash leaf) macules that occur in early childhood; 
yellowish/pink papules in the mid-face (angiobromas, ‘adenoma seba-
ceum’), occurring in adolescence; periungual and subungual bromas; 
and connective tissue naevi (shagreen patches, often on lower back). Gum 
hyperplasia, retinal phakomas (brous overgrowths), renal, lung and heart 
tumours, cerebral gliomas and calcied basal ganglia may also occur.
Reactive disorders
Erythema multiforme
Erythema multiforme has characteristic clinical and histological features 
and can be triggered by a variety of factors (Box 27.33) but a cause 
is not always identied. The disease is likely to have an immunological 
basis. Lesions are multiple, erythematous, annular, targetoid ‘bull’s eyes’ 
(Fig. 27.54) and may blister. Stevens–Johnson syndrome is a severe form 
of erythema multiforme with marked blistering, mucosal involvement 
(mouth, eyes and genitals) and systemic upset.
Identication and removal/treatment of any trigger are essential. 
Analgesia and topical glucocorticoids may provide symptomatic relief. 
Supportive care is required in Stevens–Johnson syndrome, including 
ophthalmology input.
Erythema nodosum
This is characterised histologically by a septal panniculitis of sub-
cutaneous fat (see Fig. 17.59). An identied trigger is often present 

[[p1175]]
Connective tissue disease    1115
27
Fig. 27.54 Severe bullous erythema multiforme. From Swartz MH. Textbook of 
physical diagnosis, 8th edn. Elsevier; 2021.
(Box 27.34). Lesions are typically painful, indurated violaceous nodules 
on the shins and lower legs. Systemic upset, arthralgias and fever are 
common. Spontaneous resolution occurs over a month or so, leav-
ing bruise-like marks. Any underlying cause should be identied and 
removed or treated. Bed rest, leg elevation and an oral NSAID frequently 
offer symptomatic relief. Systemic glucocorticoids are effective but sel-
dom required, and must be avoided when there is a possibility of infec-
tion. Potassium iodide, dapsone or hydroxychloroquine may be effective 
for resistant disease but these are rarely required.
Acquired reactive perforating dermatosis
The hallmark of this condition is transepidermal elimination of dermal 
material, particularly collagen and elastic tissue. It presents as keratotic 
papules, particularly in patients with diabetes and chronic renal disease. 
Treatment with topical glucocorticoids, retinoids, PUVA or UVA1 therapy 
may help. There are other related perforating dermopathies, with char-
acteristic histology.
Annular erythemas
This group of chronic, poorly dened, annular, erythematous and often 
scaly eruptions can be further subdivided and may be secondary to an 
identiable cause. Erythema chronicum migrans can be associated with 
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi). Erythema marginatum can occur in 
rheumatic fever or Still’s disease. Erythema gyratum repens typically pre-
sents as concentric circles of erythema and scale with an advancing edge 
and is usually associated with underlying malignancy. Erythema annulare 
centrifugum presents with expanding, scaly, erythematous rings, with 
central fading. A trigger may not be apparent but possible associations 
include fungal infection, drugs, autoimmune or endocrine diseases, such 
as lupus or thyroid disease, and malignancy, particularly haematological. 
An underlying trigger must be sought and removed or treated. Topical 
glucocorticoids or phototherapy may be helpful for chronic disease.
Acanthosis nigricans
Hyperkeratosis and pigmentation are typical and affected sites have a 
velvety texture. The exures, especially axillae and, in dark-skinned peo-
ple, sides of neck, are involved. There are several types, mainly associ-
ated with insulin resistance. Most often, acanthosis nigricans is found in 
conjunction with obesity and regresses with weight loss. It can be asso-
ciated with malignancy, usually adenocarcinoma (particularly gastric), 
when it is usually more extensive and pruritic, and can involve mucous 
membranes.
27.34  Provoking factors in erythema nodosum
Infections
 Bacteria: streptococci, mycobacteria, Brucella, Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, 
Chlamydia
 Viruses: hepatitis B and infectious mononucleosis
 Fungi
Drugs
 Sulphonamides, sulphonylureas, oral contraceptives
Systemic disease
 Sarcoidosis, inammatory bowel disease, malignancy
Other
 Pregnancy
Fig. 27.55 Drug eruption. Possible drug causes of rash should always be 
considered. This was doxycycline-induced photosensitivity in a farmer.
Drug eruptions
Virtually all drugs may have cutaneous adverse effects (Fig. 27.55) and 
this should be considered in the differential diagnosis of most presenta-
tions of skin disease. Drugs can exert their adverse effects via several 
mechanisms, which can be broadly subdivided into non-immunological 
and immunological (Box 27.35).
27.35  Types of drug eruption
Non-immunological
Predictable
 Striae due to glucocorticoids (see Fig. 27.10)
 Asteatosis with statins
 Candidal infections with antibiotics
 Worsening of psoriasis with lithium, β-blockers, antimalarials, NSAIDs
 Urticaria with aspirin due to mast cell degranulation
 Bradykinin-mediated angioedema due to ACE inhibitors
 Doxycycline photosensitivity
 Dapsone haemolysis
Immunological
Unpredictable
 Immediate IgE-mediated hypersensitivity (type I): penicillin-induced urticaria and 
anaphylaxis
 Antibody-mediated (type II): penicillin-induced haemolysis
 Immune complex-mediated (type III): drug-induced serum sickness or vasculitis
 Delayed hypersensitivity (type IV): drug-induced erythema multiforme, lichenoid 
or pemphigus-like reaction; drug-induced lupus
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; IgE = immunoglobulin E; NSAIDs = non-steroidal 
anti-inammatory drugs)

[[p1176]]
1116    DERMATOLOGY
27.36  Clinical patterns of drug eruptions
Reaction pattern
Clinical features
Examples of causative drugs
Exanthematous
Erythema, maculopapular
Antibiotics (especially ampicillin), anticonvulsants, gold, 
penicillamine, NSAIDs, carbimazole, anti-TNF drugs and 
other biologic therapies
Urticaria and angioedema
Sometimes accompanied by angioedema
Angioedema alone
Salicylates, opiates, NSAIDs, antibiotics, dextran, ACE 
inhibitors
Lichenoid
Violaceous, lichen planus-like, dyspigmentation
Gold, penicillamine, antimalarials, thiazides, NSAIDs, 
β-blockers, ACE inhibitors, sulphonamides, lithium, 
sulphonylureas, proton pump inhibitors, quinine, 
antituberculous, dyes in colour developers
Purpura and vasculitis
Palpable purpura and necrosis
Allopurinol, antibiotics, ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs, aspirin, 
anticonvulsants, diuretics, oral contraceptives
Erythema multiforme
Target-like lesions and bullae on extensor aspects 
of limbs
See Box 27.33
Erythema nodosum
Tender, painful, dusky, erythematous nodules on 
shins
See Box 27.34
Exfoliative dermatitis
There may be erythroderma
Allopurinol, carbamazepine, barbiturates, penicillins, PAS, 
isoniazid, gold, lithium, penicillamine, ACE inhibitors
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Rapid evolution, extensive blistering, erythema, 
necrolysis, mucosal involvement
Anticonvulsants, antibiotics, especially sulphonamides, 
NSAIDs, terbinane, sulphonylureas, antiretrovirals, 
allopurinol
Photosensitivity
Photo-exposed site rash, may be sunburn-like, 
exfoliation, lichenoid
Thiazides, amiodarone, quinine, NSAIDs, tetracyclines, 
uoroquinolones, phenothiazines, sulphonamides, retinoids, 
psoralens
Drug-induced lupus
Photosensitivity, discoid lesions, urticarial or 
erythema multiforme-like. May have positive lupus 
serology and anti-histone antibodies
Allopurinol, thiazides, ACE inhibitors, PAS, anticonvulsants, 
β-blockers, gold, hydralazine, minocycline, penicillamine, 
lithium, proton pump inhibitors
Psoriasiform rash
Rash resembles psoriasis
See Box 27.24
DRESS
Facial oedema, fever, extensive rash, 
lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia and systemic 
involvement
Anticonvulsants, trimethoprim, minocycline, allopurinol, 
dapsone, terbinane
AGEP/toxic pustuloderma
Rapid onset of sterile, non-follicular pustules on 
erythematous base
Ampicillin/amoxicillin, erythromycin, quinolones, 
sulphonamides, terbinane, diltiazem, hydroxychloroquine
Acneiform eruptions
Rash resembles acne
Lithium, anticonvulsants, oral contraceptives, androgens, 
glucocorticoids, antituberculous drugs, EGFR antagonists 
(cetuximab and erlotinib)
Pigmentation
See Box 27.30
Bullous eruptions
Often at pressure sites and there may be other 
features, such as purpura, milia
Barbiturates, penicillamine, furosemide
Pseudoporphyria
May be indistinguishable from porphyria cutanea 
tarda clinically
NSAIDs, tetracyclines, retinoids, furosemide, nalidixic acid
Exacerbation of acute hepatic porphyrias
See page 1113
Always check all drugs for safety of use in porphyrias 
against standard guidelines
Drug-induced immunobullous disease
May resemble pemphigoid, pemphigus, 
dermatomyositis, scleroderma, epidermolysis 
bullosa acquisita
Penicillamine, ACE inhibitors, vancomycin
Fixed drug eruptions
Round/oval, erythema, oedema±bullae
Same site every time drug is given
Pigmentation on resolution
Tetracyclines, sulphonamides, penicillins, quinine, NSAIDs, 
barbiturates, anticonvulsants
Hair loss
Diffuse
Cytotoxic agents, oral retinoids, anticoagulants, 
anticonvulsants, antithyroid drugs, lithium, oral 
contraceptives, iniximab
Hypertrichosis
Excessive hair growth in non-androgenic 
distribution
Diazoxide, minoxidil, ciclosporin
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; AGEP = acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis; DRESS = drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; 
NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs; PAS = para-aminosalicylic acid; TNF = tumour necrosis factor)

[[p1177]]
27
Further information    1117
Clinical features
Cutaneous drug reactions typically present in specic patterns (Box 
27.36). Non-immunologically mediated reactions can theoretically occur 
in anyone, given sufcient exposure to the drug, although idiosyncratic 
factors, such as genetic predisposition, may render some more sus-
ceptible. There is limited information on genetic determinants of drug 
responses and adverse effects, although advances have been made 
providing opportunities for personalised medicine. Immunologically 
mediated cutaneous drug eruptions typically commence within days to 
weeks of starting the drug. Detailed history-taking relating to prescribed 
and non-prescribed medications is essential and there may be other 
clues (Box 27.37).
Investigations and management
The suspected drug must be stopped. If drug-induced photosensitiv-
ity is considered, the patient should be phototested while on the drug 
to conrm the diagnosis, and again after drug withdrawal to conrm 
resolution of photosensitivity. An eosinophilia and abnormalities in liver 
function tests may occur in adverse drug reactions and, for example, 
specic IgE to penicillin may be raised in penicillin-induced rash but, 
otherwise, specic investigations are not available. Rechallenge with 
drug is not usually undertaken unless the reaction is mild, as this can 
be risky. Drug withdrawal may not be straightforward and substitute 
drugs may be required. Antihistamines and/or topical or systemic 
glucocorticoids may provide supportive management, depending on 
the type of cutaneous reaction. The management of anaphylaxis is 
described in Chapter 9
27.37  Diagnostic clues to drug eruptions
 Past history of reaction to suspected drug
 Introduction of suspected drug a few days to weeks before onset of rash
 Recent prescription of a drug commonly associated with rashes (penicillin, 
sulphonamide, thiazide, allopurinol)
 Symmetrical eruption that ts with a well-recognised pattern, caused by a 
current drug
 Resolution of rash following drug cessation
Further information
Websites
bad.org.uk British Association of Dermatologists: guidelines and patient 
information for many skin diseases.
cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews Many relevant skin reviews, including sun 
protection (CD011161), psoriasis (CD001213, CD001433, CD001976, 
CD005028, CD007633, CD009481, CD009687, CD010017, CD010497, 
CD0131535, CD011541, CD011571, CD011628, CD011941, CD011972), 
eczema (CD003871, CD004054, CD004055, CD004414, CD004416, 
CD005203, CD005205, CD005500, CD006135, CD007346, CD007770, 
CD008138, CD008426, CD008642, CD009864, CD011224, CD011380, 
CD012119, CD012167, CD013206), skin cancer (CD003412, CD005413, 
CD004415, CD004835, CD005414, CD007041, CD007281, CD007869, 
CD008946, CD008955, CD010307, CD010308, CD011123, CD011161, 
CD011901, CD011902, CD012352, CD012806, CD013186, CD013187, 
CD013189, CD013191, CD013192, CD013194), leg ulcers (CD000265, 
CD001177, CD001273, CD001733, CD001737, CD001836, CD002303, 
CD003557, CD008394, CD008599, CD009432, CD010182, CD011038, 
CD011354, CD011378, CD011979, CD012583 and others), acne, rosacea, 
hidradenitis suppurativa (CD000194, CD002086, CD003262, CD004425, 
CD007917, CD009435, CD009436, CD010081, CD011154, CD011368, 
CD011946), urticaria (CD007770, CD006137, CD008596), hair disorders 
(CD007628, CD004413, CD010334), skin infections (CD003261, CD003584, 
CD004685, CD004767, CD004834, CD005067, CD005068, CD007937, 
CD009758, CD009992, CD010031, CD010095, CD011680, CD012093, 
CD012235), bullous pemphigoid (CD002292), autoimmune (CD002954, 
CD003263, CD005027), relating to skin in older adults (CD006471, 
CD009362, CD010891, CD011377, CD013128) and many other useful 
reviews.
nice.org.uk National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: guidance for skin 
cancer (NG14, NG34, PH32, CSG8, TA473, TA321, TA268, TA319, TA384, 
TA400, TA366, TA357, TA396, TA269, IPG446, IPG478, DG19, melanoma 
2020), atopic eczema (QS44, CG57, TA81, TA82, TA177, TA534, 2020), 
psoriasis (CG153, TA146, TA372, TA103, TA134, TA350, TA180, TA419, 
TA442, TA475, TA511, TA521, TA574, TA575, QS40), sun exposure (NG34, 
PH32, 2020), vitamin D (PH56, ES28), urticaria (TA339, ESUOM31), rosacea 
(ESNM43, ESNM68), scabies (ESUOM29), photodynamic therapy (IPG155, 
MTG6); Grenz rays (IPG236) and COVID-19: Immunosuppression (NG169).
sign.ac.uk Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network: 121 – Diagnosis 
and management of psoriasis TA81and psoriatic arthritis in adults; 125 – 
Management of atopic eczema in primary care; 140 – Management of primary 
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma; 146 – Cutaneous melanoma skin.

[[p1178]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p1179]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 27.1. A 29-year-old woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus and Crohn’s 
disease presented with an 8-week history of a painful enlarging 
ulcer on her shin. It had started as a tender lump, which she 
thought developed after an insect bite. She was otherwise well, 
with no fever, although reported fatigue and malaise in recent 
weeks. Examination revealed a large supercial ulcer on the 
shin, with a raised violaceous edge (see Figure). What is the 
most likely diagnosis?
 
A. Erythema nodosum
 
B. Necrobiosis lipoidica
 
C. Cutaneous Crohn’s disease
 
D. Necrotising fasciitis
 
E. Pyoderma gangrenosum
Answer: E.
Pyoderma gangrenosum is an uncommon neutrophilic dermatosis, 
which may occur in association with a range of diseases, including inam-
matory bowel disease. It typically presents as a tender purple nodule, 
which rapidly breaks down and ulcerates and may heal with cribriform 
scarring. Immunosuppression may be needed until healed, although it 
generally does not recur. Erythema nodosum typically presents as ten-
der nodules on shins, although can occur at any site. It is a reactive 
skin presentation and triggers include streptococcal infection, inam-
matory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoid and drugs. Lesions 
are often multiple and do not usually rapidly increase in size or ulcerate. 
Necrobiosis lipoidica is strongly associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus 
and typically presents as atrophic enlarging yellow-coloured plaques on 
the shins, which may ulcerate. A raised violaceous edge would be most 
unusual as atrophy is the hallmark. Cutaneous Crohn’s is rare and usually 
involves perineal or peristomal sites, presenting with inltrative plaques, 
sinuses and stulae. Necrotising fasciitis is rare and must be recognised 
and managed urgently as it is life-threatening. Patients are usually acutely 
unwell, febrile and in pain and rapidly evolving skin and deep soft tissue 
necrosis occurs, with crepitus evident on palpation. Bacterial cultures 
are positive and patients must be urgently managed through multidisci-
plinary supportive care, intravenous antibiotics and surgical débridement 
of necrotic tissue.
 27.2. A 35-year-old woman with persistent severe acne vulgaris 
was referred for consideration of isotretinoin therapy. She had 
a history of anxiety and had not yet completed her family, so 
was concerned about possible side-effects. She had gathered 
information from friends and researching the internet, but was 
not sure if this was accurate. She arrived in clinic with a list of 
questions and hoped that her doctor could reassure her. Which 
of the following statements about isotretinoin therapy is true?
 
A. High cholesterol levels are a common side-effect
 
B.  Conception should be avoided until 2 weeks after the treat-
ment course
 
C. Mood disturbance during treatment occurs in most people
 
D. Dryness of lips and eyes is related to drug dose
 
E. Easy sunburning can persist for years after treatment
Answer: D.
Dryness of eyes and mouth is a common side-effect of isotretinoin 
through non-immunological dose-dependent direct toxicity. Isotretinoin 
commonly causes transient rise in triglycerides during treatment, but 
cholesterol is not usually signicantly elevated. Conception must be 
avoided for at least one month after isotretinoin is discontinued as it is 
highly teratogenic and slowly eliminated. A range of mood disturbances 
has been reported in association with isotretinoin therapy, including 
an unproven risk of suicide. However, whilst mood monitoring during 
treatment is important, most patients do not experience lowering of 
mood and many nd that their mood improves as their acne resolves. 
Isotretinoin can increase light sensitivity, even to wintertime or window 
glass-transmitted light. However, once the drug is stopped, light sensi-
tivity will resolve and there is no evidence that it can persist long term.
 27.3. A 22-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of a 
rash on his elbows, knees, shoulders and buttocks, which he 
described as being so itchy that he had not slept for months. 
He was otherwise well and on no medications, other than iron 
tablets. On examination there were excoriations at the affected 
sites but no other specic signs. A skin biopsy was taken from 
an affected area. What would you expect to see on H&E staining 
and direct immunouorescence?
 
A.  Sub-epidermal vesicles and granular IgA in the papillary 
dermis
 
B.  Sub-epidermal vesicles and linear IgG at basement 
membrane
 
C.  Intra-epidermal vesicles and granular IgA in the papillary 
dermis
 
D.  Intra-epidermal vesicles and linear IgG at basement 
membrane
 
E. Sub-epidermal vesicles and linear IgA in the papillary dermis
Answer: A.
Sub-epidermal vesicles and granular IgA in the papillary dermis would 
be expected observations on skin biopsy analysis as the history and 
examination ndings are highly suggestive of dermatitis herpetiformis and 
coeliac disease. The affected body sites and intense itch are typical and 
intact vesicles and blisters are not usually visible as they are de-roofed 
through scratching, with only excoriations remaining. Iron deciency in 
an otherwise well 22-year-old male is unusual and strongly suggests 
malabsorption. Typical biopsy ndings of lesional skin are of sub-epider-
mal vesicles in the dermal papillae, with a neutrophilic and eosinophilic 
inltrate. Direct immunouorescence shows granular IgA in the papillary 
dermis. The immunouorescence ndings can also be detected in the 
non-affected skin of the patient. Other investigations that can be per-
formed include tissue transglutaminase and anti-endomysial antibodies, 
although characteristic biopsy ndings are diagnostic. If the diagnosis of 

[[p1180]]
coeliac disease is uncertain, jejunal biopsy may be indicated. Dermatitis 
herpetiformis usually responds well to a gluten-free diet, with dapsone 
also being needed in some cases.
 27.4. A 44-year-old woman attended the local dermatology clinic 
with a 2 month history of an itchy erythematous, scaly rash on 
her eyelids. She had no rash elsewhere and was t and well, 
although she had a history of atopic dermatitis as a child. She 
was on no medication and worked as a nail technician at a 
beauty salon. On examination there were bilateral eczematous 
changes on both upper eyelids but no other abnormal signs. 
Allergic contact dermatitis was suspected. Patch testing was 
performed and showed a strong positive allergic reaction to a 
relevant allergen. Which of the following allergens is the most 
likely culprit?
 
A. Wool alcohol
 
B. Colophony
 
C. Paraphenylenediamine
 
D. Parabens
 
E. Dichromate
Answer: B.
Colophony is the likely allergen. It is present in sticking plasters, collo-
dions and varnishes, and eyelid eczema can be an isolated manifestation 
of allergic contact dermatitis to colophony due to rubbing and touching 
eyelids. All of the provided answers are common allergens but the clues 
in this case are that she only had the eczematous rash on her eyelids and 
not elsewhere and that she worked as a nail technician.
 27.5. A 38-year-old woman contacted her doctor as she wanted 
to get more information on how best to protect her 6-month 
old baby from the sun as they were planning a sunny holiday. 
The doctor advised her about shade, hats and clothing and 
gave specic advice about sunscreens. Which of the following 
statements is true?
 
A. Sunblocks provide more sun protection than sunscreens
 
B. Sunscreens offer only 50%–60% of the sun protection fac-
tor (SPF) stated on the bottle
 
C. Reectant sunscreens offer superior protection in the longer 
UVR wavelengths
 
D. Sunscreens should be avoided in babies as they commonly 
cause allergy
 
E. Sunscreen patch testing is the investigation of choice if 
allergy is suspected
Answer: C.
Reectant sunscreen chemicals provide better protection against the 
longer UVA wavelengths than absorbent sunscreen chemicals. There is no 
such thing as a sunblock – all sunscreens offer partial protection at best. 
Studies have shown that with real-life sunscreen use, only 25%–33% of 
the stated sun protection factor (SPF) on the product is achieved. Sun 
protection for babies should mainly be through avoidance, shade and 
covering up, with sunscreens for unavoidable exposure at limited sites. 
However, sunscreens do not commonly cause allergy – if sunscreen reac-
tions do occur they are usually due to irritancy, not allergy, with only the 
minority of reactions being true allergy or photoallergy. The investigation of 
choice for suspected sunscreen allergy is photopatch testing as photo-
allergic reactions may be missed on standard patch testing.

[[p1181]]
Neurology
28
DPJ Hunt
MD Connor
Clinical examination of the nervous system 1120
Functional anatomy and physiology 1122
Cells of the nervous system 1122
Functional anatomy of the nervous system 1123
Localising lesions in the central nervous system 1129
Investigation of neurological disease 1129
Neuroimaging 1130
Neurophysiological testing 1132
Presenting problems in neurological disease 1136
Headache and facial pain 1137
Dizziness, blackouts and ‘funny turns’ 1137
Status epilepticus 1137
Coma 1138
Delirium 1138
Amnesia 1138
Weakness 1138
Sensory disturbance 1140
Abnormal movements 1141
Abnormal perception 1143
Altered balance and vertigo 1143
Abnormal gait 1143
Abnormal speech and language 1144
Disturbance of smell 1145
Visual disturbance and ocular abnormalities 1145
Hearing disturbance 1146
Bulbar symptoms – dysphagia and dysarthria 1146
Bladder, bowel and sexual disturbance 1147
Personality change 1149
Sleep disturbance 1149
Psychiatric disorders 1149
Headache syndromes 1149
Functional neurological disorder 1152
Epilepsy 1152
Vestibular disorders 1158
Disorders of sleep 1159
Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnolence) 1159
Parasomnias 1159
Neuro-inammatory diseases 1160
Paraneoplastic neurological disorders 1165
Neurodegenerative diseases 1165
Movement disorders 1165
Ataxias 1169
Tremor disorders 1169
Dystonia 1170
Hemifacial spasm 1170
Motor neuron disease 1170
Spinal muscular atrophy 1171
Infections of the nervous system 1171
Meningitis 1171
Parenchymal viral infections 1175
Parenchymal bacterial infections 1178
Parenchymal parasitic infections 1179
Diseases caused by bacterial toxins 1180
Prion diseases 1181
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure 1182
Raised intracranial pressure 1182
Brain tumours 1183
Paraneoplastic neurological disease 1185
Hydrocephalus 1185
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension 1186
Head injury 1187
Disorders of cerebellar function 1187
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord 1187
Cervical spondylosis 1187
Lumbar spondylosis 1188
Spinal cord compression 1189
Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord 1190
Diseases of peripheral nerves 1191
Entrapment neuropathy 1191
Multifocal neuropathy 1192
Polyneuropathy 1192
Guillain–Barré syndrome 1192
Chronic polyneuropathy 1193
Brachial plexopathy 1194
Lumbosacral plexopathy 1194
Spinal root lesions 1194
Diseases of the neuromuscular junction 1194
Myasthenia gravis 1194
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome 1195
Diseases of muscle 1195
Muscular dystrophies 1196
Inherited metabolic myopathies 1197
Acquired myopathies 1197

[[p1182]]
1120    NEUROLOGY
Clinical examination of the nervous system
Higher cerebral function
Orientation
Memory
Speech and language
Localised cortical functions
Cranial nerves
Optic fundi
Papilloedema
Optic atrophy
Cupping of disc
(glaucoma)
Hypertensive changes
Signs of diabetes
Observation/general
Back
Scoliosis
Operative scars
Evidence of spina bifida occulta
Winging of scapula
Neck and skull
Skull size and shape
Neck stiffness and Kernig’s test
Carotid bruit
 General appearance
 Mood (e.g. anxious, depressed)
 Facial expression (or lack thereof)
 Handedness
 Nutritional status
 Blood pressure
Stance and gait
Posture
Romberg’s test
Arm swing
Pattern of gait
Tandem (heel-toe) gait
Sensory
Pin-prick, temperature
Joint position, vibration
Two-point discrimination
Motor
Wasting, fasciculation
Abnormal posture
Abnormal movements
Tone (including clonus)
Strength
Coordination
Tendon reflexes
Abdominal reflexes
Plantar reflexes
Winging of right scapula
(muscular dystrophy)
Right 12th nerve palsy:
wasting of right side of tongue
7th nerve palsy: drooping
mouth and flattening of
nasolabial skin fold
Wasting of right thenar
eminence due to cervical rib
Pes cavus
Haemorrhagic papilloedema
8
7
6
5
4
5
6
7
8
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
3rd nerve palsy: one eye
points ‘down and out’
Insets (winging of scapula, 12th nerve palsy, wasting of thenar eminence) Courtesy of Dr R.E. Cull, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh.

[[p1183]]
Clinical examination of the nervous system    1121
28
Motor
Sensory
Toes
Motor cortex
(pre-central gyrus)
Knee
Trunk
Arm
Neck
Face
Tongue
Teeth
Somatic cortex
(post-central gyrus)
Leg
Face
Tongue
Motor and sensory homunculi. The motor and sensory homunculi illustrate the 
cortical areas serving each anatomical area within the pre-central (motor) and post-
central (sensory) gyri.
Examination of gait and posture
Procedure
Abnormality
Disease
Rising from 
chair
Difculty rising
Proximal muscle weakness or 
joint disorders
Gait initiation
Difculty starting to walk, 
frozen
Cerebrovascular disease or 
parkinsonism
Posture
Stooped
Parkinsonism
Retropulsion/
anteropulsion
Postural instability
Parkinsonism
Arms during 
walking
Reduced arm swing
Parkinsonism or upper motor 
neuron lesion
Enhanced tremor
Parkinsonism
Dystonic posturing
Dystonia
Gait pattern
Circumduction (stiff 
leg moves outwards in 
‘circular’ manner)
Hemiparesis, typically after 
stroke
‘Slapping’, high-stepping 
due to foot drop
L5 radiculopathy or common 
peroneal nerve lesion
Narrow-based, short 
strides, freezing in 
doorways
Parkinsonism
Stiff-legged, scissors gait
Spastic paraparesis (multiple 
sclerosis, vascular disease, 
spinal cord lesions)
Wide-based, unsteady, 
unable to perform tandem 
gait
Cerebellar lesion
Waddling gait
Myopathies with proximal 
weakness
Examination of cranial nerves
Nerve
Name
Tests
I
Olfactory
Ask patient about sense of smell (examine 
only if change is reported)
II
Optic
Visual acuity and colour vision
Visual elds
Pupillary responses
Ophthalmoscopy
III   
Oculomotor
Eyelids (ptosis)
Pupil size, symmetry, reactions
Eye movements
IV
Trochlear
Eye movements (superior oblique muscle)
V
Trigeminal
Facial sensation
Corneal reex
Muscles of mastication
VI
Abducens
Eye movements (lateral rectus muscle)
VII
Facial
Facial symmetry and movements
VIII
Vestibulocochlear
Otoscopy
Hearing
Tuning fork tests (Rinne and Weber)
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Swallowing
X
Vagus
Palatal elevation (uvula deviates to side 
opposite lesion)
Swallowing
Cough (bovine)
Speech
XI
Accessory
Look for wasting of trapezius/
sternocleidomastoid
Elevation of shoulders
Turning head to right and left
XII
Hypoglossal
Look for wasting/fasciculation
Tongue protrusion (deviates to side of 
lesion)
Root values of tendon reexes
Reex
Root value
Arm
Biceps jerk
C5
Supinator jerk
C6
Triceps jerk
C7
Finger jerk
C8
Leg
Knee jerk
L3/L4
Ankle jerk
S1
1
6
4

[[p1184]]
1122    NEUROLOGY
The complexity of the brain differentiates us from other species, and its 
interactions with the spinal cord and peripheral nerves combine to allow 
us to perceive and react to the external world while maintaining a stable 
internal environment. The cerebral cortex provides a platform for pro-
cessing information and forming a response, and in doing so, both forms 
and is affected by our personality and mental state.
Neurology has for too long been misperceived as a specialty in 
which intricate clinical examination and numerous investigations are 
required to diagnose obscure and untreatable conditions. In fact, nerv-
ous system disorders are common, accounting for 10% of the UK’s 
general practice consultations, 20% of acute medical admissions and 
most chronic physical disability. The development of specic, effective 
treatments has made accurate diagnosis essential. Neurological man-
agement requires knowledge of a range of common conditions, which 
can be applied to individual patients after careful history-taking, with 
lesser contributions arising from targeted examination and considered 
investigation.
Pathological and anatomical localisation of symptoms and signs is 
important, but skill can be required to identify those not associated with 
neurological disease, differentiating patients requiring investigation and 
treatment from those who need reassurance.
Initially, it is important to exclude conditions that constitute neurologi-
cal emergencies (Box 28.1). If the presentation is not an emergency, time 
can be taken to reach a diagnosis. The history should provide a hypoth-
esis for the site and nature of the potential pathology, which a focused 
examination may rene, and direct appropriate further investigations. 
An informed discussion with the patient and family regarding diagnosis, 
management and prognosis may then take place.
As stroke has become a specic subspecialty in many centres, it is 
described in Chapter 29. This chapter should be read with it, to help 
clarify how the presentation, diagnosis and management of stroke pres-
ent their own challenges.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Cells of the nervous system
The nervous system comprises billions of specialised cells, forming 
a spectacular network of connections. In addition to neurons, there 
are many types of glial cells. Astrocytes form the structural frame-
work for neurons and control their biochemical environment, their foot 
processes adjoining small blood vessels and forming the blood–brain 
barrier (Fig.28.1). Oligodendrocytes are responsible for the formation 
and maintenance of the myelin sheath, which surrounds axons and is 
essential for maintaining the speed and consistency of action poten-
tial propagation along axons. Peripheral nerves have axons invested in 
myelin made by oligodendrocytes (Schwann cells). Microglial cells derive 
Astrocyte foot processes
surround the brain capillary
(site of blood–brain barrier)
Capillary
Red blood
cell in capillary
Tight
junction
Capillary
endothelial
cell
Astrocyte
Synapse
Neuron
Oligodendrocyte
Axon
CSF
Ependymal cell
Sensory cell
body in dorsal
root ganglion
Motor neuron
cell body in
anterior horn
Spinal cord
grey matter
Node of Ranvier
Vas
nervorum
Sensory
axon
Motor axon
Schwann cell
Fig. 28.1 Cells of the nervous system. (CSF = cerebrospinal uid)
28.1 Neurological emergencies
 Status epilepticus (p. 1137)
 Stroke (if thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy available) (p. 1211)
 Guillain–Barré syndrome (p. 1192)
 Myasthenia gravis (if bulbar and/or respiratory) (p. 1194)
 Spinal cord compression (p. 1189)
 Subarachnoid haemorrhage (p. 1214)
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (p. 1252)

[[p1185]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1123
28
from monocytes/macrophages and play a role in ghting  infection and 
 removing damaged cells. Ependymal cells line the cerebral ventricles.
Generation and transmission of the nervous impulse
The role of the central nervous system (CNS) is to generate outputs 
in response to external stimuli and changes in internal conditions. 
The CNS has to maintain a delicate balance between responsivity to 
external stimuli and remaining stoic enough to remain stable in a rap-
idly changing environment. Each neuron receives input by synaptic 
transmission from dendrites (branched projections of other neurons), 
which sum to produce output in the form of an action potential that 
is then conducted along the axon, resulting in synaptic transmission 
to other neurons or, in the motor system, to muscle cells. Summation 
of the inputs causes net changes in the target neuron's electrochem-
ical gradient, which, if large enough, will trigger an action potential. 
Communication between cells is by synaptic transmission that involves 
the release of neurotransmitters to interact with structures on the target 
cell's surface, including ion channels and other receptors (Fig. 28.2). 
At least 20 different neurotransmitters act at different sites in the nerv-
ous system, most of which are potentially amenable to pharmacological 
manipulation.
Each neuronal cell body may receive synaptic input from thousands 
of other neurons. The synapsing neuron terminals are also subject 
to feedback regulation via receptor sites on the pre-synaptic mem-
brane, modifying the release of transmitter across the synaptic cleft. 
In addition to such acute effects, some neurotransmitters produce 
long-term modulation of metabolic function or gene expression. This 
effect probably underlies more complex processes such as long-term 
memory.
Functional anatomy of the nervous system
Major components of the nervous system and their inter-relationships are 
depicted in Figure 28.3
Cerebral hemispheres
The cerebral hemispheres coordinate the highest level of nervous func-
tion, the anterior half dealing with executive (‘doing’) functions and 
the posterior half constructing a perception of the environment. Each 
cerebral hemisphere has four functionally specialised lobes (Box 28.2
and Fig. 28.4), with some functions being distributed asymmetrically 
 (‘lateralised’), to produce cerebral dominance for functions such as 
motor control, speech or memory. Cerebral dominance aligns limb dom-
inance with language function: in right-handed individuals the left hemi-
sphere is almost always dominant, while around half of left-handers have 
a dominant right hemisphere.
Frontal lobes are concerned with executive function, movement, 
behaviour and planning. As well as the primary and supplementary motor 
cortex, there are specialised areas for control of eye movements, speech 
(Broca's area) and micturition.
Transcription
factor
Microtubules in
axon down which
neurotransmitters
and/or precursors
are transported
1
Ca2+
Voltage-gated
calcium
channels
Action
potential
2
3
3
4
5
Ions
Ions
G-protein
mRNA
DNA
Cell
nucleus
Translation
New ion channel
or modulating
enzyme
Second
messengers
e.g. cAMP
A
B
Fig. 28.2 Neurotransmission and neurotransmitters. (1) An action potential 
arriving at the nerve terminal depolarises the membrane and this opens voltage-
gated calcium channels. (2) Entry of calcium causes the fusion of synaptic vesicles 
containing neurotransmitters with the pre-synaptic membrane and release of the 
neurotransmitter across the synaptic cleft. (3) The neurotransmitter binds to receptors 
on the post-synaptic membrane either (A) to open ligand-gated ion channels that, 
by allowing ion entry, depolarise the membrane and initiate an action potential 
(4), or (B) to bind to metabotropic receptors that activate an effector enzyme (e.g. 
adenylyl cyclase) and thus modulate gene transcription via the intracellular second 
messenger system, leading to changes in synthesis of ion channels or modulating 
enzymes. (5) Neurotransmitters are taken up at the pre-synaptic membrane and/or 
metabolised. (cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; DNA = deoxyribonucleic 
acid; mRNA=messenger ribonucleic acid)
Posterior
Anterior
Cerebral
hemispheres
Sensation
and
perception
Cerebellum
Brainstem
Spinal cord
Autonomic
Autonomic
Behaviour
and
motor
Gastro-
intestinal
tract
Sensory
receptor
Heart and
circulation
Muscle
Neuromuscular
junction
Bladder
Reproductive
organs
Fig. 28.3 The major anatomical components of the nervous system.

[[p1186]]
1124    NEUROLOGY
The parietal lobes integrate sensory perception. The primary sensory 
cortex lies in the post-central gyrus of the parietal lobe. Much of the 
remainder is devoted to ‘association’ cortex, which processes and inter-
prets input from the various sensory modalities. The supramarginal and 
angular gyri of the dominant parietal lobe form part of the language area 
(p. 1144). Close to these are regions dealing with numerical function. 
The non-dominant parietal lobe is concerned with spatial awareness and 
orientation.
The temporal lobes contain the primary auditory cortex and primary 
vestibular cortex. On the inner medial sides lie the olfactory and para-
hippocampal cortices, which are involved in memory function. The 
temporal lobes also link intimately to the limbic system, including the 
hippocampus and the amygdala, which are involved in memory and 
emotional processing. The dominant temporal lobe also participates 
in language functions, particularly verbal comprehension (Wernicke's 
area). Musical processing occurs across both temporal lobes, rhythm 
on the dominant side and melody/pitch on the non-dominant.
The occipital lobes are responsible for visual interpretation. The con-
tralateral visual hemield is represented in each primary visual cortex, 
with surrounding areas processing specic visual submodalities such as 
colour, movement or depth, and the analysis of more complex visual 
patterns such as faces.
Deep to the grey matter in the cortices, and the white matter (com-
posed of neuronal axons), are collections of cells known as the basal 
ganglia that are concerned with motor control; the thalamus, which is 
responsible for the level of attention to sensory perception; the limbic 
system, concerned with emotion and memory; and the hypothalamus, 
responsible for homeostasis, such as temperature and appetite control. 
The cerebral ventricles contain cerebrospinal uid (CSF), which cushions 
the brain during cranial movement.
CSF is formed in the lateral ventricles and protects and nourishes 
the CNS. CSF ows from third to fourth ventricles and through foram-
ina in the brainstem to dissipate over the surface of the CNS, eventu-
ally being reabsorbed into the cerebral venous system (see Fig. 28.42).
The brainstem
In addition to containing all the sensory and motor pathways entering 
and leaving the hemispheres, the brainstem houses the nuclei and 
projections of most cranial nerves, as well as other important collec-
tions of neurons in the reticular formation (Fig. 28.5). Cranial nerve 
nuclei provide motor control to muscles of the head (including face 
and eyes) and coordinate sensory input from the special sense organs 
and the face, nose, mouth, larynx and pharynx. They also relay auto-
nomic messages, including pupillary, salivary and lacrimal functions. 
The reticular formation is mainly involved in control of conjugate eye 
movements, the maintenance of balance and arousal, and cardiores-
piratory control.
28.2 Cortical lobar functions
Lobe
Function
Effects of damage
Cognitive/behavioural
Associated physical signs
Positive phenomena
Frontal
Personality
Disinhibition
Impaired smell
Seizures – often nocturnal 
with motor activity
Emotional control
Lack of initiation
Contralateral hemiparesis
Versive head movements
Social behaviour
Antisocial behaviour
Frontal release signs1
Contralateral motor control
Impaired memory
Language
Expressive dysphasia
Micturition
Incontinence
Parietal: dominant
Language
Dysphasia
Contralateral hemisensory loss
Focal sensory seizures
Calculation
Acalculia
Astereognosis2
Dyslexia
Agraphaesthesia4
Apraxia3
Contralateral homonymous lower 
quadrantanopia
Agnosia5
Parietal: non-dominant
Spatial orientation
Neglect of contralateral side
Contralateral hemisensory loss
Focal sensory seizures
Constructional skills
Spatial disorientation
Astereognosis2
Constructional apraxia
Agraphaesthesia4
Dressing apraxia
Contralateral homonymous lower 
quadrantanopia
Temporal: dominant
Auditory perception
Receptive aphasia
Contralateral homonymous upper 
quadrantanopia
Complex hallucinations 
(smell, sound, vision, 
memory)
Language
Dyslexia
Verbal memory
Impaired verbal memory
Smell
Balance
Temporal: non-dominant
Auditory perception
Impaired non-verbal memory
Contralateral homonymous upper 
quadrantanopia
Complex hallucinations 
(smell, sound, vision, 
memory)
Melody/pitch perception
Impaired musical skills (tonal 
perception)
Non-verbal memory
Smell
Balance
Occipital
Visual processing
Visual inattention
Homonymous hemianopia  
(macular sparing)
Simple visual 
hallucinations  
(e.g. phosphenes, zigzag 
lines)
Visual loss
Visual agnosia
1Grasp reex, palmomental response, pout response. 2Inability to determine three-dimensional shape by touch. 3Inability to perform complex movements in the presence of normal motor, sensory and 
cerebellar function. 4Inability to ‘read’ numbers or letters drawn on hand, with the eyes shut. 5Inability to recognise familiar objects, e.g. faces.

[[p1187]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1125
28
The spinal cord
The spinal cord is the route for virtually all communication between the 
extracranial structures and the CNS. Afferent and efferent bres are 
grouped in discrete bundles but collections of cells in the grey matter are 
responsible for lower-order motor reexes and the primary processing of 
sensory information.
Sensory peripheral nervous system
The sensory cell bodies of peripheral nerves are situated just outside 
the spinal cord, in the dorsal root ganglia in the spinal exit foram-
ina, while the distal ends of their neurons utilise various specialised 
endings for the conversion of external stimuli into action potentials. 
Sensory nerves consist of a combination of large, fast, myelinated 
axons (which carry information about joint position sense and com-
mands to muscles) and smaller, slower, unmyelinated axons (which 
carry information about pain and temperature, as well as autonomic 
function).
Motor peripheral nervous system
The anterior horns of the spinal cord comprise cell bodies of the 
lower motor neurons. To increase conduction speed, peripheral 
motor nerve axons are wrapped in myelin produced by Schwann 
cells. Motor neurons release acetylcholine across the neuromuscular 
junction, which changes the muscle end-plate potential and initiates 
muscle contraction.
Face
Parahippocampal
cortex
Corpus callosum
Foot
Supplementary
motor area
Superior
temporal gyrus
Lateral
Medial
1
2
3
4
5
Inferior frontal
gyrus
Primary motor
cortex
Leg
Central sulcus
Primary sensory
cortex
Supramarginal
gyrus
Angular gyrus
Primary visual
cortex
1  Frontal eye field
2  Broca’s area
3  Primary vestibular cortex
4  Primary auditory cortex
5  Wernicke’s area
Frontal lobe
Temporal lobe
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Key
Fig. 28.4 Anatomy of the cerebral cortex.
Cranial nerves
Cerebellum
10th
9th
8th
7th
6th
5th
3rd
4th
Pontine
nuclei
Sensory
tracts
Motor
tracts
Pyramidal
motor tract
Reticular
system
12th
11th
Fig. 28.5 Anatomy of the brainstem.

[[p1188]]
1126    NEUROLOGY
The autonomic system
The autonomic system regulates the cardiovascular and respiratory sys-
tems, the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract, and many exocrine 
and endocrine glands throughout the body. The autonomic system is 
controlled centrally by diffuse modulatory systems in the brainstem, lim-
bic system, hypothalamus and frontal lobes, which are concerned with 
arousal and background behavioural responses to threat. Autonomic 
output divides functionally and pharmacologically into two divisions: the 
parasympathetic and sympathetic systems.
The motor system
A programme of movement formulated by the pre-motor cortex is con-
verted into a series of excitatory and inhibitory signals in the motor cortex 
that are transmitted to the spinal cord in the pyramidal tract (Fig.28.6). 
This passes through the internal capsule and the ventral brainstem 
before crossing (decussating) in the medulla to enter the lateral columns 
of the spinal cord. The pyramidal tract ‘upper motor neurons’ synapse 
with the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord grey matter, which form the 
lower motor neurons.
Any movement necessitates changes in posture and muscle tone, 
sometimes in quite separate muscle groups to those involved in the 
actual movement. The motor system consists of a hierarchy of controls 
that maintain body posture and muscle tone, on which any movement 
is superimposed. In the grey matter of the spinal cord, the lowest order 
of the motor hierarchy controls reex responses to stretch. Muscle spin-
dles sense lengthening of the muscle; they provide the afferent side of 
the stretch reex and initiate a monosynaptic reex leading to protec-
tive or reactive muscle contraction. Inputs from the brainstem are largely 
inhibitory. Polysynaptic connections in the spinal cord grey matter control 
more complex reex actions of exion and extension of the limbs that 
form the basic building blocks of coordinated actions, but complete con-
trol requires input from the extrapyramidal system and the cerebellum.
Lower motor neurons
Lower motor neurons in the anterior horn of the spinal cord innervate 
a group of muscle bres termed a ‘motor unit’. Loss of lower motor 
neurons causes loss of contraction within this unit, resulting in weak-
ness and reduced muscle tone. Subsequently, denervated muscle 
bres atrophy, causing muscle wasting, and depolarise spontaneously, 
causing ‘brillations’. Except in the tongue, these are usually perceptible 
only on electromyography (EMG; p. 1132). With the passage of time, 
neighbouring intact neurons sprout to provide re-innervation, but the 
neuromuscular junctions of the enlarged motor units are unstable and 
depolarise spontaneously, causing fasciculations (large enough to be 
visible). Fasciculations therefore imply chronic denervation with partial 
re-innervation.
Upper motor neurons
Upper motor neurons have both inhibitory and excitatory inuence 
on the function of lower motor neurons in the anterior horn. Lesions 
affecting the upper motor neuron result in increased tone, most evi-
dent in the strongest muscle groups (i.e. the extensors of the lower 
limbs and the exors of the upper limbs). The weakness of upper 
motor neuron lesions is conversely more pronounced in the opposing 
muscle groups. Loss ofinhibition will also lead to brisk reexes and 
enhanced reex patterns of movement, such as exion withdrawal to 
noxious stimuli and spasms of extension. The increased tone is more 
apparent during rapid stretching (‘spastic catch’) but may quickly 
give way with sustained tension (the ‘clasp-knife’ phenomenon). 
More primitive reexes are also released, manifest as extensor plantar 
responses. Spasticity may not be present until some weeks after the 
onset of an upper motor neuron lesion.
The extrapyramidal system
Circuits between the basal ganglia and the motor cortex constitute 
the extrapyramidal system, which controls muscle tone, body posture 
and the initiation of movement (see Fig. 28.6). Lesions of the extrap-
yramidal system produce an increase in tone that, unlike spasticity, 
is continuous throughout the range of movement at any speed of 
stretch (‘lead pipe’ rigidity). Involuntary movements are also a feature 
of extrapyramidal lesions, and tremor in combination with rigidity pro-
duces typical ‘cogwheel’ rigidity. Extrapyramidal lesions also cause 
slowed and clumsy movements (bradykinesia), which characteristi-
cally reduce in size with repetition, as well as postural instability, which 
can precipitate falls.
The cerebellum
The cerebellum ne-tunes and coordinates movement initiated by the 
motor cortex, including articulation of speech. It also participates in the 
planning and learning of skilled movements through reciprocal connec-
tions with the thalamus and cortex. A lesion in a cerebellar hemisphere 
causes lack of coordination on the same side of the body. Cerebellar 
dysfunction impairs the smoothness of eye movements, causing nystag-
mus, and renders speech dysarthric. In the limbs, the initial movement is 
normal, but as the target is approached, the accuracy of the movement 
deteriorates, producing an ‘intention tremor’. The distances of targets 
are misjudged (dysmetria), resulting in ‘past-pointing’. The ability to pro-
duce rapid, accurate, regularly alternating movements is also impaired 
(dysdiadochokinesis). The central vermis of the cerebellum is concerned 
with the coordination of gait and posture. Disorders of this area therefore 
produce a characteristic ataxic gait (see below).
Neuromuscular
junction
A
B
Skeletal
muscle
Anterior
horn cells
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Spinal cord
Foot
Hand
Mouth
Cortical
pyramidal cells
Motor
cortex
Basal
ganglia
Cerebellum
Descending
control of
posture and
balance
Pyramidal
tract
Internal
capsule
Fig. 28.6 The motor system. Neurons from the motor cortex descend as the 
pyramidal tract in the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle to the ventral brainstem, 
where most cross low in the medulla (A). In the spinal cord the upper motor neurons 
form the corticospinal tract in the lateral column before synapsing with the lower 
motor neurons in the anterior horns. The activity in the motor cortex is modulated by 
inuences from the basal ganglia and cerebellum. Pathways descending from these 
structures control posture and balance (B).

[[p1189]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1127
28
Vision
The neurological organisation of visual pathways is shown in Figure 28.7. 
Fibres from ganglion cells in the retina pass to the optic disc and then 
backwards through the lamina cribrosa to the optic nerve. Nasal optic 
nerve bres (subserving the temporal visual eld) cross at the chiasm 
but temporal bres do not. Hence, bres in each optic tract and further 
posteriorly carry representation of contralateral visual space. From the 
lateral geniculate nucleus, lower bres pass through the temporal lobes 
on their way to the primary visual area in the occipital cortex, while the 
upper bres pass through the parietal lobe.
Normally, the eyes move conjugately (in the same direction at the 
same speed), though horizontal convergence allows fusion of images 
at different distances. The control of eye movements begins in the 
cerebral hemispheres, particularly within the frontal eye elds, and the 
pathway then descends to the brainstem with input from the visual 
cortex, superior colliculus and cerebellum. Horizontal and vertical 
gaze centres in the pons and mid-brain, respectively, coordinate out-
put to the ocular motor nerve nuclei (3, 4 and 6), which are connected 
to each other by the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) (Fig. 28.8). 
The MLF is particularly important in coordinating horizontal move-
ments of the eyes. The resulting signals to extraocular muscles are 
supplied by the oculomotor (3rd), trochlear (4th) and abducens (6th) 
cranial nerves.
The pupillary size is determined by a combination of parasympa-
thetic and sympathetic activity. Parasympathetic bres originate in the 
Edinger–Westphal subnucleus of the 3rd nerve, and pass with the 3rd 
Retina
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Lateral geniculate body
Optic 
radiation
Lower fibres in 
temporal lobe
Upper fibres
in anterior 
parietal lobe
Occipital cortex
Visual fields
L
R
Visual field defects
Monocular
blindness
Bitemporal
hemianopia
Right
homonymous
hemianopia
Right superior
homonymous
quadrantanopia
Right inferior
homonymous
quadrantanopia
Right homonymous
hemianopia with
macular sparing
R
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
1
3
4
5
6
L
Fig. 28.7 Visual pathways and visual eld defects. Schematic representation of eyes and brain in transverse section.
B
A
C
MLF
6th
8th
4th
3rd
Pontine
lateral gaze
centre
Lateral rectus
Right
Medial rectus
Left
Fig. 28.8 Control of conjugate eye movements. Downward projections pass from 
the cortex to the pontine lateral gaze centre (A). The pontine gaze centre projects to 
the 6th cranial nerve nucleus (B), which innervates the ipsilateral lateral rectus and 
projects to the contralateral 3rd nerve nucleus (and hence medial rectus) via the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). Tonic inputs from the vestibular apparatus (C) 
project to the contralateral 6th nerve nucleus via the vestibular nuclei.
Arcuate
fasciculus
Posterior language
comprehension
area (Wernicke's)
Broca's
area
Auditory
cortex
Bulbar
muscles
Corticobulbar
tract
Verbal
memory
Fig. 28.9 Areas of the cerebral cortex involved in the generation of spoken 
language.

[[p1190]]
1128    NEUROLOGY
nerve to synapse in the ciliary ganglion before supplying the constrictor 
pupillae of the iris. Sympathetic bres originate in the hypothalamus, 
pass down the brainstem and cervical spinal cord to emerge at T1, 
return up to the eye in association with the internal carotid artery, and 
supply the dilator pupillae.
Speech
Much of the cerebral cortex is involved in the process of forming 
and interpreting communicating sounds, especially in the dominant 
hemisphere (see Box 28.2). Decoding of speech sounds (phonemes) is 
carried out in the upper part of the posterior temporal lobe. The attri-
bution of meaning, as well as the formulation of the language required 
for the expression of ideas and concepts, occurs predominantly in the 
lower parts of the anterior parietal lobe (the angular and supramarginal 
gyri). The temporal speech comprehension region is called Wernicke's 
area (Fig. 28.9). Other parts of the temporal lobe contribute to verbal 
memory, where lexicons of meaningful words are ‘stored’. Parts of the 
non-dominant parietal lobe appear to contribute to non-verbal aspects 
of language in recognising meaningful intonation patterns (prosody).
The frontal language area is in the posterior end of the dominant infe-
rior frontal gyrus known as Broca's area. This receives input from the 
temporal and parietal lobes via the arcuate fasciculus. The motor com-
mands generated in Broca's area pass to the cranial nerve nuclei in the 
pons and medulla, as well as to the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord. 
Nerve impulses to the lips, tongue, palate, pharynx, larynx and respira-
tory muscles result in the series of ordered sounds comprising speech. 
The cerebellum also plays an important role in coordinating speech, and 
lesions of the cerebellum lead to dysarthria, where the problem lies in 
motor articulation of speech.
Vestibulospinal
tract
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
Pain,
temperature
and poorly
localised touch
Joint position,
vibration
and accurate
touch
Dorsal
column
Gracile and
cuneate nuclei
Thalamus
Parietal
cortex
Fig. 28.11 The main somatic sensory pathways.
C3
C2
C4
C5
T2
T1
C6
C7
C8
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T12
T11
T10
L1
L2
S2
S3
S4
S2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S 5
C3
C2
C4
C5
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
C8
C7
C6
L4
L5
S1
S2, 3
B
A
Fig. 28.10 The areas supplied by specic levels of the spinal cord. These are approximations and in practice there is much overlap. The clinical utility of these 
dermatomes has diminished somewhat with the advent of good magnetic resonance imaging of the spinal cord but it remains important to ascertain the presence of a ‘spinal 

[[p1191]]
Investigation of neurological disease    1129
28
The somatosensory system
The body surface can be described by dermatomes, each dermatome 
being an area of skin in which sensory nerves derive from a single spinal 
nerve root (Fig. 28.10). Sensory information ascends in two anatomi-
cally discrete systems (Fig. 28.11). Fibres from proprioceptive organs 
and those mediating specic sensation (including vibration) enter the 
spinal cord at the posterior horn and pass without synapsing into the 
ipsilateral posterior columns. In contrast, bres conveying pain and 
temperature sensory information (nociceptive neurons) synapse with 
second-order neurons that cross the midline in the spinal cord before 
ascending in the contralateral anterolateral spinothalamic tract to the 
brainstem.
The second-order neurons of the dorsal column sensory system 
cross the midline in the upper medulla to ascend through the brainstem. 
Here they lie just medial to the (already crossed) spinothalamic pathway. 
Brainstem lesions can therefore cause sensory loss affecting all modal-
ities on the contralateral side of the body. Distribution of facial sensory 
loss due to brainstem lesions arises from the anatomy of the trigeminal 
bres within the brainstem. Fibres from the back of the face (near the 
ears) descend within the brainstem to the upper part of the spinal cord 
before synapsing, the second-order neurons crossing the midline and 
then ascending with the spinothalamic bres. Fibres conveying sensation 
from more anterior areas of the face descend a shorter distance in the 
brainstem. Thus, sensory loss in the face from low brainstem lesions is 
in a ‘balaclava helmet’ distribution, as the longer descending trigeminal 
bres are affected. Both dorsal column and spinothalamic tracts end in 
the thalamus, relaying from there to the parietal cortex.
Pain
Pain is a complex perception that is only partly related to activity in 
nociceptor neurons (Fig. 8.2). Higher up, chronic and severe pain inter-
acts extensively with mood and can exacerbate or be exacerbated by 
mood disorder, including depression and anxiety. Modication of psy-
chological and psychiatric sequelae is a vital part of pain management 
(see Ch. 8).
Sphincter control
The sympathetic supply to the bladder arises from roots T11–L2 to 
synapse in the inferior hypogastric plexus, while the parasympathetic 
supply leaves from S2–4. In addition, a somatic supply to the exter-
nal (voluntary) sphincter arises from S2–4, travelling via the pudendal 
nerves.
Storage of urine is maintained by inhibiting parasympathetic activity 
and thus relaxing the detrusor muscle of the bladder wall. Continence 
is also helped by simultaneous sympathetic- and somatic-mediated 
tonic contraction of the urethral sphincters. Voiding in adults is usu-
ally carried out under conscious control, which triggers relaxation of 
tonic inhibition on the pontine micturition centre from higher centres, 
leading to relaxation of the pelvic oor muscles and external and inter-
nal urethral sphincters, along with parasympathetic-mediated detrusor 
contraction.
Personality and mood
The physiology and pathology of mood disorders are discussed else-
where (Ch. 31) but it is important to remember that any process affecting 
brain function may inuence mood and affect. Conversely, mood disor-
der may have a signicant effect on perception and function. It can be 
difcult to disentangle whether psychological and psychiatric changes 
are the cause or the effect of any neurological symptoms.
Sleep
The function of sleep is unknown but it is required for health. Sleep is 
controlled by the reticular activating system in the upper brainstem and 
diencephalon. It is composed of different stages that can be visualised 
on electroencephalography (EEG). As drowsiness occurs, normal EEG 
background alpha rhythm disappears and activity becomes dominated 
by deepening slow-wave activity. As sleep deepens and dreaming 
begins, the limbs become accid, movements are ‘blocked’ and EEG 
signs of rapid eye movements (REM) are superimposed on the slow 
wave. REM sleep persists for a short spell before another slow-wave 
spell starts, the cycle repeating several times throughout the night. 
REM phases lengthen as sleep progresses. REM sleep seems to be 
the most important part of the sleep cycle for refreshing cognitive pro-
cesses, and REM sleep deprivation causes tiredness, irritability and 
impaired judgement.
Localising lesions in the central nervous system
After taking a history and examining the patient, the clinician should have 
an idea of the nature and site of any pathology (see Box 28.10). Given the 
intricate anatomy of the brainstem, this section will dwell on the possible 
localisation in more detail (see Fig. 28.5).
Brainstem lesions typically present with symptoms due to cranial 
nerve, cerebellar and upper motor neuron dysfunction and are most 
commonly caused by vascular disease. Since the anatomy of the brain-
stem is very precisely organised, it is usually possible to localise the site 
of a lesion on the basis of careful history and examination in order to 
determine exactly which tracts/nuclei are affected, usually invoking the 
fewest number of lesions.
For example, in a patient presenting with sudden onset of upper motor 
neuron features affecting the right face, arm and leg in association with 
a left 3rd nerve palsy, the lesion will be in the left cerebral peduncle in 
the brainstem and the pathology is likely to have been a discrete stroke, 
as the onset was sudden. Examples of brainstem lesions are listed in 
Box28.3. The effects of individual cranial nerve decits are discussed 
elsewhere in this chapter in the sections on eye movements, and on 
facial weakness, sensory loss in brainstem lesions, dysphonia and dys-
arthria, and bulbar symptoms.
Investigation of neurological disease
Experienced clinicians make most neurological diagnoses on history 
alone, with a lesser contribution from examination and investigation. 
As investigations become more complex and more easily available, it 
is tempting to adopt a ‘scan rst, think later’ approach to neurological 
symptoms. The frequency of ‘false-positive’ results, the wide range 
of normality and the negative implications for patients (unnecessary 
expense, inconvenience, discomfort and worry) necessitate a more 
thoughtful approach. Investigation may include assessment of structure 
28.3 Major focal brainstem lesions
Site of lesions
Clinical features
Midbrain
Ipsilateral 3rd palsy
Contralateral upper motor neuron 7th palsy
Contralateral hemiplegia
Dorsal mid-brain (tectum)
Vertical gaze palsy
Convergence disorders
Convergence retraction nystagmus
Pupillary and lid disorders
Pons
Ipsilateral 6th palsy
Ipsilateral lower motor neuron 7th palsy
Contralateral hemiplegia
Medulla (Lateral medullary 
syndrome)
Ipsilateral 5th, 9th, 10th, 11th palsy
Ipsilateral Horner syndrome
Ipsilateral cerebellar signs
Contralateral spinothalamic sensory loss
Vestibular disturbance

[[p1192]]
1130    NEUROLOGY
(imaging) and function (neurophysiology). Neurophysiological testing has 
become so complex that in some countries it constitutes a separate 
specialty focusing on electroencephalography, evoked potentials, nerve 
conduction studies and electromyography.
Neuroimaging
Neurological imaging has traditionally allowed only assessment 
of structure but advances are allowing much more sophistication. 
Imaging modalities can use X-rays (plain X-rays, computed tomogra-
phy (CT), CT angiography, myelography and angiography), magnetic 
resonance (MR imaging (MRI), MR angiography (MRA)), ultrasound 
(Doppler imaging of blood vessels) and nuclear medicine techniques 
(single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and posi-
tron emission tomography (PET)). The uses and limitations of each of 
these are shown in Box 28.4. Different sequences for analysing MRI 
signals can provide helpful information for characterising tissues and 
pathologies (Box 28.5).
28.4 Imaging techniques for the nervous system
Technique
Applications
Advantages
Disadvantages
Comments
X-ray/CT
Plain X-rays, CT, CTA
Widely available
Ionising radiation
X-rays: used for fractures or 
foreign bodies
Radiculography
Relatively cheap
Contrast reactions
CT: rst line for stroke
Myelography
Relatively quick
Invasive (myelography and 
angiography)
Intra-arterial angiography: gold 
standard for vascular lesions
Intra-arterial angiography
MRI
Structural imaging
High-quality soft tissue images, 
useful for posterior fossa and 
temporal lobes
Expensive
Functional MR and spectroscopy: 
mainly research tools
MRA
Less widely available
Functional MRI
MR spectroscopy
No ionising radiation
MRA images blood ow, not  
vessel anatomy
Non-invasive
Claustrophobic
Pacemakers are a contraindication
Contrast (gadolinium) reactions
Ultrasound
Doppler
Cheap
Operator-dependent
Screening tool to assess need for 
carotid endarterectomy
Duplex scans
Quick
Poor anatomical denition
Non-invasive
Radioisotope
Isotope brain scan
In vivo imaging of functional 
anatomy (ligand binding, blood 
ow)
Poor spatial resolution
Isotope scans: obsolete
SPECT
Ionising radiation
SPECT: useful in movement 
disorders, epilepsy and 
dementias
PET
Expensive
Not widely available
PET: mainly research tool
(CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomographic angiography; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomography; 
SPECT = single photon emission computed tomography)
28.5 Different magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequences
T1
T2
T2-FLAIR
‘Anatomically correct’
‘Reverse T1’
T2 with CSF signal dampened
Grey matter  
(cortex)
Grey
White
White
White matter
White
Grey
Grey
Cerebrospinal  
uid (CSF)
Black
White
Black
Insets courtesy of Dr Ravi Jampana, Consultant Neuroradiologist, Department of Neuroradiology, Institute of Neuroscience, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow.
A
B
C

[[p1193]]
Investigation of neurological disease    1131
28
Advanced MR techniques, such as functional MRI (fMRI), MR spec-
troscopy or diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), can be used to assess brain 
metabolism and chemical compositions. This may be dynamic and 
can provide ‘maps’ of cortical function to help plan lesionectomy and 
epilepsy surgery. Similarly, MR spectroscopy can outline the chemical 
composition of specic regions, providing notions of whether lesions are 
ischaemic, neoplastic or inammatory.
Some degenerative neurological conditions cause functional rather 
than structural abnormalities that make metabolic and neurochem-
ical assessment increasingly useful. PET scanning can display glu-
cose metabolism in dementia and epilepsy. SPECT scanning uses the 
lipid-soluble properties of radioactive tracers to mark cerebral blood ow 
at the time of injection to help in investigating seizures. Dopaminergic 
pathway tracers can assess the integrity of the nigrostriatal pathway in 
patients with possible parkinsonism.
Head and orbit
Plain skull X-rays now have a very limited role in neurological disease. 
CT or MRI is needed for intracranial imaging. CT is good for demon-
strating bone and calcication well. It will also detect abnormalities of 
the brain and ventricles, such as atrophy, tumours, cysts, abscesses, 
vascular lesions and hydrocephalus. Diagnostic yield may be improved 
by the use of intravenous contrast and thinner slicing but CT is not 
optimal for lesions of meninges, cranial nerves or subtle parenchymal 
changes.
MRI resolution is unaffected by bone and so is more useful in 
posterior fossa disease. Its sensitivity for cortical and white matter 
changes makes it the modality of choice in inflammatory conditions 
such as multiple sclerosis and in the investigation of epilepsy. 
Different MRI techniques can selectively suppress signal from fluid 
or fat, for example, and so increase sensitivity for more subtle 
pathologies.
Examples of brain imaged by the various techniques are shown in 
Figure 28.12
Cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine
X-rays are useful for imaging bony structures and can show destruc-
tion or damage to vertebrae, for example, but will provide no information 
about non-bony tissues, such as intervertebral discs, spinal cord and 
nerve roots. They have some usefulness in dynamic imaging, e.g. exion/
extension of the spine, in the assessment of instability. MRI has trans-
formed spinal investigation, as it can give information not only about ver-
tebrae and intervertebral discs but also about their effects on the spinal 
cord and nerve roots. Myelography (usually with CT) is a rarely used inva-
sive technique requiring injection of contrast into the lumbar theca. While 
outlining the nerve roots and spinal cord provides some detail about 
abnormal structure, the accuracy and availability of MRI have reduced 
the need for it. Myelography may still be used where MRI is unavailable, 
contraindicated, or precluded by a patient's claustrophobia. Examples 
of the cervical spine imaged by plain X-rays, myelography and MRI are 
shown in Figure 28.13
Blood vessels
Imaging of the extra- and intracranial blood vessels and disturbance of 
arterial or venous blood ow is described on page 1214.
C
A
B
D
Fig. 28.12 Different techniques of imaging the head and brain. 
A–C) Courtesy of Dr D. Collie. (D) Courtesy of Dr 
Ravi Jampana, Consultant Neuroradiologist, Department of Neuroradiology, Institute of Neuroscience, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow.

[[p1194]]
1132    NEUROLOGY
Neurophysiological testing
Electroencephalography
The electroencephalogram (EEG) detects electrical activity arising 
in the cerebral cortex via electrodes placed on the scalp to record 
the amplitude and frequency of the resulting waveforms. With closed 
eyes, the normal background activity is 8–13 Hz (known as alpha 
rhythm), most prominent occipitally and suppressed on eye open-
ing. Other frequency bands seen over different parts of the brain in 
different circumstances are beta (faster than 13/sec), theta (4–8/sec) 
and delta (slower than 4/sec). Normal EEG patterns evolve with age 
and alertness; lower frequencies predominate in the very young and 
during sleep.
In recent years digital technology has allowed longer, cleaner EEG 
recordings that can be analysed in a number of ways and recorded 
alongside contemporaneous video of any clinical ‘event’. Meanwhile, 
C6
C7
Fig. 28.13 Different techniques of imaging the cervical spine.
(A–C) Courtesy of Dr D. Collie.
1
1
A
B
2
3
4
5
6
9
10
1
5
4
3
2
10
9
8
7
15 14 13 12
6
1
16
1
Secondary generalised
seizure
Fig. 28.14 Electroencephalograms in epilepsy. 

[[p1195]]
Investigation of neurological disease    1133
28
the development of intracranial recording allows more sensitive mon-
itoring via surgically placed electrodes in and around lesions to help 
increase the efcacy and safety of epilepsy surgery.
Abnormal EEGs result from a number of conditions. Examples include 
an increase in fast frequencies (beta) seen with sedating drugs such 
as benzodiazepines, or marked focal slowing noted over a structural 
lesion such as a tumour or an infarct. Improved quality and accessibility 
of imaging have made EEG redundant in lesion localisation, except in 
the specialist investigation of epilepsy (p. 1155). EEG remains useful 
in progressive and continuous disorders such as reduced conscious-
ness, encephalitis, and certain dementias, such as Creutzfeldt–Jakob 
disease.
Since sleep induces marked changes in cerebral activity, EEG can be 
useful in diagnosis of sleep disturbances. In paroxysmal disorders such 
as epilepsy, EEG is at its most useful when it captures activity during one 
of the events in question. Over 50% of patients with epilepsy have a nor-
mal ‘routine’ EEG but, conversely, the presence of epileptiform features 
does not of itself make a diagnosis. Up to 5% of some normal popula-
tions may demonstrate epileptiform discharges on EEG, preventing its 
use as a screening test for epilepsy, most notably in younger patients 
with a family history of epilepsy. In view of this, the EEG should not be 
used where epilepsy is merely ‘possible’.
Therefore the EEG in epilepsy is predominantly used for classication 
and prognostication, but in some patients can help localise the seat 
of epileptiform discharges when surgery is being considered. During a 
seizure, high-voltage disturbances of background activity (‘discharges’) 
are often noted. These may be generalised, as in the 3 Hz ‘spike and 
wave’ of childhood absence epilepsy, or more focal, as in localisa-
tion-related epilepsies (Fig. 28.14). Techniques such as hyperventilation 
or photic stimulation can be used to increase the yield of epileptiform 
changes, particularly in the generalised epilepsy syndromes. While 
some argue that it is possible to detect ‘spikes’ and ‘sharp waves’ to 
lend support to a clinical diagnosis, these are non-specic and there-
fore not diagnostic, and can lead an unwary clinician to err in ascribing 
other symptoms to epilepsy.
Nerve conduction studies
Electrical stimulation of a nerve causes an impulse to travel both effer-
ently and afferently along the underlying axons. Nerve conduction 
studies (NCS) make use of this, recording action potentials as they pass 
along peripheral nerves and (with motor nerves) as they pass into the 
muscle belly. Digital recording has enhanced sensitivity and reproduci-
bility of these tiny potentials. By measuring the time taken to traverse a 
known distance, it is possible to calculate nerve conduction velocities 
(NCVs). Healthy nerves at room temperature will conduct at a speed 
of 40–50 m/sec. If the recorded potential is smaller than expected, 
this provides evidence of a reduction in the overall number of func-
tioning axons. Signicant slowing of conduction velocity, in contrast, 
suggests impaired conduction due to peripheral nerve demyelination. 
Such changes in NCS may be diffuse (as in a hereditary demyelinat-
ing peripheral neuropathy), focal (as in pressure palsies) or multifocal 
(e.g. Guillain–Barré syndrome, mononeuritis multiplex). The information 
gained can allow the disease responsible for peripheral nerve dysfunc-
tion to be better deduced (see Box 28.86).
Stimulation of motor nerves allows for the recording of compound 
muscle action potentials (CMAPs) over muscles (Fig. 28.15). These are 
around 500 times larger than sensory nerve potentials, typically around 
1–20 millivolts. Since a proportion of stimulated impulses in motor nerves 
will ‘reect’ back from the anterior horn cell body (forming the ‘F’ wave), it 
is also possible to obtain some information about the condition of nerve 
roots.
Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) at 3–15/sec provides consistent 
CMAPs in healthy muscle. In myasthenia gravis (p. 1194), however, 
where there is partial blockage of acetylcholine receptors, there is a 
diagnostic fall (decrement) in CMAP amplitude. In contrast, an increasing 
CMAP with high-frequency RNS is seen in Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (p. 1195).
Electromyography
Electromyography (EMG) is usually performed alongside NCS and 
involves needle recording of muscle electrical potential during rest and 
contraction. At rest, muscle is electrically silent but loss of nerve supply 
causes muscle membrane to become unstable, manifest as brillations, 
positive sharp waves (‘spontaneous activity’) or fasciculations. Motor 
unit action potentials are recorded during muscle contraction. Axonal 
loss or destruction will result in fewer motor units. Resultant sprouting 
of remaining units will lead to increasing size of each individual unit on 
EMG. Myopathy, in contrast, causes muscle bre splitting, which results 
Anterior
horn cells
Antidromic
conduction:
generates F wave
Orthodromic
conduction
F wave
CMAP
Abductor
pollicis
brevis
Median nerve
NCV =
d
L2 – L1
S2
S1
L1
L2
R
Amplitude
d
Fig. 28.15 Motor nerve conduction tests. Electrodes (R) on the 
muscle (abductor pollicis here) record the compound muscle action 
potential (CMAP) after stimulation at the median nerve at the wrist 
(S1) and from the elbow (S2). The velocity from elbow to wrist can be 
determined if the distance between the two stimulating electrodes 
(d) is known. A prolonged L1 (L = latency) would be caused by 
dysfunction distally in the median nerve (e.g. in carpal tunnel 
syndrome). A prolonged L2 is caused by slow nerve conduction (as in 
demyelinating neuropathy). The F wave is a small delayed response 
that appears when the electrical signal travels backwards to the 
anterior horn cell, sparking a second action potential in a minority of 
bres (see text). (NCV = nerve conduction velocity)

[[p1196]]
1134    NEUROLOGY
in a large number of smaller units on EMG. Other abnormal activity, such 
as myotonic discharges, may signify abnormal ion channel conduction, 
as in myotonic dystrophy or myotonia congenita.
Specialised single-bre electromyography (SFEMG) can be used to 
investigate neuromuscular junction transmission. Measuring ‘jitter’ and 
‘blocking’ can identify the effect of antibodies in reducing the action of 
acetylcholine on the receptor.
Evoked potentials
The cortical response to visual, auditory or electrical stimulation can 
be measured on an EEG as an evoked potential (EP). If a stimulus 
is provided – e.g. to the eye – the tiny EEG response can be dis-
cerned when averaging 100–1000 repeated stimuli. Assessing the 
latency (the time delay) and amplitude can give information about the 
integrity of the relevant pathway. MRI now provides more informa-
tion about CNS pathways, thus reducing reliance on EPs. In practice, 
visual evoked potentials (VEPs) are most commonly used to help dif-
ferentiate CNS demyelination from small-vessel white-matter changes 
(Fig. 28.16).
Magnetic stimulation
Central conduction times can also be measured using electromagnetic 
induction of action potentials in the cortex or spinal cord by the local 
application of specialised coils. Again, MRI has made this technique 
largely redundant, other than for research.
Routine blood tests
Many systemic conditions that can affect the nervous system can be 
identied by simple blood tests. Nutritional deciencies, metabolic dis-
turbances, inammatory conditions or infections may all present or be 
associated with neurological symptoms, and basic blood tests (full blood 
count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, biochemical 
screening) may provide clues. Specic blood tests will be highlighted 
in the relevant subsections of this chapter. Human immunodeciency 
virus (HIV) infection is an important cause of neurological disease and the 
 clinician should have a low threshold for checking this.
Immunological tests
Recent developments have seen a host of new immune-mediated 
conditions emerge in clinical neurology, with antibody targets rang-
ing from muscle and neuromuscular junction disturbance (causing 
weakness and muscle pain) to specic neuroglial cell surface mole-
cules such as ion channels (causing cognitive decline, epilepsy and 
psychiatric changes). Examples of autoantibodies that aid diagno-
sis and may play a disease-causing role include AChR antibodies 
(myasthenia gravis), Aquaporin 4 and MOG antibodies (neuromyelitis 
optica), NMDAR, Lgi1 and CASPR2 antibodies (autoimmune enceph-
alitis). Many of these antibodies to neural/glial cell surface antigens 
are specically associated with individual neurological syndromes. 
Many other antibodies against intracellular antigens have also been 
described, in particular in association with paraneoplastic syndromes, 
although it is less clear if these antibodies play a causal role in medi-
ating disease.
Genetic testing
Relevant subsections will detail the increasing numbers of inherited neu-
rological conditions that can now be diagnosed by DNA analysis (p.52). 
These include diseases caused by increased numbers of trinucleotide 
repeats, such as Huntington’s disease myotonic dystrophy; and some 
types of spinocerebellar ataxia. Mitochondrial DNA can also be sequenced 
to diagnose relevant disorders. Next-generation sequencing technologies 
including exome sequencing and whole genome sequencing are increas-
ingly employed to identify undiagnosed genetic disease, but expertise is 
required in their interpretation (see Ch. 3).
Lumbar puncture
Lumbar puncture (LP) is the technique used to obtain both a CSF sam-
ple and an indirect measure of intracranial pressure. After local anaes-
thetic injection, a needle is inserted between lumbar spinous processes 
(usually between L3 and L4) through the dura and into the spinal canal. 
Intracranial pressure can be deduced (if patients are lying on their side) 
and CSF removed for analysis. CSF pressure measurement is important 
in the diagnosis and monitoring of idiopathic intracranial hypertension. In 
this condition, the LP itself is therapeutic.
CSF is normally clear and colourless, and the tests that are usually 
 performed include a naked eye examination of the CSF and centrifuga-
tion to determine the colour of the supernatant (yellow, or xanthochromic, 
some hours after subarachnoid haemorrhage; p. 1214). Measurement of 
absorption of specic light wavelengths helps quantify the amount of 
haem metabolites in CSF. Routine analysis involves a cell count, as well 
as glucose and protein concentrations.
CSF assessment is important in investigating infections (meningitis 
or encephalitis), subarachnoid haemorrhage and inammatory condi-
tions. Normal values and abnormalities found in specic conditions are 
shown in Box 28.6. More sophisticated analysis allows measurement 
of antibody formation solely within the CNS (oligoclonal bands), genetic 
analysis (e.g. polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex or 
tuberculosis), immunological tests (NMDAR, paraneoplastic antibodies), 
immunophenotyping by uorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and 
cytology (to detect malignant cells).
If there is a cranial space-occupying lesion causing raised intrac-
ranial pressure, LP presents a theoretical risk of downward shift of 
intracerebral contents, a potentially fatal process known as coning. 
Consequently, LP is contraindicated if there is any clinical suggestion 
of raised intracranial pressure (papilloedema), depressed level of con-
sciousness, or focal neurological signs suggesting a cerebral lesion, 
5 µV
5 µV
5 µ
µV
5 µ
µV
5 µ
µV
5 µ
µV
100
200
300
100
200
300
L
R
ms
ms
P100
P100
Fig. 28.16 Visual evoked potential (VEP) recording. The abnormality is in the left 
hemisphere, with delay in latency and a reduction in signal of the P100.

[[p1197]]
Investigation of neurological disease    1135
28
28.6 How to interpret cerebrospinal uid results
Normal
Subarachnoid 
haemorrhage
Multiple sclerosis
Carcinomatous/
lymphomatous meningitis
AIDP1
Pressure
50–250 mmH2O
Increased
Normal
Normal /increased
Normal
Colour
Clear
Blood-stained
Xanthochromic
Clear
Clear/xanthochromic
Clear
Red cell count (× 106/L)
0–4
Raised
Normal
Normal/elevated
Normal
White cell count 
(× 106/L)
0–4
Normal/slightly raised
0–50 lymphocytes
0-400 lymphocyte
0-50 (< 5 in 85%)
Glucose
> 50%–60% of blood 
level
Normal
Normal
Normal/decreased
Normal
Protein
< 0.45g/L
Increased
Normal/increased
Normal/increased
Increased2
Microbiology
Sterile
Sterile
Sterile
Sterile/cytology may be 
helpful
Sterile
Oligoclonal bands
Negative
Negative
Often positive
Uncertain
Matched bands 
(serum and CSF)
Acute bacterial 
meningitis
Partially treated 
bacterial meningitis2
Viral meningitis2
Cryptococcal meningitis 
in HIV1
Tuberculous 
meningitis
Pressure
Normal/increased
Normal/increased
Normal
Elevated often very high
Normal/increased
Colour
Cloudy
Clear /cloudy
Clear
Clear /cloudy
Clear/cloudy
Red cell count (× 106/L)
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
White cell count 
(× 106/L)
1000–5000 polymorphs
Normal to raised; mixed 
cells
10–2000 lymphocytes
20-200 mainly 
lymphocytes
50–5000 
lymphocytes
Glucose
Decreased
Normal/decreased
Normal
Normal/decreased
Decreased
Protein
Increased
Normal/increased
Normal/increased
Normal/increased
Increased
Microbiology
Organisms on Gram stain 
and/or culture
Greater chance of no 
growth
Sterile/virus detected
India ink positive (around 
50%); cryptococcal 
antigen/culture
Ziehl–Neelsen/
auramine stain or 
tuberculosis culture 
positive
Oligoclonal bands
Can be positive
Can be positive
Can be positive
Uncertain
Can be positive
(AIDP=acute inammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; HIV=human immunodeciency virus)
1See Chapter 14 for more detail on ndings in HIV infection. 2Cerebrospinal uid ndings in bacterial and viral meningitis are variable, and this table shows only the most common patterns.
until imaging (by CT or MRI) has excluded a space-occupying lesion or 
hydrocephalus. When there is a risk of local haemorrhage (thrombocy-
topenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation or anticoagulant treat-
ment), then caution should be exercised or specic measures should 
be taken. LP can be safely performed in patients on low-dose aspirin 
or low-dose heparin. UK guidelines advise considering pausing other 
antiplatelet agents for a period before elective LP (e.g. 7 days for clopi-
dogrel). LP may be unsafe in patients who are fully anticoagulated due 
to the increased risk of epidural haematoma and haematology advice 
should be sought.
About 30% of LPs are followed by a postural headache, due to 
reduced CSF pressure. The frequency of headache can be reduced by 
using smaller or atraumatic needles. Rarer complications involve tran-
sient radicular pain, and pain over the lumbar region during the proce-
dure. Aseptic technique renders secondary infections such as meningitis 
extremely rare.
Biopsy
Biopsies of nervous tissue (peripheral nerve, muscle, meninges or brain) 
are occasionally required for diagnosis.
Nerve biopsy can help in the investigation of peripheral neuropathy. 
Usually, a distal sensory nerve (sural or radial) is targeted. Histological 
examination can help identify underlying causes, such as vasculitides or 
inltrative disorders like amyloid. Nerve biopsy should not be undertaken 
lightly since there is an appreciable morbidity; it should be reserved for 
cases where the diagnosis is in doubt after routine investigations and 
where it will inuence management.
Muscle biopsy is performed more frequently and is indicated for the 
differentiation of myositis and myopathies. These conditions can usually 
be distinguished by histological examination, and enzyme histochem-
istry can be useful when mitochondrial diseases and storage diseases 
are suspected. The quadriceps muscle is most commonly biopsied 
but other muscles may also be sampled if they are involved clinically. 
Although pain and infection can follow the procedure, these are less of 
a problem than after nerve biopsy. Imaging and clinical examination may 
help guide and determine biopsy site.
Brain biopsy is required when imaging fails to clarify the nature of 
intra cerebral lesions, e.g. in unexplained degenerative diseases such 
as unusual cases of dementia and in patients with brain tumours. Some 
biopsies are performed stereotactically through a burr hole in the skull. 
Nevertheless, haemorrhage, infection and death still occur and brain 
biopsy should be considered only if a diagnosis is otherwise elusive. 
Discussion between neurologist, neuroradiologist, neurosurgeon and 
neuropathologist is important to ensure maximal diagnostic yield of 
these samples.

[[p1198]]
1136    NEUROLOGY
Biopsy of other organs can be useful in the diagnosis of systemic 
disorders presenting as neurological problems, such as tonsillar biopsy 
(prion diseases), or rectal or fat biopsy (for assessment of amyloid).
Presenting problems in neurological disease
While history is important in all medical specialties, it is especially key 
in neurology, where many neurological diagnoses have no conrmatory 
test. History-taking allows doctor and patient to get to know one another; 
many neurological diseases follow chronic paths and this may be the rst 
of many such consultations. It also allows the clinician to obtain informa-
tion about the patient's affect, cognition and psychiatric state.
History-taking is a highly active process. While there are generic 
templates (Box 28.7), each individual story will follow its own course, 
and diagnostic considerations during the history will guide further 
questioning.
It is important to be clear about what patients mean by certain words. 
They may nd it difcult to describe symptoms: for instance, weakness 
may be called ‘numbness’, while there are many possible interpretations 
of ‘dizziness’. These must be claried; even in emergency situations, a 
clear, accurate history is the foundation of any management plan. While 
the story should come primarily from the patient, input from eye-wit-
nesses and family members is crucial if the patient is unable to provide 
details or if there has been loss of consciousness. This need for cor-
roboration and clarication means the telephone is as important as any 
investigation.
The aim of the history is to address two key issues: (1) where is the 
lesion; and (2) what is the lesion? (Box 28.8). These should remain 
uppermost in the doctor's mind while the history is being elicited, espe-
cially in older people (Box 28.9). Some common combinations of symp-
toms may suggest particular locations for a lesion (Box 28.10). Enquiry 
about handedness is important; lateralisation of the dominant hand helps 
designate the dominant hemisphere, which in turn may help to localise 
any pathologies, or to plan rehabilitation or treatment strategies in asym-
metrical disorders such as stroke or Parkinson’s disease.
Epidemiology must be borne in mind. How likely is it that this par-
ticular patient has any specic condition under consideration? For 
example, a 20-year-old with right-sided headache and tenderness will 
not have temporal arteritis, but this is an important possibility if such 
symptoms present in a 78-year-old female. Global epidemiology is 
important and endemic infectious agents and travel history should 
always be considered.
Determining the evolution, speed of onset and progression of a dis-
ease is important (Box 28.11). For example, if right-hand weakness 
occurred overnight, it would suggest a stroke in an older person or 
an acute entrapment neuropathy in a younger one. Evolution over 
several days, however, might make demyelination (multiple sclerosis) 
a possible diagnosis, or perhaps a subdural haematoma if the weak-
ness was preceded by a head injury in an older person taking warfarin. 
Progression over weeks might bring an intracranial mass lesion or motor 
neuron disease into the differential. Slow progression over a year or 
so, with difculty in using the hand, could suggest a degenerative pro-
cess such as Parkinson’s disease. The impact on day-to-day activities, 
such as walking, climbing stairs and carrying out ne hand movements, 
should also be established in order to gauge the level of associated 
disability.
Estimates of the frequency and duration of specic events are essen-
tial when taking details of a paroxysmal disorder such as migraine and 
epilepsy. Vague terms such as ‘a lot’ or ‘sometimes’ are unhelpful, and it 
can assist the patient if choices are given to estimate numbers, such as 
once a day, week or month.
Many neurological symptoms are not explained by typical neurolog-
ical disease. Describing these as ‘functional’ is less pejorative, more 
acceptable to patients and more in keeping with modern understanding 
of these symptoms than ‘psychogenic’ or ‘hysterical’. Functional symp-
toms require considerable experience in diagnosis and are frequently 
missed.
28.7  How to take a neurological history
Introduction
 Age and sex
 Handedness
Presenting complaint
 Symptoms (clarify: see text)
 Overall pattern: intermittent or persistent?
 If intermittent, how often do symptoms occur and how long do they last?
 Speed of onset: seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years,  
decades?
 Better, worse or the same over time?
 Associated symptoms (including non-neurological)
 Disability caused by symptoms
 Change in walking
 Difculty with ne hand movements, e.g. writing, fastening buttons, using 
cutlery
 Effect on work, family life and leisure
Background
 Previous neurological symptoms and whether similar to current symptoms
 Previous medical history
 Domestic situation
 Driving licence status
 Medications (current and at time of symptom onset)
 Alcohol/smoking habits
 Recreational drug and other toxin exposure
 Family history and developmental history
 What are patient's thoughts/fears/concerns?
28.8 The key diagnostic questions
Where is the lesion?
 Is it neurological?
 If so, to which part of the nervous system does it localise?
Central versus peripheral
What is the lesion?
 Hereditary or congenital
 Acquired:
Traumatic
Infective
Neoplastic
Degenerative
Inammatory or immune-mediated
Vascular
Functional
28.9 Neurological examination in old age
 Pupils: tend to be smaller, making fundoscopy more difcult.
 Limb tone: more difcult to assess because of poor relaxation and concomitant 
joint disease.
 Ankle reexes: may be absent.
 Gait assessment: more difcult because of concurrent musculoskeletal 
disease and pre-existing neurological decits.
 Sensory testing: especially difcult when there is cognitive impairment.
 Vibration sense: may be reduced distally in the legs.

[[p1199]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1137
28
Headache and facial pain
Most headaches are chronic disorders but acute presentation of head-
aches is an important aspect of emergency medical care. Headache 
may be divided into primary (benign) or secondary, and most patients, 
whether presenting in clinic or as emergencies, have primary syndromes 
(see Box 9.13). The emergency clinical assessment of headaches is dealt 
with on page 186.
Ocular pain
Assuming that ocular disease (such as acute glaucoma) has been 
excluded, ocular pain may be due to trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias 
(TACs) or, rarely, inammatory or inltrative lesions at the apex of the orbit 
or the cavernous sinus, when 3rd, 4th, 5th or 6th cranial nerve involve-
ment is usually evident. Ocular pain and headache are also discussed 
on page 1223.
Facial pain
Pain in the face can be due to dental or temporomandibular joint prob-
lems. Acute sinusitis is usually apparent from other features of sinus con-
gestion/infection and may cause localised pain over the affected sinus, 
but is almost never the explanation for persistent facial pain or headache.
Facial pain is not uncommon in migraine but some syndromes can 
present solely with facial pain. The most common neurological causes 
of facial pain are trigeminal neuralgia, herpes zoster (shingles) and post-
herpetic neuralgia, all characterised by their extreme severity. In trigem-
inal neuralgia, the patient describes bouts of brief (seconds), lanci-
nating pain (‘electric shocks’), most frequently felt in the second and 
third divisions of the nerve and often triggered by talking or chewing. 
Facial shingles most commonly affects the rst (ophthalmic) division of 
the trigeminal nerve, and pain usually precedes the rash. Post-herpetic 
neuralgia may follow, typically a continuous burning pain throughout the 
affected territory, with marked sensitivity to light touch (allodynia) and 
resistance to treatment. Destructive lesions of the trigeminal nerve usu-
ally cause numbness rather than pain.
Dizziness, blackouts and ‘funny turns’
Acute onset of dizziness or blackouts will present to the acute medical 
department. In neurological practice, it is common to deal with patients 
presenting with a history of multiple events. While detailed questioning 
will be dealt with in the relevant section (see p. 185), the neurologist will 
have to tease out the pattern of each of the different attack types expe-
rienced by the patient to be able to form a treatment and investigation 
plan, one of the challenges of clinical neurology.
Status epilepticus
Status epilepticus is seizure activity not resolving spontaneously, or recur-
rent seizure with no recovery of consciousness in between. Persisting 
seizure activity has a recognised mortality and is a medical emergency.
Diagnosis is usually clinical and can be made on the basis of the 
description of prolonged rigidity and/or clonic movements with loss of 
awareness. As seizure activity becomes prolonged, movements may 
28.10 How to ‘localise’ neurological disease
Combination of symptoms/signs
Probable site
Possible pathology
Other important information
Painless loss of hemilateral function
Cerebral cortex
Usually vascular, inammatory or 
neoplastic
Associated systemic symptoms
Tempo of evolution
Pyramidal weakness of all four limbs or 
both legs, bladder signs, sensory loss
Spinal cord
Usually vascular, inammatory, 
infective, or neoplastic
Associated systemic symptoms
Tempo of evolution
Travel history
Endemic infections
Cranial nerve lesions, with limb  
pyramidal signs or sensory loss ±
sphincter disturbance
Brainstem
Usually vascular or inammatory
Associated systemic symptoms
Mid-brain
Pons
Rarely neoplastic or infective
Tempo of evolution
Medulla
Travel history
Endemic infections
Visual loss + pyramidal signs  
and/or cerebellar signs
Widespread cerebral lesions
Usually inammatory
Tempo of evolution
Weakness and/or sensory loss in a 
combination of individual peripheral nerves
Several peripheral nerves 
(‘mononeuritis multiplex’)
Usually inammatory or diabetic, 
rarely infective, such as human 
immunodeciency virus
Associated systemic symptoms
Weakness with widespread LMN and UMN 
signs
Upper and lower motor neurons
Motor neuron disease
Associated localised cervical 
symptoms
Cervical myeloradiculopathy
Distal loss of sensation and/or weakness
Generalised peripheral nerves
See causes of neuropathy (p. 1191)
Associated systemic symptoms
(LMN/UMN = lower/upper motor neuron)
28.11 The evolution of symptoms
Onset
Evolution
Possible causes
Sudden (minutes  
to hours)
Stable/improvement
Vascular (stroke/
transient 
ischaemic attack 
(TIA))
Nerve entrapment 
syndromes
Functional
Gradual
Progressive over days
Inammation
Infection
Gradual
Progressive over weeks to 
months
Neoplastic/
paraneoplastic
Gradual
Progressive over months to 
years
Genetic
Degenerative

[[p1200]]
1138    NEUROLOGY
become more subtle. Cyanosis, pyrexia, acidosis and sweating may 
occur, and complications include aspiration, hypotension, cardiac 
arrhythmias and renal or hepatic failure.
In patients with pre-existing epilepsy, the most likely cause is a fall 
in antiepileptic drug levels. In de novo status epilepticus, it is essential 
to exclude precipitants such as infection (meningitis, encephalitis), neo-
plasia and metabolic derangement (hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia or 
hypocalcaemia). Treatment and investigation are outlined in Box 28.12
Coma
Coma and loss of consciousness usually present to the acute medical 
admissions department (p. 197). Clarication of cause and prognosis 
may require specialist neurological input.
Delirium
Delirium describes cortical dysfunction and replaces the older term 
‘acute confusional state’. It has a range of primary causes, and given its 
role in precipitating acute admission, it is covered in detail on page 213.
Amnesia
Memory disturbance is a common symptom. In the absence of signi-
cant functional impairment (e.g. inability to work, dyspraxias, loss of daily 
function), many patients will prove to have benign memory dysfunction 
related to age, mood or psychiatric disorders. Investigation and treat-
ment of the dementias are discussed elsewhere (p. 1246).
Temporary loss of memory may be due to a transient delirium related 
to infection, the post-ictal period after seizure, or transient global amne-
sia. These are usually distinguished on the basis of the history. Transient 
amnesia resulting directly from a seizure (transient epileptic amnesia) is a 
rare result of temporal lobe epilepsy.
Transient global amnesia
Transient global amnesia (TGA) predominantly affects middle-aged peo-
ple, with an abrupt, discrete loss of anterograde memory function lasting 
up to a few hours. During the episode, patients are unable to record new 
memories, resulting in repetitive questioning, the hallmark of this condi-
tion. Consciousness is preserved and patients may perform even com-
plex motor acts normally. During the attack there is retrograde amnesia 
for the events of the past few days, weeks or years. After 4–6 hours, 
memory function and behaviour return to normal but the patient has 
persistent, complete amnesia for the duration of the attack itself. There 
are no seizure markers and, unlike epileptic amnesia, transient global 
amnesia recurs in only around 10%–20% of cases. A vascular aetiology 
is unlikely (TGA is not a risk factor for subsequent vascular disease) and 
amnesia may be due to a benign process similar to migraine, occurring in 
the hippocampus. TGA causes no physical signs and, provided there is 
a typical history (which requires a witness), no investigation is necessary 
and patients may be reassured.
Persistent amnesia
Serious neurological disease must be excluded in patients with per-
sistent memory disturbance, although many will prove to have benign 
symptoms. Symptoms corroborated by relatives or colleagues are likely 
to be more signicant than those noted by the patient only. Where poor 
concentration is at the heart of cognitive deterioration, it is more likely to 
be due to an underlying mood disorder.
It is important to assess the timing of onset and to establish which 
aspects of memory are affected. Complaints of getting lost or of los-
ing complex abilities are more pathological than word-nding difculties. 
Disturbance of episodic or working memory (previously called ‘short-term 
memory’) must be distinguished from semantic memory (memory for 
concept-based knowledge unrelated to specic experiences). Episodic 
memory is selectively impaired in Korsakoff syndrome (often second-
ary to alcohol) or bilateral temporal lobe damage. It can also be seen in 
conjunction with other types of dementia. Progressive deterioration over 
months suggests an underlying dementia, and a full medical assessment 
must be performed to detect any underlying medical problem.
It is important to identify and treat depression in patients with memory 
loss. Depression may present as a ‘pseudo-dementia’, with concen-
tration and memory impairment as dominant features, and this is often 
reversible with antidepressant medication. Any patient with demen-
tia (particularly of Alzheimer type) may develop depression in the early 
stages of their illness, however. Specic causes of progressive dementia, 
with their investigation and treatment, are described elsewhere (p. 1246).
Weakness
The assessment of weakness requires the application of basic anatomy, 
physiology and some pathology to the interpretation of the history and 
clinical ndings. Points to consider are shown on Figure 28.17 and in 
Boxes 28.13 and 28.14. The pattern and evolution of weakness and the 
clinical signs provide clues to the site and nature of the lesion.
28.12 Management of status epilepticus
Initial
 Ensure airway is patent; give oxygen to prevent cerebral hypoxia
 Check pulse, blood pressure, BM Stix and respiratory rate
 Secure intravenous access and initiate ECG monitoring
 Send blood for:
Glucose, urea and electrolytes, calcium and magnesium, liver function, 
antiepileptic drug levels
Full blood count and coagulation screen
Storing a sample for future analysis (e.g. drug misuse)
 If seizures continue for > 5 mins: give midazolam 10mg bucally or nasally 
or lorazepam 4mg IV if access available or diazepam 10mg rectally or IV if 
necessary; repeat once only after 15mins
 Correct any metabolic trigger, e.g. hypoglycaemia, thiamine deciency (give 
thiamine before glucose if suspected)
Ongoing
If seizures continue after 30mins
 IV infusion with one of:
Levetiracetam: 60mg/kg (max dose 4500mg) over 10 minutes
Phenytoin: 15mg/kg at 50mg/min (with cardiac monitoring, risk of 
hypotension and bradycardia)
Sodium valproate: 20–30mg/kg IV at 40mg/min
Phenobarbital: 10mg/kg at 100mg/min
 Cardiac monitor and pulse oximetry:
Monitor neurological condition, blood pressure, respiration; check blood 
gases
 If severe renal dysfunction with eGFR less than 30 mL/min/1.73m2 avoid 
levetiracetam; sodium valproate is then drug of rst choice
If seizures still continue after 30–60mins
 Transfer to intensive care:
Start treatment for refractory status with intubation, ventilation and general 
anaesthesia using propofol or thiopental
EEG monitor
Once status controlled
 Commence longer-term antiepileptic medication with one of:
Levetiracetam 1000–1500 mg IV, oral/nasogastric tube twice daily (adjust for 
renal impairment and start 10–12 hours after loading dose)
Sodium valproate 10mg/kg IV over 3–5mins, then 800–2000mg/day
Phenytoin: give loading dose (if not already used as above) of 15mg/kg, 
infuse at < 50mg/min, then 300mg/day
Carbamazepine 400mg by nasogastric tube, then 400–1200mg/day
 Investigate cause
(ECG = electrocardiogram; EEG = electroencephalogram; eGFR = estimated glomerular 
ltration rate; IV = intravenous)

[[p1201]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1139
28
It is important to establish whether the patient has loss of power rather 
than reduced sensation or generalised fatigue. Pain may restrict move-
ment and thus mimic weakness. Paradoxically, sensory neglect may 
leave patients unaware of severe weakness.
Patients with parkinsonism may complain of weakness; extrapyram-
idal signs of rigidity (cogwheel or lead pipe) and bradykinesia should be 
evident, and a resting tremor (usually asymmetrical) may provide a fur-
ther clue. Simple observation of the patient walking into the consulting 
room may be diagnostic and is as important as formal strength testing. 
Movement restricted by pain should be apparent, and other features 
(contractures, wasting, fasciculations, abnormal movements/postures) 
all provide diagnostic clues.
Weakness is a common symptom arising without an underlying 
degenerative or destructive cause (functional symptom). Functional 
weakness does not conform to typical patterns, and the signs in Box 
28.13 are absent. Clinical examination is often variable (e.g. the patient 
can walk but appears to have no leg movement when assessed on 
the couch), and strength may appear to ‘give way’, with the patient 
able to achieve full power for brief bursts, which does not occur in dis-
ease. Hoover's sign is useful to conrm functional weakness and relies 
on eliciting the normal phenomenon of simultaneous hip extension 
when the contralateral hip exes. In functional weakness, hip extension 
28.14 How to assess weakness
Clinical nding
Likely level of lesion/diagnosis
Pattern and distribution
Isolated muscles
Radiculopathy or mononeuropathy
Both limbs on one side (hemiparesis)
Cerebral hemisphere, less likely cord 
or brainstem
One limb
Neuronopathy, plexopathy, cord/brain
Both lower limbs (paraparesis)
Spinal cord; look for a sensory level
Fatigability
Myasthenia gravis
Bizarre, uctuating, not following 
anatomical rules
Functional
Signs
Upper motor neuron
Brain/spinal cord
Lower motor neuron
Peripheral nervous system
Evolution of the weakness
Sudden and improving
Stroke/mononeuropathy
Evolving over months or years
Meningioma, cervical spondylotic 
myelopathy
Gradually worsening over days or 
weeks
Cerebral mass, demyelination, 
infection
Associated symptoms
Absence of sensory involvement
Motor neuron disease, myopathy, 
myasthenia
28.13 Distinguishing signs in upper versus lower motor neuron 
syndromes
Upper motor neuron 
lesion
Lower motor neuron 
lesion
Inspection
Normal (may be 
wasting in chronic 
lesions)
Wasting, fasciculation
Tone
Increased with clonus
Normal or decreased, 
no clonus
Pattern of weakness
Preferentially affects 
extensors in arms, 
exors in leg
Typically focal, in 
distribution of nerve 
root or peripheral 
nerve, with associated 
sensory changes
Hemiparesis, 
paraparesis or 
tetraparesis
Deep tendon reexes
Increased
Decreased/absent
Plantar response
Extensor (Babinski 
sign)
Flexor
Anterior horn,
motor root,
plexus and
peripheral nerve
Upper
limbs
Contralateral
hemiplegia
Central lesion
Peripheral lesion
Tetraplegia
Paraplegia
Upper
motor
neuron
lesion
Spinal cord
Lower 
motor
neuron
lesion
Lower limbs
Fig. 28.17 Patterns of motor loss according to the anatomical site of the lesion.

[[p1202]]
1140    NEUROLOGY
weakness may be seen; this then returns to full strength when contralat-
eral hip exion is tested. This sign may be demonstrated to the patient 
in a non-confrontational manner, to show that potential limb power 
is intact.
Facial weakness
Facial nerve palsy (Bell's palsy)
One of the most common causes of facial weakness is Bell's palsy, a 
lower motor neuron lesion of the 7th (facial) nerve, affecting all ages and 
both sexes. It is more common following upper respiratory tract infec-
tions, during pregnancy and in patients with diabetes, immunosuppres-
sion and hypertension. It is common in human immunodeciency virus at 
the time of seroconversion.
The lesion is within the facial canal. Symptoms usually develop sub-
acutely over a few hours, with pain around the ear preceding the uni-
lateral facial weakness. Patients often describe the face as ‘numb’ but 
there is no objective sensory loss (except to taste, if the chorda tympani 
is involved). Hyperacusis may occur if the nerve to stapedius is involved 
and impairment of parasympathetic bres may cause diminished saliva-
tion and tear secretion. Examination reveals an ipsilateral lower motor 
neuron facial nerve palsy (no sparing of forehead muscles). Vesicles in 
the ear or on the palate may indicate primary herpes zoster infection. 
A clinical search for signs of other causes of lower motor neuron facial 
nerve weakness, such as parotid or scalp lesions, trauma or skull base 
lesions, is justied.
Glucocorticoids improve recovery rates if started within 72 hours of 
onset but antiviral drugs are not effective. Articial tears applied regularly 
prevent corneal drying, and taping the eye shut overnight helps prevent 
exposure keratitis and corneal abrasion. Patients unable to close the 
eye should be referred urgently to an ophthalmologist. About 80% of 
patients recover spontaneously within 12 weeks. Plastic surgery may be 
considered for the minority left with facial disgurement after 12 months. 
Recurrence is unusual and should prompt further investigation. Aberrant 
re-innervation may occur during recovery, producing unwanted facial 
movements, such as eye closure when the mouth is moved (synkinesis) 
or ‘crocodile tears’ (tearing during salivation).
Unlike Bell's palsy, lesions with an upper motor neuron origin may 
spare the upper face. Cortical lesions may cause a facial weakness either 
in isolation or with associated hemiparesis and speech difculties.
Sensory disturbance
Sensory symptoms are common and frequently benign. Patients often 
nd sensory symptoms difcult to describe and sensory examination 
is difcult for both doctor and patient. While neurological disease can 
cause sensory symptoms, systemic disorders can also be responsible. 
Tingling in both hands and around the mouth can occur as the result of 
hyperventilation or hypocalcaemia. When there is dysfunction of the rele-
vant cerebral cortex, the patient's perception of the wholeness or actual 
presence of the relevant part of the body may be distorted.
Numbness and paraesthesia
The history may give the best clues to localisation and pathology. Certain 
common patterns are recognised: in migraine, the aura may consist 
of spreading tingling or paraesthesia, followed by numbness evolving 
over 20–30 minutes over one half of the body, often splitting the tongue. 
Sensory loss caused by a stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA) 
occurs much more rapidly and is typically negative (numbness) rather 
than positive (tingling). Rarely, unpleasant paraesthesia of sensory epi-
lepsy spreads within seconds. The sensory alteration of inammatory 
spinal cord lesions often ascends from one or both lower limbs to a 
distinct level on the trunk over hours to days, and can give rise to a 
feeling of constriction, sometimes described as ‘being hugged’. Sensory 
change can occur as a manifestation of anxiety or as part of a functional 
neurological disorder. In such cases, the distribution usually neither 
 conforms to a known anatomical pattern nor ts with any typical neur-
ological disease. Care must be taken in diagnosing functional sensory 
problems; a careful history and examination will ensure there is no other 
objective neurological decit.
Sensory neurological examination needs to be undertaken and inter-
preted with care because the ndings depend, by denition, on sub-
jective reports. The reported distribution of sensory loss can be useful, 
however, when combined with the coexisting decits of motor and/or 
cranial nerve function (Fig. 28.18).
Sensory loss in peripheral nerve lesions
Here the symptoms are usually of sensory loss and paraesthesia. Single 
nerve lesions cause disturbance in the sensory distribution of the nerve, 
whereas in diffuse neuropathies the longest neurons are affected rst, 
giving a characteristic ‘glove and stocking’ distribution. If smaller nerve 
bres are preferentially affected (e.g. in diabetic neuropathy), temperature 
and pin-prick (pain) are reduced, whilst vibration sense and propriocep-
tion (modalities served by the larger, well-myelinated, sensory nerves) 
may be relatively spared. In contrast, vibration and proprioception are 
particularly affected if the neuropathy is demyelinating in character, pro-
ducing symptoms of tightness and swelling with impairment of proprio-
ception and vibration sensation.
Sensory loss in nerve root lesions
These typically present with pain as a prominent feature, either within 
the spine or in the limb plexuses. Pain is often felt in the myotome rather 
than the dermatome. The nerve root involved may be deduced from the 
dermatomal pattern of sensory loss, although overlap may lead to this 
being smaller than expected.
Sensory loss in spinal cord lesions
Transverse lesions of the spinal cord produce loss of all sensory modalities 
below that segmental level, although the clinical level may only be manifest 
2–3 segments lower than the anatomical site of the lesion. Very often, 
there is a band of paraesthesia or hyperaesthesia at the top of the area 
of sensory loss. Clinical examination may reveal dissociated sensory loss, 
i.e. different patterns in the spinothalamic and dorsal columnar pathways. 
If the transverse lesion is vascular due to anterior spinal artery thrombosis, 
the spinothalamic pathways may be affected while the posterior one-third 
of the spinal cord (the dorsal column modalities) may be spared.
Lesions damaging one side of the spinal cord will produce loss of spi-
nothalamic modalities (pain and temperature) on the opposite side, and 
of dorsal column modalities (joint position and vibration sense) on the 
same side of the body – the Brown–Séquard syndrome (see Fig. 28.18E).
Lesions in the centre of the spinal cord (such as syringomyelia: see 
Box 28.82 and Fig. 28.49) spare the dorsal columns but involve the 
spinothalamic bres crossing the cord from both sides over the length 
of the lesion. There is no sensory loss in segments above and below the 
lesion; this is described as ‘suspended’ sensory loss. There is some-
times reex loss at the level of the lesion if afferent bres of the reex arc 
are affected.
An isolated lesion of the dorsal columns is not uncommon in multiple 
sclerosis. This produces a characteristic unpleasant, tight feeling over 
the limb(s) involved and, while there is no loss of pin-prick or temperature 
sensation, the associated loss of proprioception may severely limit func-
tion of the affected limb(s).
Sensory loss in brainstem lesions
Lesions in the brainstem can be associated with sensory loss but the 
 distribution depends on the site of the lesion. A lesion limited to the 
trigeminal nucleus or its sensory projections will cause ipsilateral facial 
sensory disturbance. For example, pain resembling trigeminal neural-
gia can be seen in patients with multiple sclerosis. The anatomy of the 
trigeminal connections means that lesions in the medulla or spinal cord 
can give rise to ‘balaclava helmet’ patterns of sensory loss. Sensory 
pathways running up from the spinal cord can also be damaged in the 
brainstem, resulting in simultaneous sensory loss in arm(s) and/or leg(s).

[[p1203]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1141
28
Sensory loss in hemispheric lesions
The temporal, parietal and occipital lobes receive sensory information 
regarding the various modalities of touch, vision, hearing and balance 
(see Box 28.2). The initial points of entry into the cortex are the respective 
primary cortical areas (see Fig. 28.4). Damage to any of these primary 
areas will result in reduction or loss of the ability to perceive that particular 
modality: ‘negative’ symptomatology. Abnormal excitation of these areas 
can result in a false perception (‘positive’ symptoms), the most common 
of which is migrainous visual aura (ashing lights or teichopsia).
Cortical lesions are more likely to cause a mixed motor and sensory 
loss. Substantial lesions of the parietal cortex (as in large strokes) can 
cause severe loss of proprioception and may even abolish conscious 
awareness of the existence of the affected limb(s), known as neglect; 
this can be difcult to distinguish from paralysis. Pathways are so tightly 
packed in the thalamus that even small lacunar strokes can cause iso-
lated contralateral hemisensory loss.
Neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is a positive neurological symptom caused by dysfunc-
tion of the pain perception apparatus, in contrast to nociceptive pain, 
which is secondary to pathological processes such as inammation. 
Neuropathic pain has distinctive features and typically provokes a very 
unpleasant, persistent, burning sensation. There is often increased sensi-
tivity to touch, so that light brushing of the affected area causes exquisite 
pain (allodynia). Painful stimuli are felt as though they arise from a larger 
area than that touched, and spontaneous bursts of pain may also occur. 
Pain may be elicited by other modalities (allodynia) and is considerably 
affected by emotional inuences. The most common causes of neuro-
pathic pain are diabetic neuropathies, trigeminal and post-herpetic neur-
algias, and trauma to a peripheral nerve. Treatment of these syndromes 
can be difcult. Drugs that modulate various parts of the nociceptive 
system, such as gabapentin, carbamazepine or tricyclic antidepressants, 
may help. Localised treatment (topical treatment or nerve blocks) some-
times succeeds but may increase the sensory decit and worsen the 
situation. Electrical stimulation has occasionally proved successful.
Abnormal movements
Disorders of movement lead to either extra, unwanted movement (hyperki-
netic disorders) or too little movement (hypokinetic disorders) (Box28.15). 
In either case, the lesion often localises to the basal ganglia, although some 
tremors are related to cerebellar or brainstem disturbance. Functional 
movement disorders are common and may mimic all of the organic syn-
dromes below. The most important hypokinetic disorder is Parkinson’s 
disease. Parkinsonism is a clinical description of a collection of symptoms, 
including tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity. While the history is always impor-
tant, observation is clearly vital; much of the skill in diagnosing movement 
disorders lies in pattern recognition. Once it is established whether the prob-
lem is hypo- or hyperkinetic, the next task is to categorise the movements 
further, accepting that there is often overlap. Videoing the movements (with 
the patient's consent), so that they can be shown to a movement disorder 
expert, may provide a quick diagnosis in cases of uncertainty.
Tremor
Tremor is caused by alternating agonist/antagonist muscle contractions and 
produces a rhythmical oscillation of the body part affected. In the assess-
ment of tremor, the position, body part affected, frequency and amplitude 
should be considered, as these provide diagnostic clues (Box 28.16).
Other hyperkinetic syndromes
Non-rhythmic involuntary movements include chorea, athetosis, ballism, 
dystonia, myoclonus and tics. They are categorised by clinical appearance, 
and coexistence and overlap are common, such as in choreoathetosis.
C5
C7
L5
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Unilateral cord lesion
(Brown–Séquard)
Central cord lesion
Mid-brainstem lesion
Hemisphere (thalamic)
lesion
Transverse thoracic
spinal cord lesion
Single dorsal column
lesion
Sensory roots
Generalised peripheral
neuropathy
Fig. 28.18 Patterns of sensory loss.

[[p1204]]
1142    NEUROLOGY
Chorea
Chorea (from the Greek word ‘dance’) refers to abrupt, brief, irregular, 
purposeless involuntary movements, appearing dgety and clumsy 
and affecting different areas. They suggest disease in the caudate 
nucleus (as in Huntington’s disease) and are a common complication 
of levodopa treatment for Parkinson’s disease. Other causes are shown 
in Box 28.17
28.15 Movement disorders
Description
Features
Examples
Hypokinetic disorders
Parkinsonism
Akinesia
Idiopathic Parkinson’s 
disease
Rigidity
Other degenerative 
syndromes
Tremor
Drug-induced
Loss of postural reexes
(See Box 28.51)
Other features depending 
on cause
Catatonia
Mutism
Usually psychiatric; if 
neurological, is most 
commonly of vascular origin
Sustained posturing and 
waxy exibility
Hyperkinetic disorders
Tremor
Rhythmical oscillation of 
body part (see Box 28.16)
Essential tremor
Parkinson’s disease
Drug-induced
Chorea
Abrupt, brief, irregular, 
involuntary movements
Huntington’s disease
Drug-induced
Tics
Stereotyped, repetitive 
movements, briey 
suppressible
Tourette syndrome
Myoclonus
Shock-like muscle jerks
Epilepsy 
Hypnic jerks
Focal cortical disease
Dystonia
Sustained muscle 
contraction causing 
abnormal postures ±
tremor
Genetic
Generalised dystonic 
syndromes
Focal dystonias in adults 
(e.g. torticollis)
Others
Various
Paroxysmal hyperkinetic 
dyskinesias
Hemifacial spasm
Tardive syndromes
28.16 Causes and characteristics of tremors
Body part affected
Position
Frequency
Amplitude
Character
Physiological
Both arms > legs
Posture, movement
High
Small (ne)
Enhanced by anxiety, emotion, drugs, 
toxins
Parkinsonism
Unilateral or 
asymmetrical
Rest
Low (3–4Hz)
Moderate
Typically pill-rolling, thumb and index 
nger, other features of parkinsonism
Arm > leg, chin,  
never head
Postural and re-
emergent may occur
Essential tremor
Bilateral arms, head
Movement
High (8–10Hz)
Low to moderate
Family history; 50% respond to 
alcohol
Dystonic
Head, arms, legs
Posture
Variable
Variable
Other features of dystonia, often 
jerky tremors
Functional
Any
Any
Variable
Variable
Distractible
Athetosis
Slower, writhing movements of the limbs are often combined with chorea 
and have similar causes.
Ballism
This more dramatic form of chorea causes often violent inging move-
ments of one limb (monoballism) or one side of the body (hemiballism). 
The lesion localises to the contralateral subthalamic nucleus and the 
most common cause is stroke.
Dystonia
Sustained involuntary muscle contraction causes abnormal postures or 
movement. It may be generalised (usually in childhood-onset genetic 
syndromes) or, more commonly, focal/segmental (such as in torticollis, 
when the head is twisted repeatedly to one side). Some dystonias occur 
only with specic tasks, such as writer's cramp or other occupational 
‘cramps’. Dystonic tremor is associated, is asymmetrical and of large 
amplitude.
28.17 Causes of chorea
Hereditary
 Huntington’s disease (HD) and  
HD-like syndromes
 Wilson’s disease
 Neuroacanthocytosis
 Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian 
atrophy
 Benign hereditary chorea
 Paroxysmal dyskinesias
Cerebral birth injury (including kernicterus)
Cerebral trauma
Drugs
 Levodopa (long-term with 
Parkinson’s disease)
 Antipsychotics
 Antiepileptics
 Oral contraceptive
Metabolic
 Disorders affecting thyroid, 
parathyroid, glucose, sodium, 
calcium and magnesium balance
 Pregnancy
Autoimmune
 Post-streptococcal (Sydenham’s 
chorea)
 Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
 Autoimmune encephalitis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Structural lesions of basal ganglia (usually caudate)
 Vascular
 Demyelination
 Brain tumour
 Infection

[[p1205]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1143
28
Myoclonus
Myoclonus consists of brief, isolated, random jerks of muscle groups. 
This is physiological at the onset of sleep (hypnic jerks). Similarly, a myo-
clonic jerk is a component of the normal startle response, which may be 
exaggerated in some rare (mostly genetic) disorders. Myoclonus may 
occur in disorders of the cerebral cortex, such as some forms of epilepsy. 
Alternatively, myoclonus can arise from subcortical structures or, more 
rarely, from segments of the spinal cord.
Tics
Tics are stereotyped repetitive movements, such as blinking, winking, 
head shaking or shoulder shrugging. Unlike dyskinesias, the patient may 
be able to suppress them, although only for a short time. Isolated tics 
are common in childhood and usually disappear. Tourette syndrome is 
dened by the presence of multiple motor and vocal tics that may evolve 
over time; it is frequently associated with psychiatric disease, including 
obsessive compulsions, depression, self-harm or attention decit disor-
der. Tics may also occur in Huntington’s and Wilson’s diseases, or after 
streptococcal infection.
Abnormal perception
The parietal lobes are involved in the higher processing and integration 
of primary sensory information. This takes place in areas referred to as 
‘association’ cortex, damage to which gives rise to sensory (including 
visual) inattention, disorders of spatial perception and disruption of spa-
tially orientated behaviour, leading to apraxia’s. Apraxia is the inability 
to perform complex, organised activity in the presence of normal basic 
motor, sensory and cerebellar function (after weakness, numbness and 
ataxia have been excluded as causes). Examples of complex motor 
activities include dressing, using cutlery and geographical orientation. 
Other abnormalities that can result from damage to the association cor-
tex involve difculty reading (dyslexia) or writing (dysgraphia), or the ina-
bility to recognise familiar objects (agnosia). The results of damage to 
particular lobes of the brain are given in Box 28.2
Altered balance and vertigo
Balance is a complicated dynamic process that requires ongoing mod-
ication of both axial and limb muscles to compensate for the effects of 
gravity and alterations in body position and load (and hence centre of 
gravity) in order to prevent a person from falling. This requires input from 
a variety of sensory modalities (visual, vestibular and proprioceptive), pro-
cessing by the cerebellum and brainstem, and output via a number of 
descending pathways (e.g. vestibulospinal, rubrospinal and reticulospi-
nal tracts).
Disorders of balance can therefore arise from any part of this pro-
cess. Disordered input (loss of vision, vestibular disorders or lack of joint 
position sense), processing (damage to vestibular nuclei or cerebellum) 
or motor function (spinal cord lesions, leg weakness of any cause) can 
all impair balance. The patient may complain of different symptoms, 
depending on the location of the lesion. For example, loss of joint posi-
tion sense or cerebellar function may result in a sensation of unsteadi-
ness, while damage to the vestibular nuclei or labyrinth may result in an 
illusion of movement, such as vertigo (see below). A careful history is 
vital. Since vision can often compensate for lack of joint position sense, 
patients with peripheral neuropathies or dorsal column loss will often nd 
their problem more noticeable in the dark.
Examination of such patients may yield physical signs that again 
depend on the site of the lesion. Sensory abnormalities may be mani-
fest as altered visual acuities or visual elds, possibly with abnormalities 
on fundoscopy, altered eye movements (including nystagmus, impaired 
vestibular function or lack of joint position sense. Disturbance of cere-
bellar function may be manifest as nystagmus, dysarthria or ataxia, or 
difculty with gait (unsteadiness or inability to perform tandem gait; see 
below). Leg weakness, if present, will be detectable on examination of 
the limbs.
Vertigo
Vertigo is dened as an abnormal perception of movement of the envi-
ronment or self, and occurs because of conicting visual, proprioceptive 
and vestibular information about a person's position in space. Vertigo 
commonly arises from imbalance of vestibular input and is within the 
experience of most people, since this is the ‘dizziness’ that occurs after 
someone has spun round vigorously and then stops. Bilateral labyrin-
thine dysfunction often causes some unsteadiness. Labyrinthine vertigo 
usually lasts days at a time, though it may recur, while vertigo arising 
from central (brainstem) disorders is often persistent and accompanied 
by other brainstem signs. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo lasts a 
few seconds on head movement. A careful history will reveal the likely 
cause in most patients.
Abnormal gait
Many neurological disorders can affect gait. Observing patients as they 
walk into the consulting room can be very informative, although formal 
examination is also important. Neurogenic gait disorders need to be distin-
guished from those due to skeletal abnormalities, usually characterised by 
pain producing an antalgic gait, or limp. Gait alteration incompatible with 
any anatomical or physiological decit may be due to functional disorders.
Pyramidal gait
Upper motor neuron lesions cause characteristic extension of the 
affected leg. The resultant tendency for the toes to strike the ground 
on walking requires the leg to swing outwards at the hip (circumduc-
tion). Nevertheless, a shoe on the affected side worn down at the toes 
may provide evidence of this type of gait. In hemiplegia, the asymmetry 
between affected and normal sides is obvious on walking, but in para-
paresis both lower limbs swing slowly from the hips in extension and are 
dragged stify over the ground – described as ‘walking in mud’.
Foot drop
In normal walking, the heel is the rst part of the foot to hit the ground. 
A lower motor neuron lesion affecting the leg will cause weakness of 
ankle dorsiexion, resulting in a less controlled descent of the foot, which 
makes a slapping noise as it hits the ground. In severe cases, the foot 
will have to be lifted higher at the knee to allow room for the inadequately 
dorsiexed foot to swing through, resulting in a high-stepping gait.
Myopathic gait
During walking, alternating transfer of the body's weight through each 
leg requires adequate hip abduction. In proximal muscle weakness, usu-
ally caused by muscle disease, the hips are not properly xed by these 
muscles and trunk movements are exaggerated, producing a rolling or 
waddling gait.
Ataxic gait
An ataxic gait can result from lesions in the cerebellum, vestibular appa-
ratus or peripheral nerves. Patients with lesions of the central portion 
of the cerebellum (the vermis) walk with a characteristic broad-based 
gait ‘as if drunk’ (cerebellar function is particularly sensitive to alcohol). 
Patients with acute vestibular disturbances walk similarly but the accom-
panying vertigo is characteristic. Inability to walk heel to toe may be the 
only sign of less severe cerebellar dysfunction.
Proprioceptive defects can also cause an ataxic gait. The impair-
ment of joint position sense makes walking unreliable, especially in 
poor light. The feet tend to be placed on the ground with greater 
emphasis, presumably to enhance proprioceptive input, resulting in 
a ‘stamping’ gait.

[[p1206]]
1144    NEUROLOGY
Apraxic gait
In an apraxic gait, power, cerebellar function and proprioception are nor-
mal on examination of the legs. The patient may be able to carry out 
complex motor tasks (e.g. bicycling motion) while recumbent and yet 
cannot formulate the motor act of walking. In this higher cerebral dys-
function, the feet appear stuck to the oor and the patient cannot walk. 
Gait apraxia is a sign of diffuse bilateral hemisphere disease (such as 
normal pressure hydrocephalus) or diffuse frontal lobe disease.
Marche à petits pas
This gait is characterised by small, slow steps and marked instability. It 
differs from the festination found in Parkinson’s disease (see below), in 
that it lacks increasing pace and freezing. The usual cause is small-vessel 
cerebrovascular disease and there may be accompanying bilateral upper 
motor neuron signs.
Extrapyramidal gait
The rigidity and bradykinesia of basal ganglia dysfunction lead to a stooped 
posture and characteristic gait difculties, with problems initiating walking 
and controlling the pace of the gait. Patients may become stuck while 
trying to start walking or when walking through doorways (‘freezing’). The 
centre of gravity will be moved forwards to aid propulsion, which, with 
poor axial control, can lead to an accelerating pace of shufing and dif-
culty stopping. This produces the festinant gait: initial stuttering steps that 
quickly increase in frequency while decreasing in length.
Abnormal speech and language
Speech disturbance may be isolated to disruption of sound output (dys-
arthria) or may involve language disturbance (dysphasia). Dysphonia 
(reduction in the sound/volume) is usually due to mechanical laryngeal 
disruption, whereas dysarthria is more typically neurological in origin. 
Dysphasia is always neurological and localises to the dominant cerebral 
hemisphere (usually left, regardless of handedness). Combinations of 
speech and swallowing problems are explained below.
Dysphonia
Dysphonia describes hoarse or whispered speech. The most common 
cause is laryngitis, but dysphonia can also result from a lesion of the 10th 
cranial nerve or disease of the vocal cords, including laryngeal dystonia. 
Parkinsonism may cause hypophonia with marked reduction in speech 
volume, often in association with dysarthria, making speech difcult to 
understand.
Dysarthria
Dysarthria is characterised by poorly articulated or slurred speech and 
can occur in association with lesions of the cerebellum, brainstem and 
lower cranial nerves, as well as in myasthenia or myopathic disease. 
Language function is not affected. The quality of the speech tends to 
differ, depending on the cause, but it can be very difcult to distinguish 
the different types clinically (Box 28.18). Dysarthria is discussed further in 
the section on bulbar symptoms below.
Dysphasia
Dysphasia (or aphasia) is a disorder of the language content of speech. 
It can occur with lesions over a wide area of the dominant hemisphere 
(Fig. 28.19). Dysphasia may be categorised according to whether the 
speech output is uent or non-uent. Fluent aphasias, also called recep-
tive aphasias, are impairments related mostly to the input or reception of 
language, with difculties either in auditory verbal comprehension or in 
the repetition of words, phrases or sentences spoken by others. Speech 
is easy and uent but there are difculties related to the output of lan-
guage as well, such as paraphasia (either substitution of similar-sounding 
non-words, or incorrect words) and neologisms (non-existent words).
Non-uent aphasias, also called expressive aphasias, are difculties 
in articulating, but in most cases there is relatively good auditory ver-
bal comprehension. Examples include Broca aphasia (associated with 
pathologies in the inferior frontal region), transcortical motor aphasia and 
global aphasia.
‘Pure’ aphasias are selective impairments in reading, writing or the 
recognition of words. These disorders may be quite selective. For exam-
ple, a person is able to read but not write, or is able to write but not read. 
Examples include pure alexia, agraphia and pure word deafness.
28.18 Causes of dysarthria
Type
Site
Characteristics
Associated features
Myopathic
Muscles of speech
Indistinct, poor articulation
Weakness of face, tongue and neck
Myasthenic
Motor end plate
Indistinct with fatigue and dysphonia
Fluctuating severity
Ptosis, diplopia, facial and neck weakness
Bulbar
Brainstem
Indistinct, slurred, often nasal
Dysphagia, diplopia, ataxia
‘Scanning’
Cerebellum
Slurred, impaired timing and cadence, ‘sing-song’
Ataxia of limbs and gait, tremor of head/limbs
Nystagmus
Spastic (‘pseudo-bulbar’)
Pyramidal tracts
Indistinct, nasal tone, mumbling
Poor rapid tongue movements, increased 
reexes and jaw jerk
Parkinsonian
Basal ganglia
Indistinct, rapid, stammering, quiet
Tremor, rigidity, slow shufing gait
Dystonic
Basal ganglia
Strained, slow, high-pitched
Dystonia, athetosis
3
5
2
1
4
Sylvian
fissure
Central
sulcus
Fig. 28.19 Classication of cortical speech problems. (1) Wernicke’s aphasia: 
uent dysphasia with poor comprehension and poor repetition. (2) Conduction 
aphasia: uent aphasia with good comprehension and poor repetition. (3) Broca’s 
aphasia: non-uent aphasia with good comprehension and poor repetition. 
(4) Transcortical sensory aphasia: uent aphasia with poor comprehension and 
good repetition. (5) Transcortical motor aphasia: non-uent aphasia with good 
comprehension and good repetition. Large lesions affecting all of regions 1–5 cause 
global aphasia.

[[p1207]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1145
28
Dysphasia (a focal symptom) is frequently misinterpreted as disorien-
tation (which is non-focal) and it is important always to consider dyspha-
sia as an alternative explanation for the apparently ‘confused’ patient. 
Dysphasia can be misheard/misspelt as dysphagia, and for this reason 
some prefer to use ‘aphasia’ to avoid confusion.
Disturbance of smell
Symptomatic olfactory loss is most commonly due to local causes (nasal 
obstruction) but may follow head injury. Hyposmia may predate motor 
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease by many years, although it is rarely 
noticed by the patient. Frontal lobe lesions are a rare cause. Positive 
olfactory symptoms may arise in Alzheimer’s disease or epilepsy.
Visual disturbance and ocular abnormalities
Disturbances of vision may be due to primary ocular disease or to disor-
ders of the central connections and visual cortex. Visual symptoms are 
usually negative (loss of vision) but sometimes positive, most commonly in 
migraine. Eye movements may be disturbed, giving rise to double vision 
(diplopia) or blurred vision. Loss of vision is also discussed on page 1224.
Visual loss
Visual loss can occur as the result of lesions in any areas between the 
retina and the visual cortex. Patterns of visual eld loss are explained by 
the anatomy of the visual pathways (see Fig. 28.7). Associated clinical 
manifestations are described in Box 30.8. Visual symptoms affecting one 
eye only are due to lesions anterior to the optic chiasm.
Transient visual loss is quite common and sudden-onset visual loss 
lasting less than 15 minutes is likely to have a vascular origin. It may be 
difcult to know whether the visual loss was monocular (carotid circula-
tion) or binocular (vertebrobasilar circulation), and it is important to ask 
if the patient tried closing each eye in turn to see whether the symp-
tom affected one eye or both. Visual eld testing is an important part of 
the examination, either at the bedside or formally with perimetry. Field 
defects become more symmetrical (congruous), the closer the lesion 
comes to the visual cortex.
Migrainous visual symptoms are very common and, when associated 
with typical headache and other migraine features, rarely pose a diagnos-
tic challenge. They may occur in isolation, however, making distinction 
from TIA difcult, but TIAs typically cause negative (blindness) symptoms, 
whereas migraine causes positive phenomena (see below). TIAs often 
last for a shorter time (a few minutes), compared to the 10–60-minute 
duration of migraine aura, and have an abrupt onset and end, unlike the 
gradual evolution of a migraine aura.
Positive visual phenomena
The most common cause is migraine; patients may describe silvery zig-
zag lines (fortication spectra) or ashing coloured lights (teichopsia), 
usually preceding the headache. Simple ashes of light (phosphenes) 
may indicate damage to the retina (e.g. detachment) or to the primary 
visual cortex. Formed visual hallucinations may be caused by drugs or 
may be due to epilepsy or ‘release phenomena’ in a blind visual eld 
(Charles Bonnet syndrome).
Double vision
Diplopia arises from misalignment of the eyes, meaning that the image is 
not projected to the same points on the two retinas. At its most subtle it 
may be reported as blurred rather than double vision. Monocular diplopia 
indicates ocular disease, while binocular diplopia suggests a neurologi-
cal cause. Closing either eye in turn will abort binocular diplopia. Once 
the presence of binocular diplopia is conrmed, it should be established 
whether the diplopia is maximal in any particular direction of gaze, whether 
the images are separated horizontally or vertically, and whether there are 
any associated symptoms or signs, such as ptosis or pupillary disturbance.
Binocular diplopia may result from central disorders or from distur-
bance of the ocular motor nerves, muscles or the neuromuscular junction 
(see Fig. 28.8). The pattern of double vision, along with any associated 
features, usually allows the clinician to infer which nerves/muscles are 
affected, while the mode of onset and other features (e.g. fatigability in 
myasthenia) provide further clues to the cause.
The causes of ocular motor nerve palsies are listed in Box 28.19. 
Examination ndings are illustrated in Figure 28.20
28.19 Common causes of damage to cranial nerves 3, 4 and 6
Site
Common pathology
Nerve(s) involved
Associated features
Brainstem
Infarction
3 (mid-brain)
Contralateral pyramidal signs
Haemorrhage
6 (ponto-medullary junction)
Ipsilateral lower motor neuron facial palsy
Demyelination
Other brainstem/cerebellar signs
Intrinsic tumour
Intrameningeal
Meningitis (infective/malignant)
3, 4 and/or 6
Meningism, features of primary disease course
Raised intracranial pressure
6
Papilloedema
3 (uncal herniation)
Features of space-occupying lesion
Aneurysms
3 (posterior communicating artery) 
6 (basilar artery)
Pain
Features of subarachnoid haemorrhage
Cerebello-pontine angle tumour
Trauma
6
8, 7, 5 nerve lesions (order of likelihood)
Ipsilateral cerebellar signs
3, 4 and/or 6
Other features of trauma
Cavernous sinus
Infection/thrombosis
3, 4 and/or 6
May be 5th nerve involvement also
Carotid artery aneurysm
Pupil may be xed, mid-position
Caroticocavernous stula
(Sympathetic plexus on carotid may also be 
affected)
Superior orbital ssure
Tumour (e.g. sphenoid wing meningioma)
3, 4 and/or 6
May be proptosis, chemosis
Granuloma
Orbit
Vascular (e.g. diabetes, vasculitis)
3, 4 and/or 6
Pain
Infections
Pupil often spared in vascular 3rd nerve palsy
Tumour
Granuloma
Trauma

[[p1208]]
1146    NEUROLOGY
Nystagmus
Nystagmus describes a repetitive to-and-fro movement of the eyes. 
In central lesions, the slow drifts are the primary abnormal movement, 
each followed by fast (corrective) phases. Nystagmus occurs because 
the control systems of the eyes are defective, causing them to drift off 
target; corrections then become necessary to return xation to the object 
of interest, causing nystagmus. The direction of the fast phase is usu-
ally designated as the direction of the nystagmus because it is easier 
to see. Nystagmus may be horizontal, vertical or torsional, and usually 
involves both eyes synchronously. It may be a physiological phenomenon 
in response to sustained vestibular stimulation or movement of the visual 
world (optokinetic nystagmus). There are many causes of pathological 
nystagmus, the most common sites of lesions being the vestibular sys-
tem, brainstem and cerebellum.
The brainstem and the cerebellum are involved in maintaining eccen-
tric positions of gaze. Lesions will therefore allow the eyes to drift back 
in towards primary position, producing nystagmus with fast component 
beats in the direction of gaze (gaze-evoked nystagmus). This is the most 
common type of ‘central’ nystagmus; it is most commonly bidirectional 
and not usually accompanied by vertigo. Other signs of brainstem dys-
function may be evident. Brainstem disease may also cause vertical 
nystagmus.
Unilateral cerebellar lesions may result in gaze-evoked nystagmus 
when looking in the direction of the lesion, where the fast phases are 
directed towards the side of the lesion. Cerebellar hemisphere lesions 
also cause ‘ocular dysmetria’, an overshoot of target-directed, fast eye 
movements (saccades) resembling ‘past-pointing’ in limbs.
In vestibular lesions, damage to one of the horizontal canals or its 
connections will allow the tonic output from the healthy contralateral side 
to cause the eyes to drift towards the side of the lesion. This elicits recur-
rent compensatory fast movements away from the side of the lesion, 
manifest as unidirectional horizontal nystagmus. Vertical and torsional 
components can be seen with damage to other parts of the vestibular 
apparatus. The nystagmus of peripheral labyrinthine lesions is accompa-
nied by vertigo and usually by nausea, vomiting and unsteadiness, but as 
the CNS habituates, the nystagmus disappears (fatigues) quite quickly. 
Central vestibular nystagmus is more persistent.
Nystagmus also occurs as a consequence of drug toxicity and nutri-
tional deciency (e.g. thiamin). The severity is variable, and it may or 
may not result in visual degradation, though it may be associated with 
a sensation of movement of the visual world (oscillopsia). Nystagmus 
may occur as a congenital phenomenon, in which case both phases 
are equal and ‘pendular’, rather than having alternating fast and slow 
components.
Ptosis
Various disorders may cause drooping of the eyelids (ptosis) and these 
are listed in Box 28.20 and shown on Figure 28.21
Abnormal pupillary responses
Abnormal pupillary responses may arise from lesions at several points 
between the retina and brainstem. Lesions of the oculomotor nerve, ciliary 
ganglion and sympathetic supply produce characteristic ipsilateral disor-
ders of pupillary function. ‘Afferent’ defects result from damage to an optic 
nerve, impairing the direct response of a pupil to light, although leaving the 
consensual response from stimulation of the normal eye intact. Structural 
damage to the iris itself can also result in pupillary abnormalities. Causes 
are given in Box 28.21. An example is shown in Figure 28.22
Papilloedema
There are several causes of swelling of the optic disc but the term ‘pap-
illoedema’ is reserved for swelling secondary to raised intracranial pres-
sure, when obstructed axoplasmic ow from retinal ganglion cells results 
in swollen nerve bres, which in turn cause capillary and venous con-
gestion, producing papilloedema. Lack of papilloedema never excludes 
raised intracranial pressure. Optic disc swelling and papilloedema are 
also discussed on page 1226.
Optic atrophy
See Chapter 30.
Hearing disturbance
Each cochlear organ has bilateral cortical representation, so unilateral 
hearing loss is a result of peripheral organ damage. Bilateral hearing dys-
function is usual and is most commonly due to age-related degeneration 
or noise damage, although infection and drugs (particularly diuretics and 
aminoglycoside antibiotics) can be a primary cause. Prominent deafness 
may suggest a mitochondrial disorder (see Box 28.92).
Bulbar symptoms – dysphagia and dysarthria
Swallowing is a complex activity involving the coordinated action of lips, 
tongue, soft palate, pharynx and larynx, which are innervated by cranial 
nerves 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12. Structural causes of dysphagia are consid-
ered on page 795. Neurological mechanisms are vulnerable to damage 
Cranial nerve palsy
Right 3rd nerve palsy
Unable to adduct right eye
Squint worse
Right eye turns down
and out
N.B. Pupil dilated; ptosis
Right 4th nerve palsy
(more evident on
downgaze)
Right eye elevates more as
it moves medially
Right eye turns slightly up
No obvious squint
Right 6th nerve palsy
Able to adduct right eye
No obvious squint
Right eye turns medially
Unable to abduct right eye
Squint worse
Direction of gaze
Primary position
Direction of gaze
Fig. 28.20 Examination ndings in 3rd, 4th and 6th nerve palsy. Diplopia tends to be more obvious on lateral gaze compared to primary position.

[[p1209]]
Presenting problems in neurological disease    1147
28
at different points, resulting in dysphagia that is usually accompanied by 
dysarthria. Tempo is again crucial: acute onset of dysphagia may occur 
as a result of brainstem stroke or a rapidly developing neuropathy, such 
as Guillain–Barré syndrome or diphtheria. Intermittent fatigable mus-
cle weakness (including dysphagia) would suggest myasthenia gravis. 
Dysphagia developing over weeks or months may be seen in motor 
neuron disease, basal meningitis and inammatory brainstem disease. 
More slowly developing dysphagia suggests a myopathy or possibly a 
brainstem or skull-base tumour.
Pathologies affecting lower cranial nerves (9, 10, 11 and 12) frequently 
manifest bilaterally, producing dysphagia and dysarthria. The term ‘bul-
bar palsy’ is used to describe lower motor neuron lesions, either within 
the medulla or outside the brainstem. The tongue may be wasted and 
fasciculating, and palatal movement is reduced.
Upper motor neuron innervation of swallowing is bilateral, so persis-
tent dysphagia is unusual with a unilateral upper motor lesion (the excep-
tion being in the acute stages of, for example, a hemispheric stroke). 
Widespread lesions above the medulla will cause upper motor neuron 
bulbar paralysis, known as ‘pseudobulbar palsy’. Here the tongue is 
small and contracted, and moves slowly; the jaw jerk is brisk, and there 
may be associated emotional variability. Causes of these are shown in 
Box 28.22
Bladder, bowel and sexual disturbance
While isolated disturbances of bladder, bowel and sexual function are 
rarely the sole presenting features of neurological disease, they are 
common complications of many chronic disorders such as multiple 
28.20 Common causes of ptosis
Mechanism
Causes
Associated clinical features
3rd nerve palsy
Isolated palsy (see Box 28.19)
Ptosis is usually complete
Central/supranuclear lesion
Extraocular muscle palsy (eye ‘down and out’)
Depending on site of lesion, other cranial nerve palsies (e.g. 4, 5 and 6) or 
contralateral upper motor neuron signs
Sympathetic lesion
(Horner syndrome:  
see Fig. 28.22)
Central (hypothalamus/brainstem)
Ptosis is partial
Peripheral (lung apex, carotid artery pathology)
Lack of sweating on affected side
Idiopathic
Depending on site of lesion, brainstem signs, signs of apical lung/brachial 
plexus disease, or ipsilateral carotid artery stroke
Myopathic
Myasthenia gravis
Extraocular muscle palsies
Dystrophia myotonica
Usually bilateral
More widespread muscle weakness, with fatigability in myasthenia
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia
Other characteristic features of individual causes
Other
Functional ptosis
Resistance to eye opening
Pseudo-ptosis (e.g. blepharospasm)
Eyebrows depressed rather than raised
Local orbital/lid disease
May be local orbital abnormality
Age-related levator dehiscence
Neurological causes of unilateral ptosis
Smaller pupil
Larger pupil
Diplopia worse 
on upgaze 
Diplopia
Diplopia
Increasing
accommodation
?3rd nerve
paralysis
3rd nerve
paralysis
Normal pupil
Normal pupil
Horner
syndrome
Check for dilated 
pupil and other 
signs of 3rd nerve 
paralysis
Fatigable
weakness
Myasthenia
excluded
Consider
myasthenia
gravis
Family history
Consider
mitochondrial
disorder,
e.g. CPEO
Fig. 28.21 Differential diagnosis of unilateral ptosis. (CPEO = chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia)

[[p1210]]
1148    NEUROLOGY
sclerosis, stroke and dementia, and are frequently found post head 
injury. Abnormalities in these functions considerably reduce quality of life 
for patients. Incontinence and its management are discussed elsewhere 
(pp. 567, 833 and 1305).
Bladder dysfunction
The anatomy and physiology involved in controlling bladder functions 
are discussed in Chapter 18, but it is worth emphasising the role of the 
pontine micturition centre, which is itself under higher control via inputs 
from the pre-frontal cortex, mid-brain and hypothalamus.
In the absence of conscious control (e.g. in coma or dementia), dis-
tension of the bladder to near capacity evokes reex detrusor contraction 
(analogous to the muscle stretch reex), and reciprocal changes in sym-
pathetic activation and relaxation of the distal sphincter result in coordi-
nated bladder emptying.
Damage to the lower motor neuron pathways (the pelvic and pudendal 
nerves) produces a accid bladder and sphincter with overow inconti-
nence, often accompanied by loss of pudendal sensation. Such damage 
may be due to disease of the conus medullaris or sacral nerve roots, 
either within the dura (as in inammatory or carcinomatous meningitis) 
or as they pass through the sacrum (trauma or malignancy), or due to 
damage to the nerves themselves in the pelvis (infection, haematoma, 
trauma or malignancy).
Damage to the pons or spinal cord results in an ‘upper motor neu-
ron’ pattern of bladder dysfunction due to uncontrolled over-activity of 
the parasympathetic supply. The bladder is small and highly sensitive 
to being stretched. This results in frequency, urgency and urge inconti-
nence. Loss of the coordinating control of the pontine micturition centre 
will also result in the phenomenon of detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, in 
which detrusor contraction and sphincter relaxation are not coordinated; 
the spastic bladder will often try to empty against a closed sphincter. This 
manifests as both urgency and an inability to pass urine, which is dis-
tressing and painful. The resultant incomplete bladder emptying predis-
poses to urinary infection, and the prolonged high intravesical pressure 
may result in obstructive uropathy and renal failure; post-micturition blad-
der ultrasound may conrm incomplete bladder emptying. More severe 
lesions of the spinal cord, as in spinal cord compression or trauma, can 
result in painless urinary retention as bladder sensation, normally carried 
in the lateral spinothalamic tracts, will be disrupted.
Damage to the frontal lobes gives rise to loss of awareness of bladder full-
ness and consequent incontinence. Coexisting cognitive impairment may 
result in inappropriate micturition. These features may be seen in hydro-
cephalus, frontal tumours, dementia and bifrontal subdural haematomas.
28.21 Pupillary disorders
Disorder
Cause
Ophthalmological features
Associated features
3rd nerve palsy
See Box 28.20
Dilated pupil (especially with external 
compression)
Other features of 3rd nerve palsy (see  
Box 28.20)
Extraocular muscle palsy (eye is typically ‘down 
and out’)
Complete ptosis
Horner syndrome (see  
Fig. 28.22)
Lesion to sympathetic supply
Small pupil
Ipsilateral failure of sweating (anhidrosis)
Partial ptosis
Iris heterochromia (if congenital)
Holmes–Adie syndrome 
(tonic pupil)
Lesion of ciliary ganglion  
(usually idiopathic)
Dilated pupil
Generalised areexia
Light–near dissociation (accommodate but do 
not react to light)
Vermiform movement of iris during contraction
Disturbance of accommodation
Argyll Robertson pupil
Dorsal mid-brain lesion (syphilis 
or diabetes)
Small, irregular pupils
Other features of tabes dorsalis (Box 28.69)
Light–near dissociation
Local pupillary damage
Trauma/inammatory disease
Irregular pupils, often with adhesions to lens 
(synechiae)
Other features of trauma/underlying 
inammatory disease (e.g. cataract, 
blindness etc.)
Variable degree of reactivity
Relative afferent pupillary 
defect (Marcus Gunn 
pupil)
Damage to optic nerve
Pupils symmetrical – swinging torch test 
reveals dilatation in abnormal eye
Decreased visual acuity/colour vision
Central scotoma
Optic disc swelling or pallor
Fig. 28.22 Right-sided Horner syndrome due to paravertebral metastasis 
at T1. There is ipsilateral partial ptosis and a small pupil.
28.22 Causes of pseudobulbar and bulbar palsy
Type
Pseudobulbar
Bulbar
Genetic
–
Kennedy s disease 
(X-linked bulbospinal 
neuronopathy)
Vascular
Bilateral hemisphere 
(lacunar) infarction
Medullary infarction (see 
Box 28.3)
Degenerative
Motor neuron disease 
Motor neuron disease
Syringobulbia
Inammatory/
infective
Multiple sclerosis
Myasthenia
Cerebral vasculitis
Vasculitis
Neoplastic
High brainstem tumours
Brainstem glioma
Malignant meningitis

[[p1211]]
Headache syndromes    1149
28
When a patient presents with bladder symptoms, it is important to 
localise the lesion on the basis of history and examination, remembering 
that most bladder problems are not neurological unless there are overt 
neurological signs. Clinical features and management are summarised 
in Box 28.23
Rectal dysfunction
The rectum has an excitatory cholinergic input from the parasympathetic 
sacral outow, and inhibitory sympathetic supply similar to the blad-
der. Continence depends largely on skeletal muscle contraction in the 
puborectalis and pelvic oor muscles supplied by the pudendal nerves, 
as well as the internal and external anal sphincters. Damage to the auto-
nomic components usually causes constipation (a common early symp-
tom in Parkinson’s disease) but diabetic neuropathy can be associated 
with diarrhoea. Lesions affecting the conus medullaris, the somatic S2–4 
roots and the pudendal nerves may cause faecal incontinence.
Erectile failure and ejaculatory failure
These related functions are under autonomic control via the pelvic nerves 
(parasympathetic, S2–4) and hypogastric nerves (sympathetic, L1–2). 
Descending inuences from the cerebrum are important for erection but 
it can occur as a reex phenomenon in response to genital stimulation. 
Erection is largely parasympathetic and may be impaired by a number 
of drugs, including anticholinergic, antihypertensive and antidepressant 
agents. Sympathetic activity is important for ejaculation and may be 
inhibited by α-adrenoceptor antagonists (α-blockers).
Personality change
While this is often due to psychiatric illness, neurological conditions that 
alter the function of the frontal lobes can cause personality change and 
mood disorder (see Box 28.2). Personality change due to a frontal lobe 
disorder may occur as the result of structural damage due to stroke, 
trauma, tumour or hydrocephalus. The nature of any change may help 
localise the lesion.
Patients with mesial frontal lesions become increasingly withdrawn, 
unresponsive and mute (abulic), often in association with urinary incon-
tinence, gait apraxia and an increase in tone known as ‘gegenhalten’ 
or paratonia, in which the patient varies the resistance to movement in 
proportion to the force exerted by the examiner.
Patients with lesions of the dorsolateral pre-frontal cortex develop a 
dysexecutive syndrome, which involves difculties with speech, motor 
planning and organisation. Those with orbitofrontal lesions of the frontal 
lobes, in contrast, become disinhibited, displaying grandiosity or irre-
sponsible behaviour. Memory is substantially intact but frontal release 
signs may emerge, such as a grasp reex, palmomental response or 
pout. Proximity to the olfactory bulb and tracts means that inferior frontal 
lobe tumours may be associated with anosmia.
Disturbance to the cortical areas responsible for speech or memory 
can result in changes that may be interpreted as changes in personality.
Sleep disturbance
Disturbances of sleep are common and are not usually due to neurological 
disease. Patients may complain of insomnia (difculty sleeping), excessive 
daytime sleepiness, disturbed behaviour during night-time sleep, para-
somnia (sleep walking and talking, or night terrors) or disturbing subjective 
experiences during sleep and/or its onset (nightmares, hypnagogic hallu-
cinations, sleep paralysis). A careful history (from bed partner as well as 
patient) usually allows specic causes of sleep disturbance to be identied 
and these are discussed in more detail on page 1159.
Psychiatric disorders
Psychiatric disorders may cause or result from neurological problems. 
Care is needed in their identication, as effective management will help 
the underlying neurological illness.
Mood and sleep disturbance will exacerbate neurological symptoms, 
thus increasing disability. The best practitioners have the skill to carry the 
patient with them when describing the patterns of behaviour contributing 
to worsening symptoms.
Assessment to detect an underlying or exacerbating mood disorder is 
vital in all patients, ensuring that depression and anxiety are managed to 
minimise their secondary effects on neurological symptoms.
Headache syndromes
Acute management of headache is dealt with on page 186, but manage-
ment of chronic, complex, or refractory headaches may require specialist 
input. Headaches may be classied as primary or secondary, depend-
ing on the underlying cause (see Box 9.13). Secondary headache may 
be due to structural, infective, inammatory or vascular conditions, dis-
cussed later in this chapter. Primary headache syndromes are described 
here.
Tension-type headache
This is the most common type of headache and is experienced to some 
degree by the majority of the population.
Pathophysiology
Tension-type headache is incompletely understood, and some consider 
that it is simply a milder version of migraine; certainly, the original notion 
28.23 Neurogenic bladder: clinical features and treatment
Type
Site of lesion
Result
Treatment
Atonic (lower motor neuron)
Sacral segments of cord (conus 
medullaris)
Loss of detrusor contraction
Intermittent self-catheterisation
Sacral roots and nerves
Difculty initiating micturition
In-dwelling catheterisation
Bladder distension with overow
Hypertonic (upper motor neuron)
Pyramidal tract in spinal cord or 
brainstem
Urgency with urge incontinence
Anticholinergics:
Bladder sphincter incoordination  
(dyssynergia)
Solifenacin
Tolterodine
Imipramine
Incomplete bladder emptying
Intermittent self-catheterisation
Cortical
Post-central
Loss of awareness of bladder fullness
Intermittent or in-dwelling 
catheterisation
Pre-central
Difculty initiating micturition
Frontal
Inappropriate micturition
Loss of social control

[[p1212]]
1150    NEUROLOGY
that it is due primarily to muscle tension (hence the unsatisfactory name) 
has long since been dismissed. Anxiety about the headache itself may 
lead to continuation of symptoms, and patients may become convinced 
of a serious underlying condition.
Clinical features
The pain of tension headache is characterised as ‘dull’, ‘tight’ or like a 
‘pressure’, and there may be a sensation of a band round the head or 
pressure at the vertex. It is of constant character and generalised, but 
often radiates forwards from the occipital region. It may be episodic or 
persistent, although the severity may vary, and there is no associated 
vomiting or photophobia. Tension-type headache is rarely disabling and 
patients appear well. The pain often progresses throughout the day. 
Tenderness may be present over the skull vault or in the occiput but is 
easily distinguished from the triggered pains of trigeminal neuralgia and 
the exquisite tenderness of temporal arteritis. Analgesics may be taken 
with chronic regularity, despite little effect, and may perpetuate the symp-
toms (see ‘Medication overuse headache’ below).
Management
Most benet is derived from a careful assessment, followed by discus-
sion of likely precipitants and reassurance that the prognosis is good. 
The concept of medication overuse headache needs careful expla-
nation. An important therapeutic step is to allow patients to realise 
that their problem has been taken seriously and rigorously assessed. 
Physiotherapy (with muscle relaxation and stress management) may 
help and low-dose amitriptyline can provide benet. Investigation is rarely 
required. The reassurance value of brain imaging needs careful assess-
ment: the pick-up rate of structural abnormalities is exceedingly low, and 
signicantly outweighed by the likelihood of identifying an incidental and 
irrelevant nding (e.g. an arachnoid cyst, Chiari I malformation or vascular 
abnormality). The value of such ‘reassurance’ is usually over-estimated 
by doctors and patients alike.
Migraine
Migraine usually appears before middle age, or occasionally in later life; 
it affects about 20% of females and 6% of males at some point in life. 
Migraine is usually readily identiable from the history, although unusual 
variants can cause uncertainty.
Pathophysiology
The cause of migraine is unknown but there is increasing evidence that 
the aura (see below) is due to dysfunction of ion channels causing a 
spreading front of cortical depolarisation (excitation) followed by hyper-
polarisation (depression of activity). This process (the ‘spreading depres-
sion of Leão’) spreads over the cortex at a rate of about 3 mm/min, 
corresponding to the aura's symptomatic spread. The headache phase 
is associated with vasodilatation of extracranial vessels and may be 
relayed by hypothalamic activity. Activation of the trigeminovascular 
system is probably important. A genetic contribution is implied by the 
frequently positive family history, and similar phenomena occurring in 
disorders such as CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy 
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) or mitochondrial dis-
ease (p. 1197). The female preponderance and the frequency of migraine 
attacks at certain points in the menstrual cycle also suggest hormonal 
inuences. Oestrogen-containing oral contraception sometimes exacer-
bates migraine and increases the very small risk of stroke in patients who 
suffer from migraine with aura. Doctors and patients often over-estimate 
the role of dietary precipitants such as cheese, chocolate or red wine. 
When psychological factors contribute, the migraine attack often occurs 
after a period of stress, being more likely on Friday evening at the end of 
the working week or at the beginning of a holiday.
Clinical features
Some patients report a prodrome of malaise, irritability or behavioural 
change for some hours or days. Around 20% of patients experience 
an aura and are said to have migraine with aura (previously known as 
 classical migraine). The aura may manifest as almost any neurological 
symptom but is most often visual, consisting of fortication spectra, which 
are usually positive phenomena such as shimmering, silvery zigzag lines 
marching across the visual elds for up to 40 minutes, sometimes leaving 
a trail of temporary visual eld loss (scotoma). Sensory symptoms char-
acteristically spreading over 20–30 minutes, from one part of the body 
to another, are more common than motor ones, and language function 
can be affected, leading to similarities with TIA/stroke. Isolated aura may 
occur (i.e. the neurological symptoms are not followed by headache).
The 80% of patients with characteristic headache but no ‘aura’ are 
said to have migraine without aura (previously called ‘common’ migraine).
Migraine headache is usually severe and throbbing, with photophobia, 
phonophobia and vomiting lasting from 4 to 72 hours. Movement makes 
the pain worse and patients prefer to lie in a quiet, dark room.
In a small number of patients, the aura may persist, leaving more per-
manent neurological disturbance. This persistent migrainous aura may 
occur with or without evidence of brain infarction.
Management
Avoidance of identied triggers or exacerbating factors (such as the com-
bined contraceptive pill) may prevent attacks. Treatment of an acute attack 
consists of simple analgesia with aspirin, paracetamol or non-steroidal 
anti-inammatory agents. Nausea may require an antiemetic such as met-
oclopramide or domperidone. Severe attacks can be aborted by one of 
the ‘triptans’ (e.g. sumatriptan), which are potent 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT, serotonin) agonists. These can be administered via the oral, subcu-
taneous or nasal route. Caution is needed with ergotamine preparations 
because they may lead to dependence. Overuse of any analgesia, includ-
ing triptans, may contribute to medication overuse headache.
If attacks are frequent (more than two per month), prophylaxis should 
be considered. Many drugs can be chosen but the most frequently 
used are vasoactive drugs (β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), 
candesartan, lisinopril), antidepressants (amitriptyline, dosulepin) and 
antiepileptic drugs (topiramate). Consideration needs to be given to the 
teratogenicity of antiepileptic drugs in women of childbearing potential. 
Monoclonal antibodies to calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor are 
available for refractory migraine. Women with aura should avoid oes-
trogen treatment for either oral contraception or hormone replacement, 
although the increased risk of ischaemic stroke is minimal.
Medication overuse headache
With increasing availability of over-the-counter medication, headache syn-
dromes perpetuated by analgesia intake are becoming much more com-
mon. Medication overuse headache (MOH) can complicate any headache 
syndrome but is especially common with migraine and chronic tension-type 
headache. The most frequent culprits are compound analgesics (particu-
larly codeine and other opiate-containing preparations) and triptans, and 
MOH is usually associated with use on more than 10–15 days per month.
Management is by withdrawal of the responsible analgesics. Patients 
should be warned that the initial effect will be to exacerbate the head-
ache, and migraine prophylactics may be helpful in reducing the rebound 
headaches. Relapse rates are high, and patients often need help and 
support in withdrawing from analgesia; a careful explanation of this par-
adoxical concept is vital.
Cluster headache
Cluster headaches (also known as migrainous neuralgia) are much less 
common than migraine. Unusually for headache syndromes, there is a 
signicant male predominance and onset is usually in the third decade.
Pathophysiology
The cause is unknown but this type of headache differs from migraine 
in many ways, suggesting a different pathophysiological basis. Although 
uncommon, it is the most common of the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia 

[[p1213]]
Headache syndromes    1151
28
syndromes. Functional imaging studies have suggested abnormal hypo-
thalamic activity. Patients are more often smokers with a higher than aver-
age alcohol consumption.
Clinical features
Cluster headache is strikingly periodic, featuring runs of identical head-
aches beginning at the same time for weeks at a stretch (the ‘cluster’). 
Patients may experience either one or several attacks within a 24-hour 
period, and typically are awoken from sleep by symptoms (‘alarm clock 
headache’). Cluster headache causes severe, unilateral periorbital pain 
with autonomic features, such as ipsilateral tearing, nasal congestion and 
conjunctival injection (occasionally with the other features of a Horner 
syndrome). The pain, though severe, is characteristically brief (30–90 
minutes). In contrast to the behaviour of those with migraine, patients are 
highly agitated during the headache phase. The cluster period is typically 
a few weeks, followed by remission for months to years, but a small 
proportion do not experience remission.
Management
Acute attacks can usually be halted by subcutaneous injections of 
sumatriptan or inhalation of 100% oxygen. The brevity of the attack 
probably prevents other migraine therapies from being effective. Migraine 
prophylaxis is often ineffective too but attacks can be prevented in some 
patients by verapamil, sodium valproate, or short courses of oral gluco-
corticoids. Patients with severe debilitating clusters can be helped with 
lithium therapy, although this requires monitoring.
Trigeminal neuralgia
This is characterised by unilateral lancinating facial pain, most commonly 
involving the second and/or third divisions of the trigeminal nerve terri-
tory, usually in patients over the age of 50 years.
Pathophysiology
For most, trigeminal neuralgia remains an idiopathic condition but there 
is a suggestion that it may be due to an irritative lesion involving the 
trigeminal root zone, in some cases an aberrant loop of artery. Other 
compressive lesions, usually benign, are occasionally found. Trigeminal 
neuralgia associated with multiple sclerosis may result from a plaque of 
demyelination in the brainstem.
Clinical features
The pain is repetitive, severe and very brief (seconds or less). It may 
be triggered by touch, a cold wind or eating. Physical signs are usu-
ally absent, although the spasms may make the patient wince and sit 
silently (tic douloureux). There is a tendency for the condition to remit 
and relapse over many years. Rarely, there may be combined features of 
trigeminal neuralgia and cluster headache (‘cluster–tic’).
Management
The pain often responds to carbamazepine. It is wise to start with a low 
dose and increase gradually, according to effect. In patients who cannot 
tolerate carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, gabapentin, pregabalin, amitrip-
tyline or glucocorticoids may be effective alternatives, but if medication is 
ineffective or poorly tolerated, surgical treatment should be considered. 
Decompression of the vascular loop encroaching on the trigeminal root 
is often performed and may lead to pain relief in some cases. Otherwise, 
localised injection of alcohol or phenol into a peripheral branch of the 
nerve may be effective.
Headaches associated with specic activities
These usually affect men in their thirties and forties. Patients develop a 
sudden, severe headache with exertion, including sexual activity. There 
is usually no vomiting or neck stiffness, and the headache lasts less than 
10–15 minutes, though a less severe dullness may persist for some 
hours. Subarachnoid haemorrhage needs to be excluded by CT and/or 
CSF examination (see Fig. 29.13) after a rst event. The pathogenesis of 
these headaches is unknown. Although frightening, attacks are usually 
brief and patients may need only reassurance and simple analgesia for 
the residual headache. The syndrome may recur, and prevention may be 
necessary with propranolol or indometacin.
Other headache syndromes
A number of rare headache syndromes produce pains about the eye 
similar to cluster headaches (Box 28.24). These include chronic paroxys-
mal hemicrania and SUNCT (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform head-
aches with conjunctival injection and tearing). The recognition of these 
syndromes is useful because they often respond to specic treatments 
such as indometacin.
28.24 Paroxysmal headaches
Type
Character of pain
Duration
Location
Comment
Ice pick
Stabbing
Very brief (split-second)
Variable, usually 
temporoparietal
Benign, more common in 
migraine
Ice cream
Sharp, severe
30–120secs
Bitemporal/occipital
Obvious trigger by cold 
stimuli
Exertional/sexual activity
Bursting, thunderclap
Severe for mins, then less 
severe for hours
Generalised
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 
needs to be excluded
Cough
Bursting
Secs to mins
Occipital or generalised
Intracranial pathology needs 
to be excluded (especially 
craniocervical junction)
Cluster headache 
(migrainous neuralgia)
Severe unilateral, with ptosis, 
tearing, conjunctival injection, 
unilateral nasal congestion
30–90mins 1–3 times per 
day
Periorbital
Usually in men, occurring in 
clusters over weeks/months
Chronic paroxysmal 
hemicrania
Severe unilateral with cluster 
headache-like autonomic 
features (see above)
5–20mins, frequently 
through day
Periorbital/temporal
Usually in women, responds 
to indometacin
SUNCT*
Severe, sharp, triggered by 
touch or neck movements
15–120secs, repetitive 
through day
Periorbital
May respond to 
carbamazepine
*Short-lasting, unilateral, neuralgiform headache with conjunctival injection, tearing, rhinorrhoea and forehead sweating.

[[p1214]]
1152    NEUROLOGY
Functional neurological disorder
Many patients present with functional symptoms and some may have 
a functional neurological disorder (FND). FND (also known as functional 
neurological symptom disorder, dissociative neurological symptom dis-
order, or conversion disorder) is a disorder at the interface of neurology 
and psychiatry, reecting function or dysfunction in the shared organ, the 
brain. The symptoms are involuntary and cause considerable disability. 
Core to the assessment and management of most patients is a diagnosis 
made on positive grounds, communicated to patients in a manner that 
contributes constructively to management.
Functional symptoms are not consistent with any other recognised 
neurological disease or disorder. The diagnosis depends on demon-
strating internal inconsistency. The inconsistency will depend on the 
specic functional symptom. Functional symptoms include functional 
weakness, sensory disturbance, pain, movement disorders, disso-
ciative attacks (also called non-epileptic attacks), visual symptoms, 
speech and cognitive symptoms. Examples of internal inconsistency 
include: weakness of hip extension when the patient tries to extend 
the hip, which is overcome when the opposite hip is exed against 
resistance (Hoover’s sign); marked weakness of the legs on examina-
tion in a patient able to stand and walk; a detailed description of spe-
cic events of memory loss; and expressive dysphasia with retained 
written language. Other ndings may include: non-anatomical sensory 
loss, abnormal movements that are distractable, and dissociative or 
non-epileptic attacks occurring in the absence of concomitant EEG 
abnormality. Tiredness, poor concentration and sleep disturbance are 
also common.
Many but not all patients with FND have predisposing and perpet-
uating factors (Box 28.25) that may include anxiety, depression, post- 
traumatic stress disorder, a history of abuse or aversive events. There 
may be a precipitating event, which may at times appear minor in com-
parison to the range and severity of the patient’s symptoms.
The approach to the patient with FND or functional symptoms should 
ideally include:
 a detailed history exploring all symptoms
 examination looking for positive ndings, e.g. Hoover’s sign
 review of past medical records, which often contain functional 
symptoms in other organ systems, e.g. irritable bowel syndrome, 
globus, non-cardiac chest pain
 rapid investigation to exclude a structural cause
 and a clear, constructive explanation of the diagnosis based on pos-
itive ndings rather than the rather unhelpful ‘medically unexplained 
symptom’ approach of the past.
There are several useful websites that provide patients with additional 
information and advice (p. XXX). For many patients understanding their 
symptoms and the condition will be sufcient, others may require addi-
tional multidisciplinary support and treatment from a range of profession-
als including: physiotherapy, occupational and speech therapy, neurology 
and neuropsychiatry/psychiatry. Treatment may include neurophysio-
therapy, use of antidepressant medication (although not all patients are 
depressed) and cognitive behavioural therapy. The diagnosis should not 
be made simply because the patient’s presentation is unusual. A diagno-
sis of FND should be based on an appropriate history, examination and 
normal relevant ndings on investigation.
Factitious disorders and malingering are not the same as FND. In 
the absence of clear objective evidence, e.g. witnessing a patient tam-
pering with tests, diagnosis of these disorders should best be left to 
psychiatrists
Epilepsy
A seizure can be dened as the occurrence of signs and/or symptoms 
due to abnormal, excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain. 
The lifetime risk of an isolated seizure is about 5%, although incidence is 
highest at the extremes of age. Epilepsy is the tendency to have unpro-
voked seizures. While the prevalence of active epilepsy in European 
countries is about 0.5%, this gure varies globally and can be inuenced 
by the prevalence of parasitic illnesses such as cysticercosis. A recent 
change in denition allows the diagnosis of epilepsy to be made after a 
single seizure with a high risk of recurrence (e.g. a single seizure in the 
presence of a cortical lesion). Such changes may lead to an observed 
increase in epilepsy incidence.
Historical terms such as ‘grand mal’ (implying tonic–clonic seizures) 
and ‘petit mal’ (intended originally to mean ‘absence seizures’ but 
commonly misused to describe ‘anything other than grand mal’) have 
been superseded. Subsequent revisions, including terms such as ‘com-
plex partial’ and ‘simple partial’, have been imprecise and carry little 
information about underlying pathology, treatment or prognosis. The 
modern equivalents for these terms will be given below, but it is prefer-
able to adhere to the 2017 iteration of the International League Against 
Epilepsy's classication (Box 28.26).
Pathophysiology
To function normally, the brain must maintain a continual balance 
between excitation and inhibition, remaining responsive to the environ-
ment while avoiding continued unrestrained spontaneous activity. The 
inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is particularly 
important, acting on ion channels to enhance chloride inow and reduc-
ing the chances of action potential formation. Excitatory amino acids 
(glutamate and aspartate) allow inux of sodium and calcium, producing 
the opposite effect. It is likely that many seizures result from an imbalance 
between this excitation and inhibition. Intracellular recordings during sei-
zures demonstrate a paroxysmal depolarisation shift in neuronal mem-
brane potential, an upshift in internal potential predisposing to recurrent 
action potentials. In vivo, epileptic cortex shows repetitive discharges 
involving large groups of neurons.
Focal epilepsy
Seizures may be related to a localised disturbance in the cortex, becom-
ing manifest in the rst instance as focal seizures. Any disturbance of 
cortical architecture and function can precipitate this, whether focal 
infection, tumour, hamartoma or trauma-related scarring. If focal seizures 
remain localised, the symptoms experienced depend on which cortical 
area is affected. If areas in the temporal lobes become involved, then 
awareness of the environment becomes impaired but without associated 
tonic–clonic movements. When both hemispheres become involved, the 
seizure becomes generalised (Fig. 28.23).
Generalised epilepsies
The new terminology is genetic generalised epilepsies (GGEs) (previously 
idiopathic generalised epilepsies, and many prefer to still use this term) to 
reect their likely cause. These seizures are generalised at onset, abnor-
mal activity probably originating in the central mechanisms controlling 
cortical activation (see Fig. 28.23) and spreading rapidly. This group con-
stitutes around 30% of all epilepsy and is likely to reect widespread 
28.25 Clinical features suggestive of functional disorder
 Inconsistent examination ndings (e.g. Hoover’s sign)
 Situational provocation of events (e.g. in medical settings)
 Associated mental health disorders:
Anxiety
Depression
 Lack of anatomical coherence to neurological symptoms
 Florid or bizarre descriptions of individual symptoms
 History of multiple other systemic symptoms inadequately explained by disease 
(asthma/breathlessness, fatigue, pain, gastrointestinal symptoms)

[[p1215]]
Epilepsy    1153
28
A
B
Focal seizure
± secondary generalisation
Primary generalised
seizure
Fig. 28.23 The pathophysiological classication of seizures.
originates from a paroxysmal discharge in a focal area of the cerebral cortex (often 
the temporal lobe); the seizure may subsequently spread to the rest of the brain 
generalised epilepsies (GGEs) the abnormal electrical discharges originate from the 
diencephalic activating system and spread simultaneously to all areas of the cortex.
28.27 Trigger factors for seizures
 Sleep deprivation
 Missed doses of antiepileptic drugs in treated patients
 Alcohol (particularly withdrawal)
 Recreational drug misuse
 Physical and mental exhaustion
 Flickering lights, including TV and computer screens (generalised epilepsy 
syndromes only)
 Intercurrent infections and metabolic disturbances
 Uncommon: loud noises, music, reading, hot baths
28.26 Classication of seizures (2017 International League 
Against Epilepsy classication)
Generalised onset
Motor
 Tonic–clonic (in any combination)
 Clonic
 Tonic
 Myoclonic
 Myoclonic–tonic–clonic
 Myotonic–atonic
 Atonic
 Epileptic spasms
Non-motor (absence):
 Typical
 Atypical
 Myoclonic
 Eyelid myoclonia
Focal onset
(Can occur with retained awareness or impaired awareness)
Motor onset
 Automatisms
 Atonic
 Clonic
 Epileptic spasms
 Hyperkinetic
 Myoclonic
 Tonic
Nonmotor onset
 Autonomic
 Behaviour arrest
 Cognitive
 Emotional
 Sensory
Focal to bilateral tonic–clonic
Unknown onset
Motor
 Tonic–clonic
 Epileptic spasms
Non-motor
 Behavioural arrest
disturbance of structure or function. GGEs almost always become 
apparent before the age of 35.
Seizure activity is usually apparent on EEG as spike and wave dis-
charges (see Fig. 28.14). Other generalised seizures may involve merely 
brief loss of awareness (absence seizures), single jerks (myoclonus) or 
loss of tone (atonic seizures), as detailed in Box 28.26
Clinical features
Seizure type and epilepsy type
Patients can experience more than one type of seizure attack, and it 
is important to document each attack type and the patient's age at its 
onset, along with its frequency, duration and typical features. Any trig-
gers should be identied (Box 28.27). The type of seizure, other clinical 
features and investigations can then be used to determine the epilepsy 
syndrome, as discussed below. Where there is doubt about the type, 
this is best stated and a full classication should be deferred until the 
evolution of the clinical features claries the picture.
To classify seizure type, the clinician should ask rstly whether there 
is a focal onset, and secondly whether the seizures conform to one of 
the recognised patterns (see Box 28.26). Epilepsy that starts in patients 
beyond their mid-thirties will almost invariably reect a focal cerebral 
event. Where activity remains focal, the classication will be obvious. 
With generalised tonic–clonic seizures, a focal onset will be heralded by 
positive neurological symptoms and signs corresponding to the normal 
function of that area. Occipital onset causes visual changes (lights and 
blobs of colour), temporal lobe onset causes false recognition (déjà vu), 
sensory strip involvement causes sensory alteration (burning, tingling) 
and motor strip involvement causes jerking.
Alternatively, patients report a previous local cortical insult, and it 
may be reasonably (but not invariably) inferred that this is the seat of 
epileptogenesis.
Focal seizures
The classication of focal seizures is shown in Box 28.26. They are 
caused by localised cortical activity. The localisation of such symptoms 
is described above. A spreading pattern of seizure may occur, the abnor-
mal sensation spreading much faster (in seconds) than a migrainous 
focal sensory attack.
Awareness may become impaired if spread occurs to the tempo-
ral lobes (previously ‘complex partial seizure’). Patients stop and stare 
blankly, often blinking repetitively, making smacking movements of their 
lips or displaying other automatisms, such as picking at their clothes. 
After a few minutes consciousness returns but the patient may be mud-
dled and feel drowsy for a period of up to an hour. The age of onset, 
preceding aura, longer duration and post-ictal symptoms usually make 
these easy to differentiate from childhood absence seizures (see below).
Seizures arising from the anterior parts of the frontal lobe may pro-
duce bizarre behaviour patterns, including limb posturing, sleep walking 
or even frenetic, ill-directed motor activity with incoherent screaming. 
Video EEG may be necessary to differentiate these from psychogenic 
attacks (which are more common) but abruptness of onset, stereotyped 
nature, relative brevity and nocturnal preponderance may indicate a fron-
tal  origin. Causes of focal seizures are given in Box 28.28

[[p1216]]
1154    NEUROLOGY
Generalised seizures
Tonic–clonic seizures An initial ‘aura’ may be experienced by the patient, 
depending on the cortical area from which the seizure originates (as 
above). The patient then becomes rigid (tonic) and unconscious, falling 
heavily if standing (‘like a log’) and risking facial injury. During this phase, 
breathing stops and central cyanosis may occur. As cortical discharges 
reduce in frequency, jerking (clonic) movements emerge for 2 minutes at 
most. Afterwards, there is a accid state of deep coma, which can per-
sist for some minutes, and on regaining awareness the patient may be 
confused, disorientated and/or amnesic. During the attack, urinary incon-
tinence and tongue-biting may occur. A severely bitten, bleeding tongue 
after an attack of loss of consciousness is pathognomonic of a generalised 
seizure but less marked lingual injury can occur in syncope. Subsequently, 
the patient usually feels unwell and sleepy, with headache and myalgia. 
Witnesses are usually frightened by the event, often believe the person to 
be dying, and may struggle to give a clear account of the episode. Some 
may not describe the tonic or clonic phase and may not mention cyanosis 
or tongue-biting. In less typical episodes, post-ictal delirium, or sequelae 
such as headache or myalgia, may be the main pointers to the diagnosis. 
Causes of generalised tonic–clonic seizures are listed in Box 28.29
Absence seizures Absence seizures (previously ‘petit mal’) always start in 
childhood. The attacks are rarely mistaken for focal seizures because of 
their brevity. They can occur so frequently (20–30 times a day) that they 
are mistaken for daydreaming or poor concentration in school.
Myoclonic seizures These are typically brief, jerking movements, pre-
dominating in the arms. In epilepsy, they are more marked in the morning 
or on awakening from sleep, and tend to be provoked by fatigue, alcohol, 
or sleep deprivation.
Atonic seizures These are seizures involving brief loss of muscle tone, 
usually resulting in heavy falls with or without loss of consciousness. 
They occur only in the context of epilepsy syndromes that involve other 
forms of seizure.
Tonic seizures These are associated with a generalised increase in tone 
and an associated loss of awareness. They are usually seen as part of an 
epilepsy syndrome and are unlikely to be isolated.
Clonic seizures Clonic seizures are similar to tonic–clonic seizures. The 
clinical manifestations are similar but there is no preceding tonic phase.
Seizures of uncertain generalised or focal nature
Epileptic spasms While these are highlighted in the classication sys-
tem, they are unusual in adult practice and occur mainly in infancy. They 
signify widespread cortical disturbance and take the form of marked 
contractions of the axial musculature, lasting a fraction of a second but 
recurring in clusters of 5–50, often on awakening.
Epilepsy syndromes
Many patients with epilepsy fall into specic patterns, depending 
on seizure type(s), age of onset and treatment responsiveness: the 
so-called electroclinical syndromes (Box 28.30). It is anticipated that 
genetic testing will ultimately demonstrate similarities in molecular 
pathophysiology.
Box 28.31 highlights the more common epilepsy syndromes, which 
are largely of early onset and are sensitive to sleep deprivation, hyper-
ventilation, alcohol and photic stimulation. Epilepsies that do not t into 
any of these diagnostic categories can be delineated rstly on the basis 
28.28 Causes of focal seizures
Idiopathic
 Benign Rolandic epilepsy of 
childhood
 Benign occipital epilepsy of 
childhood
Focal structural lesions
Genetic
 Tuberous sclerosis
 Autosomal dominant nocturnal 
frontal lobe epilepsy
 Autosomal dominant partial epilepsy 
with auditory features (ADPEAF)
 von Hippel–Lindau disease
 Neurobromatosis
 Cerebral migration abnormalities
Infantile hemiplegia
Dysembryonic
 Cortical dysgenesis
 Sturge–Weber syndrome
Mesial temporal sclerosis (associated with febrile convulsions)
Cerebrovascular disease (see Ch. 29)
 Intracerebral haemorrhage
 Cerebral infarction
 Arteriovenous malformation
 Cavernous haemangioma
Tumours (primary and secondary)
Trauma (including neurosurgery)
Infective
 Cerebral abscess (pyogenic)
 Toxoplasmosis
 Cysticercosis
 Tuberculoma
 Subdural empyema
 Encephalitis
 Human immunodeciency virus (HIV)
Inammatory
 Autoimmune encephalopathies 
(e.g. anti-voltage-gated potassium 
channel antibodies, anti-NMDA 
receptor antibodies)
 Sarcoidosis
 Vasculitis
28.29 Causes of generalised tonic–clonic seizures
Generalisation from focal seizures
 See Box 28.28
Genetic
 Inborn errors of metabolism
 Storage diseases
 Phakomatoses (e.g. tuberous 
sclerosis)
Cerebral birth injury
Hydrocephalus
Cerebral anoxia
Drugs
 Antibiotics: penicillin, isoniazid, 
metronidazole
 Antimalarials: chloroquine, meoquine
 Ciclosporin
 Amphetamines (withdrawal)
 Cardiac anti-arrhythmics: 
lidocaine, disopyramide
 Psychotropic agents: 
phenothiazines, tricyclic 
antidepressants, lithium
Alcohol (especially withdrawal)
Toxins
 Organophosphates (sarin)
 Heavy metals (lead, tin)
Metabolic disease
 Hypocalcaemia
 Hyponatraemia
 Hypomagnesaemia
 Hypoglycaemia
 Renal failure
 Liver failure
Infective
 Post-infectious encephalopathy
 Meningitis
Inammatory
 Multiple sclerosis (uncommon)
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Diffuse degenerative diseases
 Alzheimer’s disease (uncommonly)
 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease 
(rarely)

[[p1217]]
Epilepsy    1155
28
of the presence or absence of a known structural or metabolic condition 
(presumed cause), and then on the basis of the primary mode of seizure 
onset (generalised versus focal).
Investigations
Single seizure
All patients with transient loss of consciousness should have a 12-lead 
ECG. Where seizure is suspected or denite, patients should have cranial 
imaging with either MRI or CT, although the yield is low unless focal signs 
are present. EEG may help to assess prognosis once a rm diagnosis has 
been made. The recurrence rate after a rst seizure is approximately 40% 
and most recurrent attacks occur within a month or two of the rst. Further 
seizures are less likely if an identied trigger can be avoided (see Box 28.27).
Other investigations for infective, toxic and metabolic causes 
(Box28.32) may be appropriate. An EEG performed immediately after a 
seizure may be more helpful in showing focal features than if performed 
after a delay.
Epilepsy
The same investigations are required in a patient with epilepsy 
(Box28.32). The EEG may help to establish the type of epilepsy and 
guide therapy. Investigations should be revisited if the epilepsy is intracta-
ble to treatment.
Inter-ictal EEG is abnormal in only about 50% of patients with recurrent 
seizures, so it cannot be used to exclude epilepsy. The sensitivity can 
be increased to about 85% by prolonging recording time and including 
a period of natural or drug-induced sleep, but this does not replace a 
well-taken history. Ambulatory EEG recording or video EEG monitoring 
may help with differentiation of epilepsy from other disorders if attacks 
are sufciently frequent.
28.30 Electroclinical epilepsy syndromes
Adolescence to adulthood
 Juvenile absence epilepsy (JAE)
 Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME)
 Epilepsy with generalised tonic–clonic seizures alone
 Progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PMEs)
 Autosomal dominant epilepsy with auditory features (ADEAF)
 Other familial temporal lobe epilepsies
Less specic age relationship
 Familial focal epilepsy with variable foci (childhood to adult)
 Reex epilepsies
Distinctive constellations
 Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis (MTLE with HS)
 Rasmussen syndrome
 Gelastic (from the Greek word for laughter) seizures with hypothalamic 
hamartoma
 Hemiconvulsion–hemiplegia–epilepsy
Epilepsies with structural–metabolic causes
 Malformations of cortical development (hemimegalencephaly,  
heterotopias etc.)
 Neurocutaneous syndromes (tuberous sclerosis complex, Sturge–Weber etc.)
 Tumour
 Infection
 Trauma
 Angioma
 Perinatal insults
 Stroke
Epilepsies of unknown cause
Conditions with epileptic seizures not needing long-term treatment
 Benign neonatal seizures (BNS)
 Febrile seizures (FS)
28.31 Common generalised epilepsy syndromes
Syndrome
Age of onset
Type of seizure
EEG features
Treatment
Prognosis
Childhood absence 
epilepsy
4–8 years
Frequent brief absences
3/sec spike and wave
Ethosuximide
40% develop GTCS, 
80% remit in adulthood
Sodium valproate
Levetiracetam
Juvenile absence 
epilepsy
10–15 years
Less frequent absences 
than childhood absence
Poly-spike and wave
Sodium valproate
80% develop GTCS, 
80% seizure-free in 
adulthood
Levetiracetam
Juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy
15–20 years
GTCS, absences, morning 
myoclonus
Poly-spike and wave, 
photosensitivity
Sodium valproate
90% remit with AEDs 
but relapse if AED 
withdrawn
Levetiracetam
GTCS on awakening
10–25 years
GTCS, sometimes 
myoclonus
Spike and wave on 
waking and sleep onset
Sodium valproate
65% controlled with 
AEDs but relapse off 
treatment
Levetiracetam
(AED = antiepileptic drug; GTCS = generalised tonic–clonic seizure)
28.32 Investigation of epilepsy
From where is the epilepsy arising?
 Standard EEG
 Sleep EEG
 EEG with special electrodes (foramen 
ovale, subdural)
What is the cause of the epilepsy?
Structural lesion?
 CT
 MRI
Metabolic disorder?
 Urea and electrolytes
 Liver function tests
 Blood glucose
 Serum calcium, magnesium
Inammatory or infective disorder?
 Full blood count, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, C-reactive 
protein
 Chest X-ray
 Serology for syphilis, HIV, collagen 
disease
 CSF examination
Are the attacks truly epileptic?
 Ambulatory EEG
 Videotelemetry
(CSF = cerebrospinal uid; CT = computed tomography; EEG = electroencephalography;  
HIV = human immunodeciency virus; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)

[[p1218]]
1156    NEUROLOGY
Indications for imaging are summarised in Box 28.33. Imaging cannot 
establish a diagnosis of epilepsy but identies any structural cause. It is 
not required if a condent diagnosis of a recognised GGE syndrome (e.g. 
juvenile myoclonic epilepsy) is made. While CT excludes a major struc-
tural cause of epilepsy, MRI is required to demonstrate subtle changes 
such as hippocampal sclerosis, which may direct or inform surgical 
intervention.
Management
It is important to explain the nature and cause of seizures to patients and 
their relatives, and to instruct relatives in the rst aid management of sei-
zures (Box 28.34). Many people with epilepsy feel stigmatised and may 
become unnecessarily isolated from work and social life. It is important 
to emphasise that epilepsy is a common disorder that affects 0.5%–1% 
of the population, and that full control of seizures can be expected in 
approximately 70% of patients (Box 28.35).
Immediate care
Little can or needs to be done for a person during a convulsive seizure 
except for rst aid and common-sense manoeuvres to limit damage or 
secondary complications (see Box 28.34). Advice should be given that 
on no account should anything be inserted into the patient's mouth. The 
management of status epilepticus is described on page 1137.
Lifestyle advice
Patients should be advised to avoid activities where they might place 
themselves or others at risk if they have a seizure. This applies at work, at 
home and at leisure. At home, only shallow baths (or showers) should be 
taken. Prolonged cycle journeys should be discouraged until reasonable 
freedom from seizures has been achieved. Activities involving prolonged 
proximity to water (swimming, shing or boating) should always be car-
ried out in the company of someone who is aware of the risks and the 
potential need for rescue measures. Driving regulations vary between 
countries and the patient should be made aware of these (Box 28.36). 
Certain occupations, such as reghter or airline pilot, are not open to 
those with a previous or active diagnosis of epilepsy; further information 
is available from epilepsy support organisations.
The risk of harm from epilepsy should be discussed around the time 
of diagnosis. In particular epilepsy is associated with a very small, but 
potentially modiable, risk of sudden death (sudden unexpected death in 
epilepsy, SUDEP). Explaining risks of epilepsy, including SUDEP, should 
be done with care and sensitivity, and with the aim of motivating the 
patient to adapt habits and lifestyle to optimise epilepsy control and min-
imise risks of serious complications.
Antiepileptic drugs
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) should be considered where risk of seizure 
recurrence is high. A diagnosis of two or more seizures is justication 
enough but a prolonged inter-seizure interval may deter some patients 
and physicians. Treatment decisions should always be shared with the 
patient, to enhance adherence. A wide range of drugs is available. These 
agents either increase inhibitory neurotransmission in the brain or alter 
neuronal sodium channels to prevent abnormally rapid transmission of 
impulses. In the majority of patients, full control is achieved with a single 
drug. Dose regimens should be kept as simple as possible. Guidelines 
are listed in Box 28.37. For focal epilepsies, one large study suggests 
that lamotrigine is the best-tolerated monotherapy, which, alongside its 
favourable adverse-effect prole and relative lack of pharmacokinetic 
interactions, makes it a good rst-line drug, although caution must be 
exercised with oral contraceptive use. Unclassied or genetic general-
ised epilepsies respond best to valproate, although pregnancy-related 
problems mean that valproate should not be used in women of repro-
ductive age unless the benets outweigh the risks. The initial choice 
should be an established rst-line drug (Box 28.38), with more recently 
introduced drugs as second choice.
Monitoring therapy
Some practitioners confuse epilepsy care with serum level monitoring. 
The newer drugs have much more predictable pharmacokinetics than 
the older ones and the only indication for measuring serum levels is if 
there is doubt about adherence. Blood levels need to be interpreted 
carefully and dose changes made to treat the patient rather than to bring 
a serum level into the ‘therapeutic range’. Some centres advocate serum 
level monitoring during pregnancy (notably with lamotrigine) but the evi-
dence of benet for this is not strong.
28.36 UK driving regulations
The physician’s prime duty is to ensure the patient is aware of the legal obligation 
to inform the driving authority
Private use
Single seizure
 Cease driving for 6 months; a longer period may be required if risk of 
recurrence is high
Epilepsy (i.e. more than one seizure over the age of 5 years)
 Cease driving immediately
 Licence restored when patient is seizure-free for 1 year, or an initial sleep 
seizure is followed by exclusively sleep seizures for 1 year, or mixed awake and 
sleep seizures are followed by 3 years of exclusively sleep seizures
 Licence will require renewal every 3 years thereafter until patient is seizure-free 
for 10 years
Withdrawal of antiepileptic drugs
 Cease driving during withdrawal period and for 6 months  
thereafter
Vocational drivers (heavy goods and public service vehicles)
 No licence permitted if any seizure has occurred after the age of 5 years until 
patient is off medication and seizure-free for more than 10 years, and has no 
potentially epileptogenic brain lesion
28.33 Indications for brain imaging in epilepsy
 Epilepsy starting after the age of 16 years
 Seizures having focal features clinically
 Electroencephalogram showing a focal seizure source
 Control of seizures difcult or deteriorating
28.34 How to administer rst aid for seizures
 Move the person away from danger (re, water, machinery, furniture)
 After convulsions cease, turn the person into the ‘recovery’ position  
(semi-prone)
 Ensure the airway is clear but do NOT insert anything in the mouth (tongue-
biting occurs at seizure onset and cannot be prevented by observers)
 If convulsions continue for more than 5mins or recur without the person 
regaining consciousness, summon urgent medical attention
 Do not leave the person alone until fully recovered (drowsiness and delirium can 
persist for up to 1hr)
28.35 Epilepsy: outcome after 20 years
 50% are seizure-free, without drugs, for the previous 5 years
 20% are seizure-free for the previous 5 years but continue to take  
medication
 30% continue to have seizures in spite of antiepileptic therapy

[[p1219]]
Epilepsy    1157
28
Epilepsy surgery
Some patients with drug-resistant epilepsy benet from surgical resec-
tion of epileptogenic brain tissue. Less invasive treatments, including 
vagal nerve stimulation or deep brain stimulation, may also be help-
ful in some patients. All those who continue to experience seizures 
despite appropriate drug treatment should be considered for surgical 
treatment. Planning such interventions requires intensive specialist 
assessment and investigation to identify the site of seizure onset and 
the dispensability of any target areas for resection, i.e. whether the 
area of brain involved is necessary for a critical function such as vision 
or motor function.
Withdrawing antiepileptic therapy
Withdrawal of medication may be considered after a patient has been 
seizure-free for more than 2 years. Childhood-onset epilepsy, particu-
larly classical absence seizures, carries the best prognosis for successful 
drug withdrawal. Other epilepsy syndromes, such as juvenile myoclonic 
epilepsy, have a marked tendency to recur after drug withdrawal.
Focal epilepsies that begin in adult life are also likely to recur, especially 
if there is an identied structural lesion. Overall, the recurrence rate after 
drug withdrawal depends on the individual's epilepsy history. An indi-
vidualised estimate may be gained from the SIGN guideline tables (see 
‘Further information’).
Patients should be advised of the risks of recurrence, to allow them to 
decide whether or not they wish to withdraw. If undertaken, withdrawal 
should be done slowly, reducing the drug dose gradually over weeks 
or months. Withdrawal may necessitate precautions around driving or 
occupation (see Box 28.36).
Contraception
Some AEDs induce hepatic enzymes that metabolise synthetic hor-
mones, increasing the risk of contraceptive failure. This is most marked 
with carbamazepine, phenytoin and barbiturates, but clinically signicant 
effects can be seen with lamotrigine and topiramate. If the AED cannot 
be changed, this can be overcome by giving higher-dose preparations 
of the oral contraceptive. Sodium valproate and levetiracetam have no 
interaction with hormonal contraception.
Pregnancy and reproduction
Epilepsy presents specic management problems during pregnancy 
(Box 28.39). There is usually concern about the risks of teratogenesis 
associated with AEDs which must be balanced against the benets 
of these drugs. It is important to recognise proportionate risks: back-
ground risk of severe fetal malformation in the general population is 
around 2%–3%, while the AED most associated with teratogenesis 
is sodium valproate, which, at high dose, increases the risk to up to 
10%. Long-term observational studies show that most of the com-
monly used AEDs can be given safely in pregnancy, although the risk of 
congenital abnormalities in the fetus is dependent on the type, number 
and dose of AEDs.
Over the past few years medicines regulatory agencies have strength-
ened their warnings surrounding the risk of birth defects and develop-
mental disorders in children born to women who take valproate during 
pregnancy. In the UK it has been emphasised that if valproate is taken 
during pregnancy, up to 4 in 10 babies are at risk of developmental 
disorders, in addition to the 1 in 10 who are at risk of birth defects. 
Consequently, in the UK, valproate must no longer be used in any 
woman or girl able to have children, unless she has a pregnancy preven-
tion programme in place.
Pre-conception treatment with folic acid (5 mg daily), along with use 
of the smallest effective doses of as few AEDs as possible, may reduce 
the risk of fetal abnormalities. The risks of abrupt AED withdrawal to the 
mother should be stressed.
Seizures may become more frequent during pregnancy, particu-
larly if pharmacokinetic changes decrease serum levels of AEDs (see 
Box28.39).
Menstrual irregularities and reduced fertility are more common in 
women with epilepsy, and are also increased by sodium valproate. 
Patients with epilepsy are at greater risk of osteoporosis, apparently 
independently of the drug used. Some centres advocate vitamin D sup-
plementation in any patient with epilepsy but the higher female risk of 
osteoporosis makes this most important in women. Oral contraception 
can interact with individual AEDs (see Box 28.39).
Prognosis
The outcome of newly diagnosed epilepsy is generally good. Overall, 
generalised epilepsies and generalised seizures are more readily con-
trolled than focal seizures. The presence of a structural lesion reduces 
the chances of freedom from seizures. The overall prognosis for 
28.38 Guidelines for choice of antiepileptic drug1
Epilepsy type
First-line
Second-line
Third-line
Focal onset 
and/or 
secondary 
GTCS
Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Gabapentin
Oxcarbazepine
Phenytoin
Pregabalin
Tiagabine
Levetiracetam
Sodium 
valproate
Topiramate
Perampanel
Zonisamide
Lacosamide
GTCS2
Sodium 
valproate
Lamotrigine 
Topiramate
Phenytoin
Primidone
Acetazolamide
Levetiracetam
Zonisamide
Ethosuximide
Absence2
Ethosuximide
Sodium 
valproate
Lamotrigine
Clonazepam
Myoclonic2
Sodium 
valproate
Levetiracetam
Lamotrigine
Clonazepam
Phenobarbital
1See Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network SIGN 143 – Diagnosis and management of 
epilepsy in adults (May 2015). 2Genetic generalised epilepsies.
N.B. Use as few drugs as possible at the lowest possible dose. Avoid sodium valproate in 
women of childbearing age/potential unless benet outweighs risk.
(GTCS = generalised tonic–clonic seizure)
28.37 Guidelines for antiepileptic drug therapy*
 Start with one rst-line drug (see Box 28.38)
 Start at a low dose; gradually increase dose until effective control of seizures  
is achieved or side-effects develop
 Optimise adherence (use minimum number of doses per day)
 If rst drug fails (seizures continue or side-effects develop), start second  
rst-line drug, followed if possible by gradual withdrawal of rst
 If second drug fails (seizures continue or side-effects develop), start second-line 
drug in combination with the preferred baseline drug at maximum tolerated 
dose (beware interactions)
 If this combination fails (seizures continue or side-effects develop), replace 
second-line drug with alternative second-line drug
 If this combination fails, check adherence and reconsider diagnosis.  
(Are events seizures? Occult lesion? Treatment adherence/alcohol/drugs 
confounding response?)
 Consider alternative, non-drug treatments (e.g. epilepsy surgery, vagal nerve 
stimulation)
 Use minimum number of drugs in combination at any one time
*See Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network SIGN 143 – Diagnosis and management of 
epilepsy in adults (May 2015).

[[p1220]]
1158    NEUROLOGY
epilepsy is shown in Box 28.35. Problems that epilepsy poses in older 
adults and in adolescents are summarised in Boxes 28.40 and 28.41, 
respectively.
Status epilepticus
Presentation and management are described on page 1137. While gen-
eralised status epilepticus is most easily recognised, non-convulsive 
status may be less dramatic and less easily diagnosed. It may cause 
only altered awareness, delirium or wandering with automatisms. In an 
intensive care unit setting, EEG monitoring is essential to ensure that 
diagnosis and treatment are optimised.
Non-epileptic attack disorder (‘dissociative attacks’)
The difculty with nomenclature is discussed on page 1152. Patients 
may present with attacks that resemble epileptic seizures but are caused 
by psychological phenomena and have no abnormal EEG discharges. 
Such attacks may be very prolonged, sometimes mimicking status epi-
lepticus. Epileptic and non-epileptic attacks may coexist and time and 
effort are needed to clarify the relative contribution of each, allowing more 
accurate and comprehensive treatment.
Non-epileptic attack disorder (NEAD) may be accompanied by dra-
matic ailing of the limbs and arching of the back, with side-to-side head 
movements and vocalising. Cyanosis and severe biting of the tongue are 
rare but incontinence can occur. Distress and crying are common follow-
ing non-epileptic attacks. The distinction between epileptic attacks orig-
inating in the frontal lobes and non-epileptic attacks may be especially 
difcult, and may require videotelemetry with prolonged EEG recordings. 
Non-epileptic attacks are three times more common in women than in 
men. They are not necessarily associated with formal psychiatric illness. 
Patients and carers may need reassurance that hospital admission is not 
required for every attack. Prevention requires psychotherapeutic inter-
ventions rather than drug therapy.
Vestibular disorders
Vertigo is the typical symptom caused by vestibular dysfunction, and 
most patients with vertigo have acute vestibular failure, benign parox-
ysmal positional vertigo or Ménière's disease. Central (brain) causes of 
vertigo are rare by comparison, with the exception of migraine.
Acute vestibular failure
Although commonly called ‘labyrinthitis’ or ‘vestibular neuronitis’, acute 
vestibular failure is a more accurate term, as most cases are idiopathic. 
It usually presents as isolated severe vertigo with vomiting and unstead-
iness. It begins abruptly, often on waking, and many patients are initially 
bed-bound. The vertigo settles within a few days, though head movement 
may continue to provoke transient symptoms (positional vertigo) for some 
time. During the acute attack, nystagmus will be present for a few days.
Cinnarizine, prochlorperazine or betahistine provide symptomatic relief 
but should not be used long term, as this may delay recovery. A small 
proportion of patients fail to recover fully and complain of ongoing imbal-
ance and dysequilibrium rather than vertigo; vestibular rehabilitation by a 
physiotherapist may help.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is due to the pres-
ence of otolithic debris from the saccule or utricle affecting the free 
ow of endolymph in the semicircular canals (cupulolithiasis). It may 
follow minor head injury but typically is spontaneous. The history is 
diagnostic, with transient (seconds) vertigo precipitated by movement 
(typically, rolling over in bed or getting into or out of bed). Although 
it is benign, and usually self-limiting after weeks or months, patients 
are often alarmed by the symptoms. The diagnosis can be conrmed 
by the ‘Hallpike manoeuvre’ to demonstrate positional nystagmus 
(Fig.28.24). Treatment comprises explanation and reassurance, along 
with positioning procedures designed to return otolithic debris from the 
semicircular canal to saccule or utricle (such as the Epley manoeuvre) 
and/or to re-educate the brain to cope with the inappropriate signals 
from the labyrinth (such as Cawthorne–Cooksey exercises: see ‘Further 
information’).
28.41 Epilepsy in adolescence
 Effect on school/education: seizures, antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) and 
psychological complications of epilepsy may hamper education. Fear may make 
some educational institutions unduly restrictive.
 Effect on family relationships: parents may adopt a protective role, which can 
lead to epilepsy (and AEDs) becoming a point of assertion and rebellion.
 Effect on career choice: epilepsy may exclude or restrict employment in the 
emergency services and armed forces.
 Alcohol: may affect sleep pattern; excess may be associated with poor AED 
adherence.
 Illicit drugs: may affect seizure threshold and be associated with poor AED 
adherence.
 Sleep disturbance: may be worsened by social activities and computer games.
 Oral contraception: interactions with AED can occur. Use may not always be 
disclosed to parents.
28.39 Epilepsy in pregnancy
 Provision of pre-conception counselling is best practice: start folic 
acid (5mg daily for 2 months) before conception to reduce the risk of fetal 
malformations.
 Fetal malformation: risk is minimised if a single drug is used.
Carbamazepine and lamotrigine have the lowest incidence of major fetal 
malformations.
The risk with sodium valproate is particularly high (see text) and should be 
carefully balanced against its benets.
Levetiracetam may be safe but avoid other newer drugs if possible.
 Learning difculties in children: IQ may be lower when children are exposed 
to valproate in utero, so its use should always be considered carefully.
 Haemorrhagic disease of the newborn: enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drugs 
increase risk. Give IM vitamin K (1mg) to the infant at birth.
 Increased frequency of seizures: where breakthrough seizures occur, monitor 
antiepileptic drug levels and adjust the dose regimen accordingly.
 Pharmacokinetic effects of pregnancy: carbamazepine levels may fall in the 
third trimester. Lamotrigine and levetiracetam levels may fall early in pregnancy. 
Some advocate monitoring of levels.
28.40 Epilepsy in old age
 Incidence and prevalence: late-onset epilepsy is very common and the annual 
incidence in those over 60 years is rising.
 Fits and faints: the features that usually differentiate these may be less 
denitive than in younger patients.
 Non-convulsive status epilepticus: can present as delirium in old age.
 Cerebrovascular disease: the underlying cause of seizures in 30%–50% of 
patients over the age of 50 years. A seizure may occur with an overt stroke or 
with occult vascular disease.
 Neurogenerative disease or dementia: should be considered when epilepsy 
presents in old age.
 Antiepileptic drug regimens: keep as simple as possible and take care to 
avoid interactions with other drugs being prescribed.
 Carbamazepine-induced hyponatraemia: increases signicantly with age; 
this is particularly important in patients on diuretics or those with heart failure.
 Withdrawal of antiepileptic therapy: drug withdrawal should be attempted 
only where benets exceed risk of harm from seizures.

[[p1221]]
Disorders of sleep    1159
28
Ménière disease
This is due to an abnormality of the endolymph that causes episodes 
of vertigo accompanied by tinnitus and fullness in the ear, each attack 
typically lasting a few hours. Over the years, patients may develop pro-
gressive deafness (typically low-tone on audiometry). Examination is 
typically normal in between attacks. The diagnosis is clinical, supported 
by abnormal audiometry. Ménière disease is idiopathic but a similar syn-
drome may be caused by middle ear trauma or infection. Imaging may 
be indicated to exclude other focal brainstem or cerebellopontine angle 
pathology but will be normal in Ménière disease. Management includes 
a low-salt diet, vestibular sedatives for acute attacks (e.g. cinnarizine or 
prochlorperazine), and occasionally surgery to increase endolymphatic 
drainage from the vestibular system. Migraine may also cause episodic 
vertigo, and can be confused with Ménière disease, although usually 
other migrainous features will appear in the history.
Disorders of sleep
Sleep disturbances include too much sleep (hypersomnolence or exces-
sive daytime sleepiness), insufcient or poor-quality sleep (insomnia) 
and abnormal behaviour during sleep (parasomnias). Insomnia is usually 
caused by psychological or psychiatric disorders, shift work and other 
environmental causes, pain and so on, and will not be discussed further. 
Many symptoms and disorders may affect sleep and sleep quality (e.g. 
pain, depression/anxiety, parkinsonism).
Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnolence)
There are primary and secondary causes (Box 28.42). The most com-
mon causes are impaired sleep due to lifestyle issues or sleep-disordered 
breathing. Sleepiness may be measured using the Epworth sleepiness 
scale (see Box 17.86). Most causes will be identied by a detailed history 
from the patient and their bed partner, and a 2-week sleep diary.
Narcolepsy
This has a prevalence of about 1 in 2000, with peak onset in adoles-
cence and early middle age. The key symptom is sudden, irresistible 
‘sleep attacks’, often in inappropriate circumstances such as while 
eating or talking. Other characteristic features help distinguish this from 
excessive daytime sleepiness (Box 28.43). Symptoms may be due to 
loss of hypocretin-secreting hypothalamic neurons. Diagnosis requires 
sleep study with sleep latency testing (demonstrating rapid onset of REM 
sleep). Narcolepsy may respond to stimulants such as modanil but more 
severe cases may require sodium oxybate, dexamfetamine, methylphen-
idate or a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). Cataplexy can be 
debilitating and can respond to sodium oxybate or to antidepressants, 
such as clomipramine or venlafaxine.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are abnormal motor behaviours that occur around sleep. 
They may arise in either REM or non-REM sleep, with characteristic 
Fig. 28.24 The Hallpike manoeuvre for diagnosis of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Patients are asked to keep their eyes open and look at the examiner 
The examiner looks for nystagmus (usually accompanied by vertigo). In BPPV, the nystagmus typically occurs in A or B only and is torsional, the fast phase beating towards 
the lower ear. Its onset is usually delayed a few seconds and it lasts 10–20 seconds. As the patient is returned to the upright position, transient nystagmus may occur in the 
opposite direction. Both nystagmus and vertigo typically decrease (fatigue) on repeat testing.
28.42 Causes of hypersomnolence
Primary causes
 Narcolepsy
 Idiopathic hypersomnolence
 Brain injury
Secondary causes (due to poor-quality sleep)
 Obstructive sleep apnoea
 Pain
 Restless legs/periodic limb 
movements of sleep
 Parkinsonism and other 
neurodegenerative diseases
 Depression/anxiety
 Medication
 Environmental factors (noise, 
temperature etc.)
28.43 Narcolepsy symptoms
Sleep attacks
 Brief, frequent and unlike normal somnolence
Cataplexy
 Sudden loss of muscle tone triggered by surprise, laughter, strong emotion etc.
Hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations
 Frightening hallucinations experienced during sleep onset or waking due to 
intrusion of REM sleep during wakefulness (can occur in normal people)
Sleep paralysis
 Brief paralysis on waking (can occur in normal people)

[[p1222]]
1160    NEUROLOGY
features and timing. Non-REM parasomnias tend to occur early in sleep. 
Parasomnias should be distinguished from other motor disturbances 
(such as periodic limb movements, hypnic jerks or sleep talking) and 
sleep-onset epileptic seizures. History from a sleeping partner or other 
witness is essential.
Non-REM parasomnias
These are due to incomplete arousal from non-REM sleep and manifest 
as night terrors, sleep walking and confusional arousals (sleep drunken-
ness). They typically occur within an hour or two of sleep onset, are com-
mon in children and usually of no pathological signicance. Rarely, they 
persist into adulthood and may become increasingly complex, includ-
ing dressing, moving objects, eating, drinking or even acts of violence. 
Patients have little or no recollection of the episodes, even though they 
appear ‘awake’. The episodes may be triggered by alcohol or unfamiliar 
sleeping situations and can be familial. Treatment is usually not required 
but clonazepam can be used.
REM sleep behaviour disorder
In REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD), patients ‘act out’ their 
dreams during REM sleep, due to failure of the usual muscle atonia. 
Sleep partners provide typical histories of patients ‘ghting’ or ‘strug-
gling’ in their sleep, sometimes causing injury to themselves or to 
their partner. They are easily roused from this state, with recollection 
of their dream, unlike in non-REM states. RBD is more common in 
men and may be an early symptom of neurodegenerative diseases 
such as alpha synucleinopathies, perhaps preceding more typical 
symptoms of these conditions by years. Polysomnography will con-
rm absence of atonia during REM sleep. Clonazepam is the most 
successful treatment.
Restless legs syndrome
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is common, with a prevalence of up to 
10%, but many patients never seek medical attention. It is characterised 
by unpleasant leg (rarely, arm) sensations that are eased by movement 
(motor restlessness); the diagnosis is clinical (Box 28.44). It has a strong 
familial tendency and can present with daytime somnolence due to poor 
sleep. It is usually idiopathic but may be associated with iron deciency, 
pregnancy, peripheral neuropathy, Parkinson’s disease or uraemia. It 
should be distinguished from akathisia, the daytime motor restlessness 
that is an adverse effect of antipsychotic drugs. Treatment, if required, 
is with gabapentanoids, dopaminergic drugs (dopamine agonists or 
levodopa) or benzodiazepines. Serum ferritin should be maintained 
above 75 µg/L.
Periodic limb movements in sleep
Unlike RLS, periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS) only occur during 
sleep and cause repetitive exion movements of the limbs, usually in the 
early (non-REM) stages of sleep. Although patients are unaware of the 
symptoms, they may disrupt sleep quality and often disturb partners. 
The pathological signicance of PLMS is uncertain and it often occurs in 
normal health. There is an overlap with RLS. Treatment is most success-
ful with clonazepam or dopaminergic drugs.
28.44 Diagnostic criteria for restless legs syndrome
A need to move the legs, usually accompanied or caused by uncomfortable, 
unpleasant sensations in the legs, with the following features:
 only present or worse during periods of rest or inactivity, such as lying or sitting
 partially or totally relieved by movement such as walking or stretching, at least 
as long as the activity continues
 generally worse or occurs only in the evening or night.
Neuro-inammatory diseases
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an important treatable cause of long-term dis-
ability in adults. The annual incidence is around 7 per 100 000, while the 
lifetime risk of developing MS is about 1 in 400. The incidence of MS is 
higher in Northern Europeans and the disease is about twice as common 
in females.
Pathophysiology
There is evidence that both genetic and environmental factors play a 
causative role. The prevalence of MS is low near the equator and 
increases in the temperate zones of both hemispheres. People retain 
the risk of developing the disease in the zone in which they grew up, 
indicating that environmental exposures during growth and development 
are important. Prevalence also correlates with environmental factors, 
such as sunlight exposure, vitamin D and exposure to Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV), although causative mechanisms remain unclear. Genetic factors 
are also relevant; the risk of familial occurrence in MS is 15%, with high-
est risk in rst-degree relatives (age-adjusted risk 4%–5% for siblings and 
2%–3% for parents or offspring). Large genome-wide association stud-
ies (GWAS) of MS implicate the modest inuence of hundreds of genes, 
in particular those with an immunological function, and there is overlap 
with other immune diseases. An autoimmune cause of multiple sclerosis 
is therefore supported by genetic studies, a prominent role of immune 
cells in disease pathogenesis and efcacy of multiple immune therapies.
Initial CNS inammation in MS involves entry of lymphocytes across 
the blood–brain barrier, which can be inhibited by monoclonal antibod-
ies like natalizumab which bind α4ß1-integrin. These cells proliferate in 
perivascular lesions and the resulting inammatory cascade releases 
cytokines and initiates destruction of the oligodendrocyte–myelin unit. 
Histologically, the resultant lesion is a plaque of inammatory demyelina-
tion, most commonly in the periventricular regions of the brain, the optic 
nerves and the spinal cord (Fig. 28.25), and also found in the cortex. 
After the acute attack, gliosis and repair by oligodendrocyte precursor 
cells follows, leaving a shrunken scar.
Much of the initial acute clinical decit is caused by the effect of inam-
mation on transmission of the nervous impulse rather than structural dis-
ruption of myelin, and may explain the rapid recovery of some decits. In 
the long term, accumulating myelin loss reduces the efciency of impulse 
propagation or causes complete conduction block, contributing to sus-
tained impairment of CNS functions. Inammatory mediators released 
during the acute attack, and loss of structural and trophic support from 
myelinating cells, contribute to axonal damage, which is a feature of the 
latter stages of the disease and is an important substrate of disability in 
the later, progressive phase of MS (Fig. 28.26).
Clinical features
The diagnosis of MS requires the demonstration of otherwise unex-
plained CNS lesions separated in time and space (Box 28.45); tradi-
tionally, this meant two or more clinical relapses affecting different parts 
of the nervous system, and the rst ever episode is often referred to as 
a ‘clinically isolated syndrome’ (CIS). However recent changes to diag-
nostic criteria mean that MS may be diagnosed after an isolated episode 
because MRI can identify clinically silent lesions of different ages, and the 
presence of unpaired oligoclonal bands in the CSF can strongly suggest 
the development of future events (Box 28.45). As such MS can be proac-
tively diagnosed and treated compared to a decade ago. The peak age 
of onset of MS is the fourth decade; onset in childhood or after the age 
of 70 years is less common but can occur.
Symptoms and signs of MS usually evolve over days or weeks, resolv-
ing over weeks or months. About 85%–90% of patients have an initial 
relapsing and remitting clinical course with variable intervening recovery, 
although the majority will eventually enter a secondary progressive phase. 
Most of the rest follow a slowly progressive clinical course (so-called 

[[p1223]]
Neuro-inflammatory diseases    1161
28
primary progressive MS). Aggressive variants of multiple sclerosis can 
occur, and this can include presentation with tumour-like lesions which 
may require biopsy for conrmation (see Fig. 28.26). The clinical course 
of multiple sclerosis is highly variable and difcult to predict. Frequent 
relapses with incomplete recovery indicate a poorer prognosis and the 
need for high efcacy therapy. Some milder cases have an interval of 
years or even decades between attacks.
There are a number of typical clinical symptoms and syndromes sug-
gestive of MS, occurring either at presentation or during the course of the 
illness (Box 28.46). The physical signs observed in MS are determined 
by the anatomical site of inammation. Combined spinal cord and brain-
stem signs are common, although evidence of previous optic neuritis 
may be found in the form of an afferent pupillary decit. Cognitive symp-
toms of MS are underappreciated and can be signicant, particularly in 
the later stages of the disease.
The prognosis for patients with MS is difcult to predict with con-
dence, especially early in the disease. Those with untreated relapsing 
and remitting MS experience, on average, 1–2 relapses every 2 years, 
although this may decline with time. Prognosis is better for patients 
with optic neuritis and only sensory relapses. Overall, about one-third 
of patients are disabled to the point of needing help with walking after 
10 years, and this proportion rises to about half after 15 years. It would 
appear likely (though this is as yet unproven) that disease-modifying 
drugs will have an effect on long-term disability.
A
B
C
A
A
A
B
B
Fig. 28.25 Multiple sclerosis.
resonance imaging in multiple sclerosis. Multiple high-signal lesions (arrows) 
gadolinium enhancement, recent lesions (A arrows) show enhancement, suggesting 
active inammation (enhancement persists for 4 weeks); older lesions (B arrows) 
show no enhancement but low signal, suggesting gliosis.
28.45 The McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis (MS) (2017)*
Number 
of clinical 
attacks
Number of 
lesions with 
objective clinical 
evidence
Additional evidence required to diagnose 
MS
≥2
≥2
None
≥2
1 (with reasonable 
historical evidence 
of a previous 
relapse)
None
≥2
1
Dissemination in space demonstrated by 
an additional clinical attack implicating a 
different CNS site or by MRI
1
≥2
Dissemination in time demonstrated by 
an additional clinical attack or by MRI or 
demonstration of CSF-specic oligoclonal 
bands
1
1
Dissemination in space demonstrated by 
an additional clinical attack implicating a 
different CNS site or by MRI and
Dissemination in time demonstrated by 
an additional clinical attack or by MRI, or 
demonstration of CSF-specic oligoclonal 
bands
*The diagnostic criteria require reasonable exclusion of other possible causes for central 
nervous system inammation.
From Thompson A et al. Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: 2017 revisions of the McDonald 
criteria. Lancet Neurology 2018;17(2):162–173.
(CSF = cerebrospinal uid; CNS = central nervous system; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)
28.46 Clinical features of multiple sclerosis
Common presentations of multiple sclerosis
 Optic neuritis
 Transverse myelitis
 Brainstem syndrome
 Cerebellar syndrome
Other symptoms and syndromes seen in MS
 Afferent pupillary defect and optic atrophy (previous optic neuritis)
 Lhermitte’s symptom (tingling in spine or limbs on neck exion)
 Progressive paraparesis
 Partial Brown–Séquard syndrome (Fig. 28.18)
 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia with ataxia
 Tremor
 Cognitive dysfunction
 Trigeminal neuralgia under the age of 50

[[p1224]]
1162    NEUROLOGY
Investigations
There is no single diagnostic test that is denitive for MS and the results 
of investigation need to be combined with the clinical picture in order to 
make a diagnosis; MRI is the most important investigation (Fig. 28.27). 
MS mimics should be excluded (see below). Following the rst clinical 
event, investigations help conrm the disseminated nature of the dis-
ease. MRI is the most sensitive technique for imaging lesions in brain 
and spinal cord (Fig. 28.28) and for excluding other causes that have 
provoked the neurological decit. MS lesions often have an oval appear-
ance and lesions which have developed in the past couple of months 
usually take up contrast around the lesion rim. Typical MRI lesion loca-
tions include the periventricular region, juxtacortical, infratentorial regions 
and spinal cord. Spinal cord lesions in MS are typically short and are 
asymmetric (Fig. 28.28). Longer spinal cord lesions, over 3 vertebral 
bodies in length, should raise the possibility of neuromyelitis optica, an 
antibody-mediated neuroinammatory disease. In older age groups, MRI 
appearances in MS may be confused with those of small-vessel disease 
and non-specic white matter lesions can be seen in common conditions 
such as migraine. Therefore careful and experienced evaluation of brain 
and spinal cord imaging is important for accurate diagnosis.
In MS, the CSF typically has a normal white cell count and protein, 
although may show a small lymphocytic pleocytosis in active disease. 
CSF can be used to identify intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins 
in MS. Oligoclonal bands are found in the CSF but not the blood in 
about 90% of patients. The presence of these bands can help facilitate a 
more rapid diagnosis of MS in individuals who have had a single clinical 
event, since they suggest a more chronic neuroinammatory process. 
Oligoclonal bands are not specic for MS and denote only intrathecal 
inammation, provided they are unique for the CSF. These can appear 
in other disorders, which should be excluded by examination and inves-
tigation. It is important to exclude other potentially treatable conditions, 
such as infection, vitamin B12 deciency and spinal cord compression.
Management
The management of MS involves (i) disease modifying therapies and 
(ii) symptomatic approaches.
Disease-modifying treatment (DMT)
The past two decades have seen enormous progress in the treatment of 
multiple sclerosis, in particular the treatment of early MS. There is a broad 
spectrum of immunotherapies for the treatment of MS, with > 10 drugs 
approved in Europe and the United States. These drugs are most ef-
cacious in the relapsing–remitting phase of disease, and early diagnosis 
and treatment is increasingly viewed as important in improving long-term 
outcomes. All DMTs reduce relapse frequency and higher efcacy drugs, 
for example B-cell depleting monoclonal antibodies, reduce the develop-
ment of disability. Recently, immunotherapies have also been approved 
to prevent disability in progressive forms of MS, although only where 
active inammation can be demonstrated. In general, drugs with higher 
efcacy are associated with more serious side-effects and clinical trials 
are under way to determine the optimum level of immune treatment early 
in the course of MS (Box 28.47). Careful selection and counselling of 
patients are necessary and these drugs should be supervised by teams 
experienced in their use, as recommended in national guidelines. Some 
DMTs can be used during pregnancy, but MS specialist advice should 
be sought.
Smoking, poor diet and obesity are risk factors for disease progres-
sion in MS, and should be addressed as early as possible.
The acute relapse
In a disabling relapse of MS, pulses of high-dose glucocorticoid, given 
either intravenously or orally over 3–5 days, will shorten the duration 
of the acute episode, but will not affect long-term recovery. If a patient 
develops a new neurological decit whilst on a DMT, consideration 
should also be given to possible neurological side-effects of the drug 
(e.g. visual loss due to ngolimod-associated macular oedema, cognitive 
symptoms caused by natalizumab-associated PML)
Exclude other structural disease
and identify plaques of demyelination
Image area of clinical involvement
(magnetic resonance imaging, myelography)
Demonstrate other sites of involvement
Imaging (MRI)
Visual evoked potentials
Other evoked potentials
Demonstrate inflammatory nature of lesion(s)
Cerebrospinal fluid examination
Cell count
Protein electrophoresis (oligoclonal bands)
Exclude other conditions
Chest X-ray
AQP4/MOG antibodies
Serum vitamin B12
Antinuclear antibodies
Antiphospholipid antibodies
Fig. 28.27 Investigations in a patient suspected of having multiple sclerosis.
Fulminant
(< 10%)
Relapsing–
remitting
(80%)
Primary
progressive
(10–20%)
Secondary
progressive
Disability
Time
Fig. 28.26 The progression of disability in fulminant, relapsing–remitting and progressive multiple sclerosis. Courtesy of Professor D.A.S. Compston.

[[p1225]]
Neuro-inflammatory diseases    1163
28
Treatment of symptoms, complications and disability
Treatments for the complications of MS are summarised in Box 28.48. 
It is important to provide patients with a careful explanation of the nature 
of the disease and its outcome. Specialist nurses working in a multidis-
ciplinary team of health-care professionals are of great value in man-
aging the chronic phase of the disease. Periods of physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy may improve functional capacity in those who 
become disabled, and guidance can be provided on the provision of aids 
at home. Bladder care is particularly important. Urgency and frequency 
can be treated pharmacologically (see Box 28.23) but this may lead to a 
degree of retention with an attendant risk of infection. Urinary retention 
can be managed initially by intermittent urinary catheterisation but an 
in-dwelling catheter may become necessary. It is important to address 
sexual dysfunction, which can occur and is a frequent source of distress. 
Pregnancy does not increase the risk of progression of MS but relapses 
may occur post-partum (Box 28.49).
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
This is an acute, often severe monophasic demyelinating condition 
in which areas of perivenous demyelination are widely disseminated 
throughout the brain and spinal cord. The illness may arise spontane-
ously but often occurs a week or so after a viral infection, especially 
measles or chickenpox, or following vaccination, suggesting that it is 
immunologically mediated.
Clinical features
Headache, vomiting, pyrexia, delirium and meningism may be present-
ing features, often with focal or multifocal brain and spinal cord signs. 
Seizures or coma may occur. A minority of patients who recover have 
further episodes.
Investigations
MRI shows multiple high-signal areas in a pattern similar to that of MS, 
although often with large conuent areas of abnormality. CSF may be 
normal or show an increase in protein and lymphocytes (occasion-
ally > 100 ×106 cells/L). Oligoclonal bands may be found in the acute epi-
sode but, in contrast to MS, do not persist beyond clinical recovery. The 
clinical picture may be very similar to a rst relapse of MS.
Management
The prognosis for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is generally 
good, although occasionally it may be fatal. Treatment with high-dose 
intravenous methylprednisolone, using the same regimen as for a relapse 
of MS, is recommended.
A
B
Fig. 28.28 Multiple sclerosis. Demyelinating lesion in cervical spinal cord, 
28.47 Disease-modifying treatments in multiple sclerosis
Treatment
Route of administration/
dosing
Comment
High-efcacy biologic therapy: average relapse rate reduction >  50%
Ocrelizumab
Intravenous infusion 
every 6 months
Associated with infusion 
reactions, increased 
infection risk and 
hypogammaglobulinaemia. 
Rituximab is also widely 
used in some countries 
with strong RCT      
evidence
Natalizumab
4-weekly intravenous 
infusion
Risk of PML in individuals 
who have evidence of JC 
virus infection
Alemtuzumab
Intravenous infusion 
over two courses 
separated by 12 
months; 5-day infusion 
initially, second course 
3 days
Cytokine release syndrome 
and infusion reactions. 
30% develop secondary 
autoimmunity, mainly 
affecting thyroid
Moderate efcacy immunotherapy: average relapse rate reduction 
30%–50%
Fingolimod
Daily oral
More effective than 
interferon. First dose 
bradycardia, increased 
susceptibility to infections, 
macular oedema
Cladribine
Pulsed oral treatment
Risk of lymphopenia and 
infections. Some concern 
about longer-term cancer 
risk
Dimethyl fumarate
Daily oral
May cause ushing 
and gastrointestinal 
disturbance. Small risk 
of PML
Lower efcacy immunotherapy: average relapse rate reduction 30%
Glatiramer acetate
Alternate-day 
subcutaneous injection
Similar efcacy to 
interferon-beta
Teriunomide
Daily oral
May cause diarrhoea, 
alopecia, hepatotoxicity 
and teratogenicity
Interferon-beta
Alternate-day or weekly 
intramuscular or 
subcutaneous  
injection
In widespread use for 
reducing relapse rate
(JC virus = human polyoma virus 2; PML = progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy;  
RCT = randomised controlled trial)

[[p1226]]
1164    NEUROLOGY
Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis is an acute, usually monophasic, demyelinating dis-
order affecting the spinal cord. It is sometimes thought to be post-in-
fectious in origin. It occurs at any age and presents with a subacute 
paraparesis with a sensory level, accompanied by severe pain in the 
neck or back at the onset. MRI should distinguish this from an external 
lesion affecting the spinal cord. CSF examination shows cellular pleocy-
tosis. Oligoclonal bands are usually absent. Treatment is with high-dose 
intravenous methylprednisolone. The outcome is variable: one-third have 
static decit, one-third go on to develop MS and one-third recover with 
no subsequent relapse. Some clinical features may suggest a higher risk 
of MS after transverse myelitis.
Neuromyelitis optica
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD, previously Devic dis-
ease) typically presents with severe optic neuritis or longitudinally extensive 
transverse myelitis. NMO can also cause severe vomiting or hiccups due 
to brainstem dysfunction. With cord presentations, spinal MRI scans show 
lesions that are typically longer than three spinal segments. The majority of 
cases are associated with an antibody against an astrocytic water channel, 
aquaporin 4. It is likely that this is a pathogenic antibody. The presence of 
aquaporin 4 antibodies is a strong predictor of future relapse. More recently 
it is recognised that some cases of NMOSD can be associated with myelin 
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-associated MOG antibodies, although these 
patients might be less prone to relapse. A proportion of NMOSD are not 
associated with known antibodies. Brain lesions can be seen on MRI, but 
are less prominent than in MS and can develop in aquaporin 4-rich areas 
around the base of the fourth ventricle. Clinical decits tend to recover less 
well than in MS, and the disease may be more aggressive with more fre-
quent relapses. Treatment with glucocorticoids, oral immunosuppression 
and rituximab is often used. Recent clinical trials have suggested efcacy 
of B-cell depletion, IL-6 blockade and complement inhibition (Fig. 28.29).
Autoimmune encephalitis
Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) is an immune-mediated brain disease 
which can occur at any age and presents with cognitive symptoms, 
behavioural change and seizures. AE can occasionally develop follow-
ing a preceding infection and should be considered if there is an inam-
matory deterioration following recovery from an initial brain infection. AE 
can present with distinct clinical syndromes and these are associated 
with specic autoantibodies directed against neuronal cell surface anti-
gens. Limbic encephalitis presents with memory disturbance (and can 
mimic neurodegenerative dementia in older persons), emotional and 
behavioural disturbance and seizures, which can cause brief dystonic 
movements of the face and arm (facio-brachial dystonic seizures). MRI 
may show enhancement and inammation in hippocampus and asso-
ciated limbic structures, and there are often mild inammatory changes 
in the CSF. There is a strong association with Lgi1 and CASPR2 
antibodies.
AE can also be associated with NMDAR antibodies, and this syn-
drome typically presents with neuropsychiatric symptoms, movement 
disorders, autonomic dysfunction and seizures and often causes 
Aquaporin-4 water channel
on astrocyte membrane
AQP4
+ Patient serum
A
C
D
B
Fig. 28.29 Neuromyelitis optica. NMOSD typically causes longitudinally extensive 
of spinal cord (T2-weighted) shows long hyperintense lesion within the thoracic 
If antibodies are present in serum, these bind to the surface of the transfected cells 
(red). (A) From Williams J, McGlasson S, Irani S, et al. Neuromyelitis optica in patients 
with increased interferon alpha concentrations. Lancet Neurol 2020; 19(1):31–33.  
(D) Courtesy of Professor Sarosh Irani, University of Oxford.
28.48 Treatment of complications in multiple sclerosis
Dysaesthesia and pain
 Carbamazepine
 Gabapentin
 Duloxetine
 Amitriptyline
Walking speed
 Fampridine
Bladder symptoms
 See Box 28.23
Erectile dysfunction
 Sildenal 50–100mg/day
 Tadalal
Spasticity
 Physiotherapy
 Baclofen (usually oral)
 Dantrolene
 Gabapentin
 Cannabinoids
 Tizanidine
 Intrathecal baclofen
 Local (intramuscular) injection 
of botulinum toxin
 Chemical neuronectomy
28.49 Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy
 Counselling: provision of pre-conception counselling is best practice.
 Relapse risk: slight reduction in relapse rate during pregnancy, but increased 
risk of postpartum relapse
 Disease-modifying drugs: some DMTs can be continued during pregnancy 
following assessment of risk–benet. Specialist advice is recommended in all 
cases.
(DMT = disease-modifying treatment)

[[p1227]]
Neurodegenerative diseases    1165
28
serious illness requiring intensive care admission. A subset of NMDAR 
encephalitis is associated with ovarian teratoma. Corticosteroids, 
immune globulin and plasma exchange are often used acutely. AE can 
relapse or follow a chronic course and long-term immunosuppression 
with oral immunosuppressants, cyclophosphamide or rituximab may be 
needed.
Paraneoplastic neurological disorders
Neurological disease may occur with systemic malignant tumours in the 
absence of cerebral metastases. It is now recognised that, in the majority 
of these cases, antigen production in the body of the tumour leads to 
development of antibodies to parts of the CNS. Paraneoplastic condi-
tions are increasingly recognised and the number of antibodies identied 
is also growing (Box 28.50). These syndromes are particularly associ-
ated with small-cell carcinoma of lung, ovarian tumours and lymphomas. 
Autoantibodies are found in the serum and/or CSF, and biopsy will show 
a lymphocytic inltrate of the neural tissue affected.
Clinical features
Clinical presentations are summarised in Box 28.50. In most instances, 
the neurological condition progresses quite rapidly over a few months, 
preceding the malignant disease in around half of cases. The range of 
clinical patterns is so wide that paraneoplastic disease should be consid-
ered in the diagnosis of any unusual progressive neurological syndrome. 
The paraneoplastic disorders of the peripheral nervous system particu-
larly affect the synaptic cleft (p. 1122).
Investigations and management
The presence of characteristic autoantibodies in the context of a suspi-
cious clinical picture may be diagnostic. The causative tumour may be 
very small and therefore CT of the chest or abdomen or PET scanning 
may be necessary to nd it. These investigations should be pursued only 
when paraneoplastic disease has been proven, rather than when it is 
suspected. The CSF often shows an increased protein and lymphocyte 
count with oligoclonal bands.
Treatment is directed at the primary tumour. Occasionally, successful 
therapy of the tumour is associated with improvement of the paraneo-
plastic syndrome. Some improvement may occur following administra-
tion of intravenous immunoglobulin.
Neurodegenerative diseases
While MS is the most common cause of disability in young people 
in the UK, vascular and neurodegenerative diseases are increasingly 
important in later life. The neurodegenerative diseases are united in 
having a pathological process that leads to specic neuronal death, 
causing relentlessly progressive symptoms, with incidence rising with 
age. The causes are not yet known, although genetic inuences are 
important. Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease are the most 
common.
Movement disorders
Movement disorders present with a wide range of symptoms. They may 
be genetic or acquired, and the most important is Parkinson’s disease. 
Most movement disorders are categorised clinically, with few conrm-
atory investigations available other than for those with a known gene 
abnormality.
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome characterised primarily by brady-
kinesia, with associated increased tone (rigidity), tremor and loss of 
postural reexes. There are many causes (Box 28.51) but the most 
common is Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD has an annual incidence of 
about 18/100 000 in the UK and a prevalence of about 180/100 000. 
Age has a critical inuence on incidence and prevalence, the latter ris-
ing to 300–500/100 000 after 80 years of age. The global prevalence of 
PD (over 6 million in 2016) more than doubled between 1990 and 2016 
with increases across all socio-demographic regions of the world, related 
mainly to increasing age and longer disease duration. Average age of 
onset is about 60 years and fewer than 5% of patients present under the 
age of 40. Genetic factors are increasingly recognised and several single 
genes causing parkinsonism have been identied. Monogenic Parkinson’s 
disease can be caused by mutations in SNCA (which encode alpha-syn-
uclein), as well as Parkin, PINK1, DJ-1 and many more, although overall 
monogenic disease accounts for a very small proportion of cases overall. 
Mutations in the LRRK2 gene are the most frequent genetic cause of 
late-onset PD. Having a rst-degree relative with PD confers a 2–3 times 
28.50 Paraneoplastic disorders of the nervous system
Clinical presentation
Associated tumour
Central nervous system
Limbic encephalitis
SCLC, testicular, breast, thymoma, 
teratoma
Myelopathy
SCLC, thymoma, others
Stiff person syndrome
Breast, SCLC, thymoma, others
Cerebellar degeneration
Breast, ovarian, SCLC, lymphoma
Encephalomyelitis
SCLC, thymoma
Opsoclonus–myoclonus
Breast, ovarian, SCLC, neuroblastoma, 
testicular
Optic neuritis
SCLC
Peripheral nervous system
Neuromyotonia
Thymoma, SCLC, others
Myasthenia gravis
Thymoma
Sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Lambert–Eaton syndrome
SCLC
Motor neuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Sensory neuropathy
Lymphoma, SCLC, others
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Lung, breast
(SCLC = small cell lung cancer)
28.51 Causes of parkinsonism
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (at least 80% of parkinsonism)
Cerebrovascular disease
Drugs and toxins
 Antipsychotic drugs (older and 
‘atypical’)
 Metoclopramide, prochlorperazine
 Tetrabenazine
 Sodium valproate
 Lithium
 Manganese
 MPTP
Other degenerative diseases
 Dementia with Lewy bodies
 Progressive supranuclear palsy
 Multiple system atrophy
 Corticobasal degeneration
 Alzheimer’s disease
Genetic
 Huntington’s disease
 Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome
 Dopa-responsive dystonia
 Spinocerebellar ataxias (particularly 
SCA 3)
 Wilson’s disease
Anoxic brain injury
(MPTP = methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine)

[[p1228]]
1166    NEUROLOGY
increased risk of developing the disorder. It is progressive and incurable, 
with a variable prognosis. While motor symptoms are the most common 
presenting features, non-motor symptoms (particularly cognitive impair-
ment, depression and anxiety) become increasingly prominent as the 
disease progresses, and signicantly reduce quality of life.
Pathophysiology
Although mutations in several genes have been identied in a few 
cases, in most patients the cause remains unknown. The discovery that 
methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) caused severe parkinsonism in 
young drug users suggested that PD might be due to an environmental 
toxin but none has been convincingly identied. The pathological hall-
marks of PD are depletion of the pigmented dopaminergic neurons in 
the substantia nigra and the presence of α-synuclein and other protein 
inclusions in nigral cells (Lewy bodies; Fig. 28.30). It is thought that envi-
ronmental or genetic factors alter the α-synuclein protein, rendering it 
toxic and leading to Lewy body formation within the nigral cells. Lewy 
bodies are also found in the basal ganglia, brainstem and cortex, and 
increase with disease progression. PD is recognised as a synucleino-
pathy alongside multiple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy bod-
ies. The loss of dopaminergic neurotransmission is responsible for many 
of the clinical features.
Clinical features
Non-motor symptoms, including reduction in sense of smell (hyposmia), 
anxiety/depression, constipation and REM sleep behavioural distur-
bance (RBD), may precede the development of typical motor features by 
many years but patients rarely present at this stage. The motor symp-
toms are almost always initially asymmetrical. The hallmark is bradykine-
sia, leading to classic symptoms such as increasingly small handwriting 
(‘micrographia’), difculty tying shoelaces or buttoning clothes, and dif-
culty rolling over in bed. Tremor is an early feature but may not be present 
in at least 20% of people with PD. It is typically a unilateral rest tremor 
affecting limbs, jaw and chin but not the head. In some patients tremor 
remains the dominant symptom for many years. Rigidity causes stiffness 
and a exed posture. Although postural righting reexes are impaired 
early on in the disease, falls tend not to occur until later. As the disease 
advances, speech becomes softer and indistinct. There are a number of 
abnormalities on neurological examination (Box 28.52).
Although features are initially unilateral, gradual bilateral involvement 
evolves with time. Cognition is spared in early disease; if impaired, it 
should trigger consideration of alternative diagnoses, such as dementia 
with Lewy bodies.
Non-motor symptoms
While non-motor symptoms may precede the onset of more typical 
symptoms by many years, for most patients these features become 
increasingly common and disabling as PD progresses. Cognitive impair-
ment, including dementia, is the symptom most likely to impair quality of 
life for patients and their carers. Estimates of dementia frequency range 
from 30% to 80%, depending on denitions and length of follow-up. 
Other distressing non-motor symptoms include neuropsychiatric fea-
tures (anxiety, depression, apathy, hallucinosis/psychosis), sleep distur-
bance and hypersomnolence, fatigue, pain, sphincter disturbance and 
constipation, sexual problems (erectile failure, loss of libido or hypersex-
uality), drooling and weight loss.
Investigations
The diagnosis is clinical. Structural imaging (CT or MRI) is usually normal 
for age and thus rarely helpful, although it may support a suspected vas-
cular cause of parkinsonism. Functional dopaminergic imaging (SPECT 
or PET) is abnormal, even in the early stages (Fig. 28.31), but does not 
differentiate between the different forms of degenerative parkinsonism 
(see Box 28.51) and so is not specic for PD. In younger patients, spe-
cic investigations may be appropriate (e.g. exclusion of Huntington’s or 
Wilson’s diseases). Some patients with family histories may wish to con-
sider genetic testing, although the role of genetic counselling is uncertain 
at present.
Management
Drug therapy
Drug treatment for PD remains symptomatic rather than curative, 
and there is no evidence that any of the currently available drugs are 
neuroprotective. Levodopa (LD) remains the most effective treatment 
28.52 Physical signs in Parkinson’s disease
General
 Expressionless face (hypomimia)
 Soft, rapid, indistinct speech 
(dysphonia)
 Flexed (stooped) posture
 Impaired postural reexes
Gait
 Slow to start walking (failure of gait 
ignition)
 Rapid, short stride length, tendency 
to shorten (festination)
 Reduction of arm swing
 Impaired balance on turning
Tremor
Resting (3–4Hz, moderate amplitude): most common
 Asymmetric, usually rst in arm/hand (‘pill rolling’)
 May affect legs, jaw and chin but not head
 Intermittent, present at rest, often briey abolished by movement of limb, 
exacerbated by walking
Postural (6–8Hz, moderate amplitude)
 Present immediately on stretching out arms
Re-emergent tremor (3–4Hz, moderate amplitude)
 Initially no tremor on stretching arms out, rest tremor re-emerges after a few 
seconds
Rigidity
 Cogwheel type, mostly upper limbs (due to tremor superimposed on rigidity)
 Lead pipe type
Akinesia (fundamental feature)
 Slowness of movement
 Fatiguing and decrease in size of repetitive movements
Normal ndings (if abnormal, consider other causes)
 Power, deep tendon reexes, plantar responses
 Eye movements
 Sensory and cerebellar examination
Fig. 28.30 Parkinson’s disease. High power (× 400) view of substantia nigra of 
a patient with Parkinson’s disease showing classical Lewy body (haematoxylin and 
eosin). Courtesy of Dr J. Xuereb.

[[p1229]]
Neurodegenerative diseases    1167
28
available but other agents include dopamine agonists, anticholinergics, 
inhibitors of monoamine oxidase (MAOI)-B and catechol-O-methyl- 
transferase (COMT), and amantadine. Debate continues about when 
and what treatment should be started. In general, most specialists 
recommend initiating treatment when symptoms are impacting on 
everyday life, although some favour treatment as soon as the diag-
nosis is made. Whether it is best to start with LD, a dopamine agonist 
or MAOI-B remains unclear but most accept that the most effective, 
best-tolerated and cheapest drug is LD. Many motor symptoms, such 
as tremor, freezing, falling, head-drop and abnormal exion, are quite 
resistant to treatment. Some non-motor symptoms, such as anxiety or 
depression, may respond to drug or non-drug treatments. In the UK, 
rivastigmine is licensed for use in PD-associated dementia, although 
its effect is modest. Many other non-motor symptoms are resistant to 
treatment. Drugs for PD should not be stopped abruptly, as this can 
precipitate malignant hyperthermia.
Levodopa Levodopa is the precursor to dopamine. When administered 
orally, more than 90% is decarboxylated to dopamine peripherally in 
the gastrointestinal tract and blood vessels, and only a small pro-
portion reaches the brain. This peripheral conversion is responsible 
for the high frequency of adverse effects. To avoid this, LD is com-
bined with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (DDI); the inhibitor does not 
cross the blood–brain barrier, thus avoiding unwanted decarboxyla-
tion-blocking in the brain. Two DDIs, carbidopa and benserazide, are 
available as combination preparations with LD (Sinemet and Madopar, 
respectively).
LD is most effective for relieving akinesia and rigidity; tremor 
response is often less satisfactory and it has no effect on many motor 
(posture, freezing) and non-motor symptoms. Failure of akinesia/rigid-
ity to respond to LD (1000 mg/day) should prompt reconsideration of 
the diagnosis. Although controlled-release versions of LD exist, these 
are usually best reserved for use overnight, as their variable bioavaila-
bility makes them difcult to use throughout the day. Madopar is also 
available as a dispersible tablet for more rapid-onset effect.
Adverse effects include postural hypotension, nausea and vomit-
ing, which may be offset by domperidone, though this is only pre-
scribed for brief periods, if essential, given the risk of prolonged QTc 
interval and arrhythmia. LD may exacerbate or trigger hallucinations, 
and abnormal LD-seeking behaviour (dopamine dysregulation syn-
drome), in which the patient takes excessive doses of LD, may occur 
uncommonly.
As PD progresses, the response to LD becomes less predictable in 
many patients, leading to motor uctuations. This end-of-dose deteri-
oration is due to progressive loss of dopamine storage capacity by 
dwindling numbers of striatonigral neurons. LD-induced involuntary 
movements (dyskinesia) may occur as a peak-dose phenomenon or 
as a biphasic phenomenon (occurring during both the build-up and 
wearing-off phases). More complex uctuations present as sudden, 
unpredictable changes in response, in which periods of parkinsonism 
(‘off’ phases) alternate with improved mobility but with dyskinesias 
(‘on’ phases). Motor complication management is difcult; wearing-off 
effects may respond to increased dose or frequency of LD or the 
addition of a COMT inhibitor (see below). More complex uctuations 
may be improved by the addition of dopamine agonists (including 
continuous infusion of apomorphine), use of intraintestinal LD via 
a percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy, or deep brain stimulator 
implantation.
Dopamine receptor agonists Originally introduced in the hope of delaying 
the initiation of LD and thus delaying motor complications, several dopa-
mine agonists are available, and may be delivered orally, transdermally, 
sublingually, intranasally or subcutaneously (Box 28.53).
The ergot-derived agonists are no longer recommended because of 
rare but serious brotic side-effects. With the exception of apomorphine, 
all the agonists are considerably less effective than LD in relieving par-
kinsonism, have more adverse effects (nausea, vomiting, disorientation 
and hallucinations, impulse control disorders) and are more expensive. 
Their role in the management of PD (monotherapy or adjunctive) remains 
uncertain, and evidence suggests that their usefulness as initial mono-
therapy is short-lasting.
MAOI-B inhibitors Monoamine oxidase type B facilitates breakdown of 
excess dopamine in the synapse. Two inhibitors are used in PD: sele-
giline and rasagiline. The effects of both are modest, although usually 
well tolerated. Neither is neuroprotective, despite initial hopes.
COMT inhibitors Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (along with dopa 
decarboxylase) is involved in peripheral breakdown of LD. Three inhib-
itors are available: entacapone, opicapone and tolcapone (which also 
inhibits central COMT). Entacapone has a modest effect and is most 
useful for early wearing-off. It is available either as a single tablet taken 
with each LD/DDI dose, or as a combination tablet with LD and DDI. 
The more potent tolcapone is less used because of rare but serious 
hepatotoxicity. Opicapone, the newest of the three, is available as a 
once-daily drug.
Amantadine This has a mild, usually short-lived effect on bradykinesia 
and is rarely used unless patients are unable to tolerate other drugs. It is 
more commonly employed as a treatment for LD-induced dyskinesias, 
although again benet is modest and short-lived. Adverse effects include 
livedo reticularis, peripheral oedema, delirium and other anticholinergic 
effects.
Anticholinergic drugs These were the main treatment for PD prior to the 
introduction of LD. Their role now is limited by lack of efcacy (apart from 
an effect on tremor sometimes) and adverse effects, including dry mouth, 
blurred vision, constipation, urinary retention, delirium and hallucinosis, 
as well as long-term concerns regarding cognitive impairment. Several 
anticholinergics are available, including trihexyphenidyl (benzhexol) and 
orphenadrine.
A
B
Fig. 28.31 Imaging in Parkinson’s disease.
computed tomography (SPECT) in Parkinson’s disease showing reduced dopamine 
28.53 Dopamine agonists*
Ergot-derived
 Bromocriptine
 Lisuride
 Pergolide
 Cabergoline
Non-ergot-derived
 Ropinirole
 Pramipexole
 Rotigotine (transdermal patch)
 Apomorphine (subcutaneous, nasal, 
sublingual)
*Oral unless otherwise stated.

[[p1230]]
1168    NEUROLOGY
Surgery
Destructive neurosurgery was commonly used before the introduc-
tion of LD. In the last 20 years, stereotactic surgery has emerged and 
most commonly involves deep brain stimulation (DBS), rather than the 
destructive approach of previous eras. Various targets have been iden-
tied, including the thalamus (only effective for tremor), globus pallidus 
and subthalamic nucleus. DBS is usually reserved for individuals with 
medically refractory tremor or motor uctuations, and careful patient 
selection is vital to success. Intracranial delivery of fetal grafts or specic 
growth factors remains experimental. MRI-guided ultrasound-induced 
thalamotomy is a relatively new treatment for tremor; long-term out-
comes are not well established.
Physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy
Patients at all stages of PD benet from physiotherapy, which helps 
reduce rigidity and corrects abnormal posture. Occupational thera-
pists can provide equipment to help overcome functional limitations, 
such as rails for stairs and the toilet, and bathing equipment. Speech 
therapy can help where dysarthria and dysphonia interfere with com-
munication, and advice may also be provided to those with dyspha-
gia. As with many complex neurological disorders, patients with PD 
should ideally be managed by a multidisciplinary team, including PD 
specialist nurses.
Other Parkinsonian syndromes
Cerebrovascular disease and drug-induced parkinsonism are the most 
common alternative causes of parkinsonism (see Box 28.51). There are 
several degenerative conditions that cause parkinsonism, including mul-
tiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal 
degeneration. They typically have a more rapid progression than PD and 
tend to be resistant to treatment with LD. They are dened pathologi-
cally and identication during life is difcult. There are other conditions 
that may rarely manifest as parkinsonism, including Huntington’s and 
Wilson’s diseases.
Multiple system atrophy
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is characterised by parkinsonism, auto-
nomic failure and cerebellar symptoms, with either parkinsonism (MSA-
P) or cerebellar features (MSA-C) predominating. It is much less common 
than PD, with a prevalence of about 4/100 000. Although early distinction 
between PD and MSA-P may be difcult, early falls, postural instabil-
ity and lack of response to LD are clues. The pathological hallmark is 
α-synuclein-containing glial cytoplasmic inclusions found in the basal 
ganglia, cerebellum and motor cortex. Management is symptomatic and 
the prognosis is less good than for PD, with mean survival from symp-
tom onset of fewer than 10 years and early disability. Cognition is usually 
unaffected.
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) presents with symmetrical par-
kinsonism, cognitive impairment, early falls and bulbar symptoms. 
The characteristic eye movement disorder, with slowed vertical sac-
cades leading to impairment of up- and down-gaze, may take years 
to emerge. PSP has different pathological features, being associated 
with abnormal accumulation of tau (τ) proteins and degeneration of 
the substantia nigra, subthalamic nucleus and mid-brain. It is there-
fore considered a tauopathy rather than synucleinopathy. The preva-
lence is about 5/100 000, with average survival similar to that in MSA. 
There is no treatment, and the parkinsonism usually does not respond 
to LD.
Corticobasal degeneration
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is less common than MSA or PSP, 
and the clinical manifestations are variable, including parkinsonism, 
dystonia, myoclonus and ‘alien limb’ phenomenon, whereby a limb 
(usually upper) moves about or interferes with the other limb without 
apparent conscious control. Cortical symptoms, including dementia 
and especially apraxia, are common and may be the only features in 
some cases. A number of other diseases may present with a cortico-
basal syndrome, including other dementias. CBD is a tauopathy with 
widespread deposition throughout the brain and has similar survival 
rates to MSA and PSP.
Wilson’s disease
This is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from mutation in the 
ATP7B gene, causing a defect of copper metabolism (p. 907). It is a 
treatable cause of various movement disorders, including tremor, dys-
tonia, parkinsonism and ataxia; psychiatric symptoms may also occur. 
Wilson’s disease should always be excluded in patients under the age of 
50 presenting with any movement disorder.
Huntington’s disease
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant disorder, present-
ing in adults usually but occasionally in children. It is due to expansion 
of a trinucleotide CAG repeat in the Huntingtin gene on chromosome 4 
(see Box 3.2). The disease frequently demonstrates the phenomenon of 
anticipation, in which there is a younger age at onset as the disease is 
passed through generations, due to progressive expansion of the repeat. 
The prevalence is about 4–8/100 000.
Clinical features
HD typically presents with a progressive behavioural disturbance, abnor-
mal movements (usually chorea) and cognitive impairment leading to 
dementia. Onset under 18 years is rare but patients may then present 
with parkinsonism rather than chorea (the ‘Westphal variant’). There is 
always a family history, although this may not always be apparent and 
can sometimes be concealed.
28.54 Causes of acquired ataxia
Structural
 Brain tumour
 Brain abscess
Toxic
 Drugs: lithium, several antiepileptics (including phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
lamotrigine and valproate), amiodarone, toluene, 5-uorouracil, cytosine 
arabinoside
 Alcohol
 Heavy metals/chemicals: mercury, lead, thallium
Infection/post-infectious
 HIV
 Varicella zoster
 Whipple’s disease
 Miller Fisher syndrome (p. 1192)
Degenerative
 Multiple system atrophy
 Sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
 Idiopathic (or sporadic) late-onset 
cerebellar ataxia
Inammatory/immune-mediated
 Multiple sclerosis
 Gluten ataxia (coeliac disease)
 Paraneoplastic ataxia
 Hashimoto encephalopathy
Metabolic
 Vitamin B1 or E deciency
 Hypothyroidism
 Hypoparathyroidism
Vascular
 Stroke (ischaemic or haemorrhagic)
 Vascular malformations
 Supercial siderosis

[[p1231]]
Neurodegenerative diseases    1169
28
Investigations and management
The diagnosis is conrmed by genetic testing; pre-symptomatic testing 
for other family members is available but must be preceded by appro-
priate counselling. Brain imaging may show caudate atrophy but is not a 
reliable test. There are a number of HD mimics.
Management is symptomatic, though antisense oligonucleotide ther-
apy to reduce the Huntingtin gene (HTT ) product is currently being tri-
alled. The chorea may respond to neuroleptics such as risperidone or 
sulpiride, or tetrabenazine. Depression and anxiety are common and 
may be helped by medication.
Ataxias
The ataxias are a heterogeneous group of inherited and acquired disor-
ders, presenting either with pure ataxia or in association with other neur-
ological and non-neurological features. The differential is wide (Boxes 
28.54 and 28.55), and diagnosis is guided by age of onset, evolution 
and clinical features. A signicant proportion of cases remain idiopathic 
despite investigation.
The hereditary ataxias are a group of inherited disorders in which 
degenerative changes occur to varying extents in the cerebellum, brain-
stem, pyramidal tracts, spinocerebellar tracts and optic and peripheral 
nerves, and inuence the clinical manifestations. Onset ranges from 
infancy to adulthood, with recessive, sex-linked or dominant inheritance 
(see Box 28.55). While the genetic abnormality has been identied for 
some, allowing diagnostic testing, this is not currently the case for many 
of the hereditary ataxias.
Tremor disorders
Tremor is a feature of many disorders but the most important clinical 
syndromes are PD, essential tremor, drug-induced tremors (Box 28.56) 
and functional (psychogenic) tremors.
Essential tremor
This has a prevalence of about 300/100 000 and may display a dominant 
pattern of inheritance, although no genes have thus far been identied. 
It may present at any age with a bilateral arm tremor (8–10 Hz), rarely at 
rest but typical with movement. The head and voice may be involved. 
The tremor improves in about 50% of patients with small amounts of 
alcohol. There are no specic tests and essential tremor should be distin-
guished from other tremor syndromes, including dystonic tremor. Beta-
blockers and primidone are sometimes helpful, and DBS of the thalamus 
is an effective treatment for severe cases.
28.55 Inherited ataxias
Inheritance pattern
Age of onset
Clinical features
Autosomal dominant
Episodic ataxias
Childhood and early adulthood
Brief episodes of ataxia, sometimes induced by stress or startle. 
May develop progressive ataxia
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs)
Childhood to middle age
Over 35 subtypes identied. Progressive ataxia, sometimes 
associated with other features, e.g. retinitis pigmentosa, 
pyramidal tract abnormalities, peripheral neuropathy and cognitive 
decits
Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA)
Childhood to middle age
Children present with myoclonic epilepsy and progressive ataxia. 
Adults have progressive ataxia with psychiatric features, dementia 
and choreoathetosis
Autosomal recessive
Friedreich’s ataxia
Childhood/adolescence  
(late onset possible)
Ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, spasticity, areexia, proprioceptive 
impairment, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, cardiac abnormalities. 
Usually chair-bound
Ataxia telangiectasia
Childhood
Progressive ataxia, athetosis, telangiectasia on conjunctivae, 
impaired DNA repair, immune deciency, tendency to 
malignancies
Abetalipoproteinaemia
Childhood
Steatorrhoea, sensorimotor neuropathy, retinitis pigmentosa, 
malabsorption of vitamins A, D, E and K
Hereditary ataxia with vitamin E deciency
< 20years
Similar to Friedreich's ataxia, visual loss or retinitis pigmentosa, 
chorea
Others
Usually young onset
Numerous, with genes identied only in some
X-linked
Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome
> 50 years
Tremor, ataxia, parkinsonism, autonomic failure, cognitive 
impairment and dementia
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Childhood to adult
Impaired adrenal and cognitive function, sometimes spastic 
paraparesis
Mitochondrial disease
Various
Ataxia features in several mitochondrial diseases, including 
Kearns–Sayre syndrome, MELAS, MERRF, Leigh syndrome
(MELAS = mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF = myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red bres)
28.56 Drug-induced tremor (usually postural)*
 β-agonists (e.g. salbutamol)
 Theophylline
 Sodium valproate
 Thyroxine
 Lithium
 Tricyclic antidepressants
 Recreational drugs  
(e.g. amphetamines)
 Alcohol
 Caffeine
*Drugs causing parkinsonism and associated tremor are listed in Box 28.51

[[p1232]]
1170    NEUROLOGY
Dystonia
Dystonia is characterised by a focal increase in tone affecting muscles 
in the limbs or trunk. It may be a feature of a number of neurological 
conditions (PD, Wilson’s disease), or occur secondary to brain damage 
(trauma, stroke) or drugs (tardive syndromes). Dystonia also occurs as a 
primary disorder. With childhood onset the cause is usually genetic and 
dystonia is generalised, but adult onset is usually focal; examples include 
a twisted neck (torticollis), repetitive blinking (blepharospasm) or tremor. 
Task-specic symptoms (e.g. writer's cramp, musician's dystonia) are 
often dystonic. Treatment is difcult but botulinum toxin injections or DBS 
may be useful.
Hemifacial spasm
This usually presents after middle age with intermittent twitching around 
one eye, spreading ipsilaterally to other facial muscles. The spasms are 
exacerbated by talking, eating and stress. Hemifacial spasm is usually 
idiopathic, similar to trigeminal neuralgia; it has been suggested that it 
may be due to an aberrant arterial loop irritating the 7th nerve just outside 
the pons. It may, however, be symptomatic and secondary to structural 
lesions. Drug treatment is not effective but injections of botulinum toxin 
into affected muscles help, although these usually have to be repeated 
every 3 months or so. In refractory cases, microvascular decompression 
may be considered.
Motor neuron disease
Motor neuron disease (MND) is a neurodegenerative condition caused by 
loss of upper and lower motor neurons in the spinal cord, cranial nerve 
nuclei and motor cortex. Annual incidence is about 2/100 000, with a 
prevalence of about 7/100 000. Most cases are sporadic but 10% of 
cases are familial and mutations in C9orf72 (repeat expansion), SOD1, 
VCP, FUS and TARDBP/TDP43 are found in many of these monogenic 
cases and may inuence clinical phenotype and course, in particular 
overlap with frontotemporal dementia. The most common form of MND 
(Fig. 28.32) is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and many use the 
terms MND and ALS interchangeably. ALS is characterised by a combi-
nation of upper and lower motor neuron signs; there are rarer, pure lower 
(progressive muscular atrophy) or upper (progressive lateral sclerosis) 
motor neuron variants of MND. The average age of onset is 65, with 
10% presenting before 45 years.
Clinical features
Diagnosis can be difcult and is often delayed. MND typically presents 
focally, either with limb onset (e.g. foot drop or loss of manual dexterity) 
or with bulbar symptoms (dysarthria, swallowing difculty); respiratory 
onset is rare but type II respiratory failure is a common cause of death. 
Sensory, autonomic and visual symptoms do not occur, although cramp 
is common (Box 28.57). Examination reveals a combination of lower and 
upper motor neuron signs (e.g. brisk reexes in wasted, fasciculating 
muscles) without sensory involvement (see Fig. 28.32). Cognitive impair-
ment is under-recognised in MND: up to 50% will have a mainly executive 
impairment on formal testing, and around 10% develop a frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). About 10% of patients presenting with FTD will develop 
ALS within a few years of dementia onset. Even with treatment, MND is 
relentlessly progressive, but median survival is improved with specialist 
follow-up offering non-invasive ventilation, feeding measures and access 
to pharmacological treatment.
Investigations
Clinical features are often typical but alternative diagnoses should be 
excluded. Exclusion of treatable causes, such as immune-mediated 
Motor neuron disease
Primary
lateral sclerosis
Progressive
muscular atrophy
Predominantly LMN
Weakness and wasting of
distal limb muscles initially
Fasciculation
Tendon reflexes may be
present
Mixed LMN and UMN
Distal and proximal muscle
wasting and weakness
Fasciculation
Spasticity, exaggerated
reflexes, extensor plantars
Bulbar and pseudobulbar
palsy follow eventually
Pyramidal tract features
may predominate
Predominantly UMN
Spasticity–few lower
motor neuron signs
Gradual progression
Predominantly cranial nerves
Early involvement of tongue,
palate and pharyngeal muscles
Dysarthria/dysphagia
Wasting and fasciculation
of tongue
Pyramidal signs may
be present
Progressive
bulbar palsy
Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis
Fig. 28.32 Patterns of involvement in motor neuron disease. (LMN = lower motor neuron; UMN = upper motor neuron)
28.57 Clinical features of motor neuron disease
Onset
 Usually after the age of 50 years
 Very uncommon before the age of 30 years
 Affects males more commonly than females
Symptoms
 Limb muscle weakness, cramps, occasionally fasciculation
 Disturbance of speech/swallowing (dysarthria/dysphagia)
 Cognitive and behavioural features common (similar to frontotemporal 
dementia)
Signs
 Wasting and fasciculation of muscles
 Weakness of muscles of limbs, tongue, face and palate
 Pyramidal tract involvement, causing spasticity, exaggerated tendon reexes, 
extensor plantar responses
 External ocular muscles and sphincters usually remain intact
 No objective sensory decit
 Evidence of cognitive impairment with frontotemporal dominance
Course
 Symptoms often begin focally in one part and spread gradually but relentlessly 
to become widespread

[[p1233]]
Infections of the nervous system    1171
28
multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (p. 1192) and cervi-
cal myeloradiculopathy, is essential. Blood tests are usually normal, other 
than a mildly raised creatine kinase. Sensory and motor nerve conduc-
tion studies are normal but there may be reduction in amplitude of motor 
action potentials due to axonal loss. EMG will usually conrm the typical 
features of widespread denervation and re-innervation. Spinal uid anal-
ysis is not usually necessary. Genetic testing is increasing in importance, 
with mutations found in SOD1, FUS, TARDBP and C9orf72 that may 
help predict risk of disease in those with a family history of MND.
Management
Patients should be managed within a multidisciplinary service, including 
physiotherapists, speech and occupational therapists, dietitians, ventila-
tory and feeding support, and palliative care teams, with neurological and 
respiratory input. Riluzole, a glutamate release antagonist, is licensed for 
ALS but has only a modest effect, prolonging median survival by about 
2–3 months.
Non-invasive ventilation signicantly prolongs survival and improves or 
maintains quality of life in people with ALS. Survival and some measures of 
quality of life are signicantly improved in the subgroup of people with better 
baseline bulbar function but not in those with severe bulbar impairment. 
Feeding by percutaneous gastrostomy may improve quality of life and pro-
long survival, even when done at a late stage. Rapid access to palliative care 
teams is essential for patients as they enter the terminal stages of MND.
Spinal muscular atrophy
This is a group of genetically determined recessive disorders affecting 
spinal and cranial lower motor neurons, characterised by proximal and 
distal wasting, fasciculation and weakness of muscles. Most SMA cases 
are caused by a defective SMN1 gene. Involvement is usually symmetri-
cal but occasional localised forms occur. With the exception of the infan-
tile form, progression is slow and the prognosis better than for MND. 
Sophisticated nucleic acid-based therapies for the treatment of SMA 
have shown signicant promise. Intrathecally delivered antisense oligo-
nucleotide therapies can partially correct this SMN1 genetic defect and 
show clinical efcacy in severe forms of the disease.
Infections of the nervous system
The clinical features of nervous system infections depend on the location of 
the infection (the meninges or the parenchyma of the brain and spinal cord), 
the causative organism (virus, bacterium, fungus or parasite), and whether 
the infection is acute or chronic. The major infections of the nervous system 
are listed in Box 28.58. The frequency of these varies geographically and in 
relation to socio-economic level. While certain infections, e.g. tuberculosis 
and cysticercosis, may not be prevalent in the United Kingdom, they are 
common in other regions and, therefore, occur in returning travellers or 
immigrants. Protozoal infections are described in Chapter 13.
Meningitis
The characteristic clinical features of acute infection of the meninges are 
pyrexia, headache and meningism. Meningism consists of headache, 
photophobia and stiffness of the neck, sometimes accompanied by other 
signs of meningeal irritation, including Kernig's sign (extension at the knee 
with the hip joint exed causes spasm in the hamstring muscles) and 
Brudzinski's sign (passive exion of the neck causes exion of the hips and 
knees). However, as discussed in Chapter 1, meningitis frequently pre-
sents without meningism, and although Kernig’s and Brudinski’s signs are 
specic, their sensitivity can be as low as 5%. Therefore, meningitis should 
be considered in anyone who presents with fever and headache. Altered 
level of consciousness may occur and is more common in older people. 
Abnormalities in the CSF (see Box 28.6) are important in distinguishing the 
cause of meningitis. Causes of meningitis are listed in Box 28.59
Viral meningitis
Viruses are the most common cause of meningitis, usually resulting in 
a benign and self-limiting illness requiring no specic therapy. It is much 
less serious than bacterial meningitis unless there is associated enceph-
alitis. A number of viruses can cause meningitis (see Box 28.59), the 
most common being enteroviruses. Where specic immunisation is not 
employed, the mumps virus is a common cause.
Clinical features
Viral meningitis occurs mainly in children or young adults, with acute 
onset of headache and irritability and the rapid development of mening-
ism. The headache is usually the most severe feature. There may be a 
high pyrexia but focal neurological signs are rare.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made by lumbar puncture, with the specic viral cause 
identied by a nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT). CSF usually con-
tains an excess of lymphocytes. While glucose and protein levels are 
commonly normal, the latter may be raised. It is important to verify that 
the patient has not received antibiotics (for whatever cause) prior to the 
lumbar puncture, as CSF lymphocytosis can also be found in partially 
treated bacterial meningitis (see Box 28.6).
Management
There is no specic treatment and the condition is usually benign 
and self-limiting. The patient should be treated symptomatically in a 
quiet environment. Recovery usually occurs within days, although a 
lymphocytic pleocytosis may persist in the CSF. Meningitis may also 
occur as a complication of a systemic viral infection such as mumps, 
measles, infectious mononucleosis, varicella zoster and hepatitis. 
Whatever the virus, complete recovery without specic therapy is 
the rule.
28.58 Infections of the nervous system
Bacterial infections
 Meningitis
 Suppurative encephalitis
 Brain abscess
 Paravertebral (epidural) abscess
 Tuberculosis
 Neurosyphilis
 Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) 
(peripheral nerves)*
 Diphtheria (peripheral nerves)*
 Tetanus (motor cells)
Viral infections
 Meningitis
 Encephalitis
 Transverse myelitis
 Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy
 Poliomyelitis
 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
(late sequel)
 Rabies
 HIV infection (Ch. 14)
 COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2)
Prion diseases
 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
 Kuru
Protozoal infections (Ch. 13)
 Malaria*
 Toxoplasmosis (in immune-
suppressed)*
 Trypanosomiasis*
 Amoebic abscess*
Helminthic infections
 Schistosomiasis (spinal cord)*
 Cysticercosis*
 Hydatid disease*
 Strongyloidiasis*
Fungal infections
 Candida meningitis or brain  
abscess
 Cryptococcal meningitis
*These infections are discussed in Chapter 13

[[p1234]]
1172    NEUROLOGY
Bacterial meningitis
Many bacteria can cause meningitis but geographical patterns vary, 
as does age-related sensitivity (Box 28.60). In the ‘meningitis belt’ of 
sub-Saharan Africa, drought and dust storms are often associated with 
meningococcal outbreaks (Harmattan meningitis). Bacterial meningitis is 
usually part of a bacteraemic illness, although direct spread from an adja-
cent focus of infection in the ear, skull fracture or sinus can be causative. 
Antibiotics have rendered this less common but mortality and morbidity 
remain signicant. An important factor in determining prognosis is early 
diagnosis and the prompt initiation of appropriate therapy. Most bacterial 
causes of meningitis are normal commensals of the upper respiratory 
tract. New and potentially pathogenic strains are acquired by droplet 
spread but close contact is necessary. Epidemics of meningococcal 
meningitis occur, particularly in cramped living conditions or where the 
climate is hot and dry. The organism invades through the nasopharynx, 
producing sepsis and leading to meningitis.
Pathophysiology
Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) and Neisseria menin gitidis
(meningococcus) are the commonest cause of bacterial meningitis 
globally, including in the United Kingdom. Streptococcus suis is a rare 
zoonotic cause of meningitis associated with porcine contact. It is an 
important cause of meningitis in some parts of Asia, including Vietnam 
and Thailand. Some degree of hearing loss occurs in more than half of 
survivors. Infection stimulates an immune response, causing the pia–
arachnoid membrane to become congested and inltrated with inam-
matory cells. The pro-inammatory immune mediators released are 
particularly prominent in Streptococcus pneumoniae infection and may 
account for the poor prognosis associated with pneumococcal meningi-
tis. Pus then forms in layers, which may later organise to form adhesions. 
These may obstruct the free ow of CSF, leading to hydrocephalus, or 
they may damage the cranial nerves at the base of the brain. Hearing 
loss is a frequent complication. The CSF pressure rises rapidly, the 
protein content increases, and there is a cellular reaction that varies in 
type and severity according to the nature of the inammation and the 
causative organism. An obliterative endarteritis of the leptomeningeal 
arteries passing through the meningeal exudate may produce secondary 
cerebral infarction. Pneumococcal meningitis is often associated with a 
very purulent CSF and a high mortality, especially in older adults.
Clinical features
The most common presenting features are fever and headache, which 
may also be associated with drowsiness and meningism. More than 90% 
of patients have any two of: headache, pyrexia, meningism and altered 
consciousness. Rash may occur in meningococcal meningitis. In severe 
bacterial meningitis the patient may be comatose, later developing focal 
neurological signs. Seizures may occur in around a quarter of patients. 
When accompanied by sepsis, presenting signs may evolve rapidly, with 
abrupt onset of obtundation due to cerebral oedema. Complications of 
meningococcal sepsis are listed in Box 28.61. Chronic meningococcae-
mia is a rare condition in which the patient can be unwell for weeks 
or even months with recurrent fever, sweating, joint pains and transient 
rash. In pneumococcal and Haemophilus infections there may be an 
accompanying otitis media. Pneumococcal meningitis may be associ-
ated with pneumonia and occurs especially in older patients and alco-
holics, as well as those with hyposplenism. Listeria monocytogenes
causes meningitis and rhombencephalitis (brainstem encephalitis) in the 
immunosuppressed, people at the extremes of age (neonates and older 
adults), with diabetes, alcoholics and pregnant women.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture is mandatory unless there are contraindications. If the 
patient is drowsy and has focal neurological signs or seiz ures, is immuno-
suppressed, has undergone recent neurosurgery or has suffered a head 
injury, it is wise to obtain a CT to exclude a mass lesion (such as a cerebral 
abscess) before lumbar puncture because of the risk of coning. This should 
not, however, delay treatment of presumed meningitis. If lumbar puncture 
is deferred or omitted, it is essential to take blood cultures and to start 
empirical treatment (Fig. 28.33). Lumbar puncture will help differentiate the 
causative organism but the characteristic ndings in bacterial meningitis 
listed in Box 28.6 are far from universal. If the CSF is abnormal, the safest 
28.60 Bacterial causes of meningitis at different ages
Age of onset
Common
Less common
Neonate
Gram-negative bacilli 
(Escherichia coli)
Listeria monocytogenes
Group B streptococci
Pre-school child
Haemophilus 
inuenzae
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Neisseria meningitidis
(serogroups A, B, 
C, Y, W)
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Older child and adult
Strep. pneumoniae
L. monocytogenes
N. meningitidis
(serogroups A, B, 
C, Y, W)
Other streptococci 
Staphylococcus aureus 
(skull fracture)
M. tuberculosis
H. inuenzae
28.61 Complications of meningococcal sepsis
 Meningitis
 Rash (morbilliform, petechial or 
purpuric)
 Shock
 Intravascular coagulation
 Renal failure
 Peripheral gangrene
 Arthritis (septic or reactive)
 Pericarditis (septic or reactive)
28.59 Causes of meningitis
Infective
Bacteria
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 Listeria monocytogenes
 Neisseria meningitidis
(serogroups A, B, C, Y, W135)
 Other streptococci including Strep. 
suis
 Mycobacterium tuberculosis
 Staphylococcus aureus (skull fracture)
 Haemophilus inuenzae
Viruses
 Enteroviruses (echo, Coxsackie, 
polio)
 Herpes simplex virus type 2 
(Mollaret’s meningitis)
 Varicella zoster virus
 Herpes simplex type 1
 Epstein–Barr virus
 Cytomegalovirus
 Measles
 Mumps
 Other viruses that cause
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
West Nile virus
Human immunodeciency virus
Fungi
 Cryptococcus neoformans
 Candida
 Histoplasma
 Blastomyces
 Coccidioides
 Sporothrix
Non-infective (‘sterile’)
Malignant disease
 Breast cancer
 Bronchogenic cancer
 Leukaemia
 Lymphoma
Inammatory disease (may be recurrent)
 Sarcoidosis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Behçet’s disease

[[p1235]]
Infections of the nervous system    1173
28
course is to treat for bacterial meningitis. A bloody tap may complicate 
CSF ndings. The safest approach is to treat for bacterial meningitis if the 
white cell count is above normal and disregard the red cell count. Gram lm 
and culture may allow identication of the organism. Blood cultures may be 
positive. PCR techniques can be used on both blood and CSF to identify 
bacterial DNA for several days after antibiotic treatment has started.
Management
There is an untreated mortality rate of around 80%, so action must be 
swift. Antibiotics should ideally be given after CSF and blood cultures have 
been obtained, but if there is any delay obtaining these samples, anti-
biotic therapy should be started immediately. Recommended empirical 
therapies are outlined in Box 28.62, and the preferred antibiotic when 
the organism is known after CSF examination is stipulated in Box 28.63. 
Some regions of the world have a high prevalence of penicillin resistance 
and local guidelines or microbiologist advice should be sought. There is 
remarkably little evidence to guide duration of antibiotic treatment. As a 
guide, pneumococcal meningitis should be treated for 10–14 days, menin-
gococcal meningitis slightly less (around 7 days) and Listeria meningitis for 
21 days. Adjunctive glucocorticoid therapy is useful in reducing hearing 
loss and neurological sequelae in both children and adults in high-income 
countries, but evidence does not support the use of dexamethasone in 
lower-income countries or where there are high rates of untreated HIV.
In meningococcal disease, mortality is doubled if the patient presents 
with features of sepsis rather than meningitis. Individuals likely to require 
intensive care facilities and expertise include those with cardiac, respira-
tory or renal involvement, and those with CNS depression prejudicing 
the airway. Early endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation 
protect the airway and may prevent the development of the acute res-
piratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Adverse prognostic features include 
hypot ensive shock, a rapidly developing rash, a haemorrhagic diathesis, 
multisystem failure and age over 60 years.
Prevention of meningococcal infection
Close contacts of patients with meningococcal infection (Box 28.64) 
should be given a single dose of ciprooxacin. Rifampicin for two days 
is an alternative for those unable to take ciprooxacin. If not treated with 
ceftriaxone or cefotaxime, the index case should be given similar treatment 
to clear infection from the nasopharynx before hospital discharge. Vaccines 
are available for most meningococcal subgroups.
Resuscitate and stabilise patient
Initial tests: blood cultures, meningococcal and
pneumococcal PCR, throat swab for enterovirus
PCR if viral meningitis likely, full blood count,
urea, creatinine, electrolytes, glucose, liver
function tests and clotting screen, procalcitonin
or CRP, serology sample
                Immediate management
 Assess GCS: within the first hour after arrival
 Assess need for intensive care
 Perform LP if no contraindication
 If LP cannot be performed immediately start
   empiric treatment after blood cultures taken
   and within the first hour
Note: if predominantly sepsis or rapidly
evolving rash, give antibiotics immediately
after blood cultures, follow sepsis guidelines,
and defer LP
Computed
tomography
brain
No mass lesion,
hydrocephalus
or other
contraindication
to LP
Lumbar
puncture
Yes
No
      Contraindication for
            immediate LP
 Signs of severe sepsis or
   rapidly evolving rash
 Anticoagulant therapy/
   known thrombocytopenia
 Respiratory or cardiac
   compromise
Note: once the patient is
stable, with or without sepsis,
an LP may still be
diagnostically useful even
after several days
 Focal neurological signs
 Papilloedema (inability
   to see the fundus is not
   a contraindication)
 Continuous or uncontrolled
   seizures
 GCS ≤ 12
Fig. 28.33 The investigation of meningitis based on the British Infection Association acute meningitis guideline.  (CRP = C-reactive protein; GCS=Glasgow Coma 
Scale; LP = lumbar puncture, PCR = polymerase chain reaction) (Adapted from the UK joint specialist societies guideline on the diagnosis and management of acute meningitis 
and meningococcal sepsis in immunocompetent adults. Journal of Infection 2016; 72: 405–438.)
28.62 Treatment of bacterial meningitis of unknown 
cause (based on the British Infection Association 
Guideline 2016)*
1. Adults aged less than 60 years
 Cefotaxime 2 g IV 4 times daily or
 Ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice daily
2. Patients in whom penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infection is 
suspected, or in areas with a signicant incidence of penicillin resistance  
in the community
As for (1) but add:
 Vancomycin 15–20 mg/kg IV twice daily or
 Rifampicin 600 mg IV or orally twice daily
3. Adults aged > 60 years and those in whom Listeria monocytogenes
infection is suspected (brainstem signs, immunosuppression, diabetic, 
alcohol misuser)
As for (1) but add:
 Ampicillin 2 g IV 6 times daily or
 Amoxicillin 2 g IV 6 times daily
4. Adults aged > 60 years, or with risk factors in (3) above, in areas with a 
signicant incidence of penicillin resistance in the community
As for (2) but add:
 Ampicillin 2 g IV 6 times daily or
 Amoxicillin 2 g IV 6 times daily
5. Patients with a clear history of anaphylaxis to β-lactams
 Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg IV 4 times daily plus
 Vancomycin 15–20 mg/kg IV twice daily
If over the age of 60 years, add: co-trimoxazole 10–20 mg/kg  
(of the trimethoprim component) in four divided doses
6. Adjunctive treatment (see text)
 Dexamethasone 10 mg 4 times daily for 2–4 days
British Infection Association Guideline in Journal of Infection 2016; 72:405–438.
*N.B. Antibiotic recommendations depend on local epidemiology of organisms and antibiotic 
resistance. Local guidance should always be sought.

[[p1236]]
1174    NEUROLOGY
28.63 Chemotherapy of bacterial meningitis when the 
cause is known (based on the British Infection Association 
Guideline 2016)1
Pathogen
Regimen of choice
Alternative agents
Neisseria meningitidis
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 
4 times daily or 
ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 5–7 
days
Benzylpenicillin 2.4 g IV 
6 times daily or
Chloramphenicol2 3
25 mg/kg 4 times daily 
for 5–7 days
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
(sensitive to  
β-lactams, MIC  
≤ 0.06)
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 4 
times daily or
Chloramphenicol2 3
25mg/kg 4 times daily 
for 10–14 days
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 10–14 
days
Strep. pneumoniae
(resistant to β-lactams)
As for sensitive strains 
but add:
Chloramphenicol3
25 mg/kg 4 times daily 
for 14 days
Vancomycin 
15–20 mg/kg IV twice 
daily or
Rifampicin 600 mg IV 
twice daily for 14 days
Haemophilus inuenzae
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 4 
times daily or
Moxioxacin 400 mg 
daily for 10 days
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV 
twice daily for 10 days
Listeria monocytogenes
Amoxicillin 2 g IV 6 
times daily for 21 
days
Co-trimoxazole 
10–20 mg/kg (of 
the trimethoprim 
component) daily in 
four divided doses for 
21 days
Streptococcus suis
Cefotaxime 2 g IV 4 
times daily or
Chloramphenicol2 3
25 mg/kg 4 times daily 
for 10–14 days
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice 
daily for 10–14 days
1N.B. Antibiotic recommendations depend on local epidemiology of organisms and antibiotic 
resistance. Local guidance should always be sought. 2For patients with a history of anaphylaxis 
to β-lactam antibiotics. British Infection Association Guideline in Journal of Infection 2016; 
72:405–438. 3If the patient is recovering reduce the dose of chloramphenicol to 12.5 mg/kg 
to reduce the risk of dose-related anaemia. From Erratum to reference in note 2
(MIC = minimum inhibitory concentration)
Tuberculous meningitis
Tuberculous meningitis is now uncommon in high-income countries 
except in immunocompromised individuals, although it is still seen in 
those born in endemic areas and in low- and middle-resource countries. 
It is seen more frequently as a secondary infection in patients with HIV 
infection.
Pathophysiology
Tuberculous meningitis most commonly occurs shortly after a primary 
infection in childhood or as part of miliary tuberculosis. The usual local 
source of infection is a caseous focus in the meninges or brain sub-
stance adjacent to the CSF pathway. The brain is covered by a greenish, 
gelatinous exudate, especially around the base, and numerous scattered 
tubercles are found on the meninges.
Clinical features
The clinical features and staging criteria are listed in Box 28.65. Onset 
is much slower than in other bacterial meningitis – over 2–8 weeks. If 
untreated, tuberculous meningitis is fatal in a few weeks but complete 
recovery is usual if treatment is started at stage I (Box 28.65). When 
treatment is initiated later, the rate of death or serious neurological decit 
may be as high as 30%.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture should be performed if the diagnosis is suspected. The 
CSF is under increased pressure. It is usually clear but, when allowed to 
stand, a ne clot (‘spider web’) may form. The uid contains up to 500 ×106
cells/μL, predominantly lymphocytes, but can contain neutrophils. There is 
a rise in protein, often marked, and a similarly marked fall in glucose. The 
tubercle bacillus may be detected in a smear of the centrifuged deposit from 
the CSF but a negative result does not exclude the diagnosis. The CSF 
should be cultured but, as this result will not be known for up to 6 weeks, 
treatment must be started without waiting for conrmation. The WHO rec-
ommends use of additional nucleic acid amplication tests (NAATs), spe-
cically Xpert MT/RIF Ultra. This should be used in addition to smear and 
culture studies, as NAATs are not sensitive enough to exclude tuberculous 
meningitis when negative. Brain imaging may show hydrocephalus, brisk 
particularly basal meningeal enhancement on enhanced CT or MRI, and/or 
uncommonly an intracranial tuberculoma.
Management
As soon as the diagnosis is made or strongly suspected, chemotherapy 
should be started using one of the regimens that include pyrazinamide, 
described on page 522. The use of glucocorticoids in addition to antitu-
berculous therapy has been controversial. Recent evidence suggests 
that it improves mortality, especially if given early, but not focal neuro-
logical damage whether associated with HIV infection or not. Surgical 
28.64 Chemoprophylaxis following meningococcal exposure
Close contacts warranting chemoprophylaxis
 Household contacts (including persons who ate or slept in the same dwelling as 
the patient during the 7 days prior to disease onset)
 Child-care and nursery-school contacts
 Persons having contact with patient's oral secretions during the 7 days prior to 
disease onset:
Kissing
Sharing of toothbrushes
Sharing of eating utensils
Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
Unprotected contact during endotracheal intubation
 Aircraft contacts for persons seated next to the patient for > 8 hr
Persons at low risk in whom chemoprophylaxis is not recommended
 Casual contact (e.g. at school or work) without direct exposure to patient’s oral 
secretions
 Indirect contact only (contact with a high-risk contact and not a case)
 Health-care worker without direct exposure to patient's oral secretions
28.65 Clinical features and staging of tuberculous meningitis
Symptoms
 Headache
 Vomiting
 Low-grade fever
 Lassitude
 Depression
 Delirium
 Behaviour changes
Signs
 Meningism (may be absent)
 Oculomotor palsies
 Papilloedema
 Depression of conscious level
 Focal hemisphere signs
Staging of severity
 Stage I (early): non-specic symptoms and signs without alteration of 
consciousness
 Stage II (intermediate): altered consciousness without coma or delirium plus
minor focal neurological signs
 Stage III (advanced): stupor or coma, severe neurological decits, seizures or 
abnormal movements

[[p1237]]
Infections of the nervous system    1175
28
ventricular drainage may be needed if obstructive hydrocephalus devel-
ops. Skilled nursing is essential during the acute phase of the illness, and 
adequate hydration and nutrition must be maintained.
Fungal meningitis
Fungal meningitis is uncommon and usually occurs in the immunosup-
pressed. The yeast Cryptococcus neoformans is the commonest and an 
important cause of meningitis in those immunosuppressed by HIV infec-
tion. It does occur in the immunocompetent although non-HIV forms of 
immunocompromise should be sought. The presentation may be atypi-
cal with subacute or chronic meningism, fever, headache and symptoms 
of raised intracranial pressure occur. The CSF opening pressure is often 
very raised, with 20–200 cells x106/L mainly lymphocytes, elevated pro-
tein and low glucose levels (similar to ndings in tuberculous meningitis) 
(Box 28.6). In some regions the India ink test and cryptococcal PCR are 
used to detect cryptococci in the CSF. Cryptococcal antigen is present 
in the CSF and sometimes serum. Treatment is discussed on p. 363. 
Treatment of raised CSF pressure may be complex and frequent, some-
times daily, lumbar punctures are required.
Other meningitides
In some areas, meningitis may be caused by spirochaetes (leptospirosis, 
Lyme disease and syphilis; rickettsiae (typhus fever) or protozoa (primary 
amoebic meningoencephalitis, PAM).
Meningitis can also be due to non-infective pathologies. This is seen in 
recurrent aseptic meningitis resulting from systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), Behçet’s disease or sarcoidosis, as well as a condition of previ-
ously unknown origin known as Mollaret syndrome, in which the recurrent 
meningitis is associated with epithelioid cells in the spinal uid (‘Mollaret’ 
cells). Recent evidence suggests that this condition may be due to her-
pes simplex virus type 2 and is therefore infective after all. Meningitis can 
also be caused by direct invasion of the meninges by neoplastic cells 
(‘malignant meningitis’; see Box 28.59).
Subdural empyema
This is a rare complication of frontal sinusitis, osteomyelitis of the skull 
vault or middle ear disease. A collection of pus in the subdural space 
spreads over the surface of the hemisphere, causing underlying cortical 
oedema or thrombophlebitis. Patients present with severe pain in the 
face or head and pyrexia, often with a history of preceding paranasal 
sinus or ear infection. The patient then becomes drowsy, with seizures 
and focal signs such as a progressive hemiparesis.
The diagnosis rests on a strong clinical suspicion in patients with a 
local focus of infection. Careful assessment with contrast-enhanced CT 
or MRI may show a subdural collection with underlying cerebral oedema. 
Management requires aspiration of pus via a burr hole and appropriate 
parenteral antibiotics. Any local source of infection must be treated to 
prevent re-infection.
Spinal epidural abscess
The characteristic clinical features are back pain, often in a nerve root 
distribution and progressive transverse spinal cord syndrome with para-
paresis, sensory impairment and sphincter dysfunction. There may be 
fever and raised inammatory markers. Features of the primary focus of 
infection may be less obvious and thus can be overlooked. The resur-
gence of resistant staphylococcal infection and injection drug use has 
contributed to a recent marked rise in incidence.
Once the diagnosis is suspected, an MRI scan of the spine should 
be carried out (or myelography if MRI is not available). MRI is often 
negative in early disease, so if it is non-diagnostic and the clinical sus-
picion remains, it should be repeated after a week or so. Obtaining 
a bacteriological diagnosis is a high priority, and antibiotics are not 
usually started until this has been achieved (or at least attempted), 
e.g. by blood culture and tissue aspiration or biopsy. If there is spi-
nal cord compression surgical treatment is required (e.g. decompres-
sive laminectomy with abscess drainage). However, in the absence 
of neurological impairment, treatment with antibiotics alone is often 
attempted, usually using intravenous antibiotics for at least 6 weeks, 
guided by clinical and biochemical response.
Parenchymal viral infections
Infection of the substance of the nervous system will produce symptoms of 
focal dysfunction (decits and/or seizures) with general signs of infection, 
depending on the acuteness of the infection and the type of organism.
Viral encephalitis
A range of viruses can cause encephalitis but only a minority of patients 
report recent systemic viral infection (Box 28.66). The relative impor-
tance of specic viruses depends on location and the specic pop-
ulation involved, e.g. immunosuppressed. In high-income countries, 
the most serious cause of viral encephalitis is herpes simplex, which 
probably reaches the brain via the olfactory nerves. The development 
of effective therapy for some forms of encephalitis has increased 
the importance of clinical diagnosis and virological examination of 
the CSF.
Pathophysiology
The infection provokes an inammatory response that involves the cor-
tex, white matter, basal ganglia and brainstem. The distribution of lesions 
varies with the type of virus. For example, in herpes simplex enceph-
alitis, the temporal lobes are usually primarily affected, whereas cyto-
megalovirus can involve the areas adjacent to the ventricles (ventriculitis). 
Inclusion bodies may be present in the neurons and glial cells, and there 
is an inltration of polymorphonuclear cells in the perivascular space. 
There is neuronal degeneration and diffuse glial proliferation, often asso-
ciated with cerebral oedema.
Clinical features
Viral encephalitis presents with acute onset of headache, fever, focal neuro-
logical signs (aphasia and/or hemiplegia, visual eld defects) and seizures. 
Disturbance of consciousness ranging from drowsiness to deep coma 
supervenes early and may advance dramatically. Meningism occurs in many 
patients. Additional clues to the causative virus are listed in Box28.66. 
Rabies presents a distinct clinical picture and is described below.
Investigations
Imaging by CT scan may show low-density lesions in the temporal lobes 
but MRI is more sensitive in detecting early abnormalities. Lumbar punc-
ture should be performed once imaging has excluded a mass lesion. The 
CSF usually contains excess lymphocytes but polymorphonuclear cells 
may predominate in the early stages. The CSF may be normal in up to 
10% of cases. Some viruses, including the West Nile virus, may cause 
a sustained neutrophilic CSF. The protein content may be elevated but 
the glucose is normal. The EEG is usually abnormal in the early stages, 
especially in herpes simplex encephalitis, with characteristic periodic 
slow-wave activity in the temporal lobes. Virological investigations of the 
CSF, including PCR, may reveal the causative organism but treatment 
initiation should not await this.
Management
Optimum treatment for herpes simplex encephalitis (aciclovir 10 mg/kg IV 
3 times daily for 2–3 weeks) has reduced mortality from 70% to around 
10%. This should be given early to all patients suspected of having viral 
encephalitis.
Some survivors will have residual epilepsy or cognitive impairment. For 
details of post-infectious encephalomyelitis, see page 1163. Antiepileptic 
treatment may be required and raised intracranial pressure may indicate 
the need for dexamethasone.

[[p1238]]
1176    NEUROLOGY
Brainstem encephalitis
This presents with ataxia, dysarthria, diplopia or other cranial nerve 
palsies. The CSF is lymphocytic, with a normal glucose. The causative 
agent is presumed to be viral. However, Listeria monocytogenes may 
cause a similar syndrome with meningitis (and often a polymorpho-
nuclear CSF pleocytosis) and requires specic treatment with ampicillin 
(2 grams 6 times daily; see Box 28.63).
Rabies
Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus that infects the central nervous tissue 
and salivary glands of a wide range of mammals. It is usually conveyed 
by saliva through bites or licks on abrasions or on intact mucous mem-
branes. Humans are most frequently infected from dogs and bats. In 
Europe, the maintenance host is the fox. The incubation period varies 
in humans from a minimum of 9 days to many months but is usually 
between 4 and 8 weeks. Severe bites, especially if on the head or neck, 
are associated with shorter incubation periods. Human rabies is a rare 
disease, even in endemic areas. However, because it is usually fatal, 
major efforts are directed at limiting its spread and preventing its impor-
tation into uninfected countries, such as the UK.
Clinical features
At the onset there may be fever, and paraesthesia at the site of the bite. 
A prodromal period of 1–10 days, during which the patient becomes 
increasingly anxious, leads to the characteristic ‘hydrophobia’. Although 
the patient is thirsty, attempts at drinking provoke violent contractions of 
the diaphragm and other inspiratory muscles. Delusions and hallucina-
tions may develop, accompanied by spitting, biting and mania, with lucid 
intervals in which the patient is markedly anxious. Cranial nerve lesions 
develop and terminal hyperpyrexia is common. Death ensues, usually 
within a week of the onset of symptoms.
Investigations
During life, the diagnosis is usually made on clinical grounds but rapid 
immunouorescent techniques can detect antigen in corneal impression 
smears or skin biopsies.
28.66 Causes of viral encephalitis (location dependent)
Virus
Locations
Comment
Sporadic encephalitides
Herpes simplex virus type 1
Commonest cause; especially high resource areas
Treatable, important to consider diagnosis early
Herpes simplex virus type 2
Around 10% of herpes simplex virus infections
Usually meningoencephalitis, may be recurrent
Varicella zoster virus
Increasing globally
Before, with or few days after vesicular rash. More 
common in immunosuppressed. Post infectious 
cerebellitis and cerebral vasculitis may occur
Enterovirus 70 and 71
Global, Enterovirus 71, particularly Asia–Pacic  
region
Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis (Enterovirus 70), hand 
foot and mouth disease and brainstem encephalitis 
(Enterovirus 71)
Human immunodeciency virus
Global
Around seroconversion
Measles and mumps
Global
Measles: post infectious or long-term subacute 
sclerosing panencephalitis. Mumps: before or after 
parotitis
Arbo- and zoonotic viruses (spread by ticks, mosquitoes and other vectors)
West Nile virus
West and Central Asia, Middle East, Africa,  
Southern Europe and North America
(Mosquito) Profound accid weakness and rash; 
parkinsonism, myoclonus
Japanese encephalitis virus
Asia, Western Pacic
(Pigs and wading birds) Seizures very common, 
abnormal behaviour/psychosis, asymmetric accid 
paralysis, abnormal movement/parkinsonian
Dengue viruses
Asia, Pacic, Africa, Americas, Southern Europe
(Mosquito) Fever, arthralgia, rash, haemorrhagic 
manifestations, leukopenia
Chikungunya
Africa, Asia, Europe, Indian and Pacic Ocean  
islands, Americas
(Mosquito) Excruciating joint pain/arthritis, rash
Nipah and Hendra viruses
Asia–Pacic region, Hendra in Australia
(Bats, human to human, intermediate transmission 
pigs, horses; Hendra – horse contact) Nipah – 
segmental myoclonus, cerebellar signs, areexia, 
multiple small (< 5 mm) lesions on MRI
Rabies virus
Latin America, Caribbean, Asia, Africa, Central Asia 
and Middle East
(Bats, dogs, cats) Hyperactivity, painful pharyngeal 
and inspiratory muscle spasms, autonomic 
instability, hydrophobia
Other: St Louis virus, eastern, western, 
Venezuelan equine, La Crosse viruses/ 
Colorado tick fever virus, Powassan virus
Americas mainly
(Mosquitos/ticks)
Zika virus
Africa, South-east Asia, Pacic islands, Americas,  
Carribbean
(Mosquitos, human to human) Pruritic rash, 
conjunctivitis, arthralgia hands and feet
(MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)

[[p1239]]
Infections of the nervous system    1177
28
Management
Established disease
Only a few patients with established rabies have survived. All received 
some post-exposure prophylaxis (see below) and needed intensive care 
facilities to control cardiac and respiratory failure. Otherwise, only palli-
ative treatment is possible once symptoms have appeared. The patient 
should be heavily sedated with diazepam, supplemented by chlorprom-
azine if needed. Nutrition and uids should be given intravenously or 
through a gastrostomy.
Pre-exposure prophylaxis
Pre-exposure prophylaxis with rabies vaccine is required by those who 
handle potentially infected animals professionally, work with rabies virus 
in laboratories or live at special risk in rabies-endemic areas.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
The wounds should be thoroughly cleaned, preferably with a quaternary 
ammonium detergent or soap; damaged tissues should be excised and 
the wound left unsutured. Rabies can usually be prevented if treatment 
is started within a day or two of biting. Delayed treatment may still be of 
value. For maximum protection, hyperimmune serum and vaccine are 
required.
The safest anti-rabies antiserum is human rabies immunoglobulin. The 
dose is 20 IU/kg body weight; half is inltrated around the bite and half is 
given intramuscularly at a different site from the vaccine. Hyperimmune 
animal serum may be used but hypersensitivity reactions, including ana-
phylaxis, are common.
The safest vaccine, free of complications, is human diploid cell strain 
vaccine. Post-exposure treatment is complex and depends on a com-
posite risk based on the risk by country and the category of exposure. 
Detailed advice may be available locally or on the UK website https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/rabies-post-exposure-prophy-
laxis-management-guidelines. For example, an unimmunised individual 
from a high-risk country exposed to direct contact with terrestrial mam-
mal saliva should receive human rabies immunoglobulin and four doses 
of vaccine on days 0, 3, 7 and 21. If immunocompromised, they should 
receive ve doses of vaccine on days 0, 3, 7, 14 and 30. In contrast, an 
individual in a low-risk country and no physical contact with terrestrial 
mammal saliva would not require post-exposure prophylaxis.
Human immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection
Box 28.67 summarises the neurological manifestations of HIV infection. 
These are covered in detail in Chapter 14.
Poliomyelitis
Disease is caused by one of three polioviruses, which constitute a sub-
group of the enteroviruses. Poliomyelitis has become much less com-
mon following the introduction of the Global Polio Eradication initiative. 
Incidence dropped from more than 350 000 cases in 1988 to 33 in 
2018. However, incomplete immunisation still results in small numbers of 
cases. Transmission usually occurs through faecal–hand–oral contami-
nation with primary replication in the lymphatic tissue of the gastrointes-
tinal and oropharyngeal tracts.
The virus causes a lymphocytic meningitis and infects the grey matter 
of the spinal cord, brainstem and cortex. There is a particular propensity 
to damage anterior horn cells, especially in the lumbar segments.
Many patients recover fully after the initial phase of a few days of mild 
fever and headache. In other individuals, after a week of well-being, there 
is a recurrence of pyrexia, headache and meningism. Weakness may 
start later in one muscle group and can progress to widespread paresis. 
Respiratory failure may supervene if intercostal muscles are paralysed or 
the medullary motor nuclei are involved. Poliomyelitis virus may be cul-
tured from CSF and stool. Second attacks are very rare but occasionally 
patients show late deterioration in muscle bulk and power many years 
after the initial infection (this is termed the ‘post-polio syndrome’).
Prevention of poliomyelitis is by immunisation with live Sabin vac-
cine, a collection of live attenuated polio viruses (OPV – oral poliovirus 
vaccine) in low- and middle-income regions. The advantages of OPV 
include cost, ease of administration and transmission of the vaccine virus 
to unimmunised contacts. In high-income countries where polio is now 
very rare, the live vaccine has been replaced by the Salk vaccine (IPV), a 
collection of inactivated polio viruses. Advantages include avoidance of 
vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis and effective combination with 
other routine childhood vaccines.
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Herpes zoster is the result of reactivation of the varicella zoster virus that 
has lain dormant in a nerve root ganglion following chickenpox earlier in 
life. Reactivation may be spontaneous (as usually occurs in middle-aged 
or older adults) or due to immunosuppression (as in patients with diabe-
tes, malignant disease or HIV).
28.67 Neurological manifestations of human immuno-
deciency virus (HIV) infection and treatment side-effects
Neurocognitive manifestations
 HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder
 HIV-associated encephalopathy: subcortical dementia (psychomotor slowing and 
memory loss), depression, movement disorders
Stroke
 Ischaemic stroke (90%): HIV-associated vasculopathy (accelerated 
atherosclerosis, aneurysm, vasculitis, small vessel disease), cardioembolism 
(cardiomyopathy, ischaemic heart disease, endocarditis), opportunistic 
infection (causing meningitis or vasculitis), lymphoma involving blood vessels, 
coagulopathy
 Cerebral haemorrhage (< 10%): HIV-associated vasculopathy, 
thrombocytopenia, mycotic aneurysm
Other brain/cranial nerve involvement
 Bell palsy (often around seroconversion)
 Meningitis: aseptic around seroconversion, cryptococcal meningitis, tuberculous 
meningitis
 Mass lesions: toxoplasmosis, lymphoma, tuberculosis
 Encephalitis: HIV around seroconversion, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, 
varicella zoster virus (can also result in vasculitis)
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
 Seizures
 Immune reconstitution syndrome*
Spinal cord, motor neuron and nerve root
 Motor neuron disease
 Vacuolar myelopathy (late stage)
 Other viral myelopathy (particularly herpes group of viruses)
 Radiculopathy (caused by cytomegalovirus, or tuberculous  
meningitis)
Peripheral nerve and plexus
 Acute inammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP)
 Chronic inammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)
 Mononeuritis multiplex (vasculitic)
 Distal symmetric peripheral neuropathy
 Diffuse inltrative lymphocytosis syndrome
 Brachial plexopathy
 Antiretroviral-associated neuropathy*
Muscle
 HIV-associated myopathy (inammatory myopathy)
 Antiretroviral-associated myopathy*
*Treatment effect.

[[p1240]]
1178    NEUROLOGY
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
This is a rare, chronic, progressive and eventually fatal complication of 
measles, presumably a result of an inability of the nervous system to 
eradicate the virus. It occurs in children and adolescents, usually many 
years after the primary virus infection. There is generalised neurological 
deterioration and onset is insidious, with intellectual deterioration, apathy 
and clumsiness, followed by myoclonic jerks, rigidity and dementia.
The CSF may show a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and the EEG 
demonstrates characteristic periodic bursts of triphasic waves. Although 
there is persistent measles-specic IgG in serum and CSF, antiviral ther-
apy is ineffective and death ensues within a few years.
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy
This was originally described as a rare complication of lymphoma, leu-
kaemia or carcinomatosis but is seen in untreated HIV/AIDS or second-
ary to immunosuppression, e.g. following organ transplantation or use 
of disease-modifying drugs for MS, in particular natalizumab. It is an 
infection of oligodendrocytes and other neuroglial cells by human polyo-
mavirus JC, causing widespread demyelination of the white matter of the 
cerebral hemispheres. Clinical signs include dementia, hemiparesis and 
aphasia, which progress rapidly, usually leading to death within weeks 
or months. Areas of low density in the white matter are seen on CT but 
MRI is more sensitive, showing diffuse high signal in the cerebral white 
matter on T2-weighted images, sometimes with contrast enhancement. 
The only treatment available is restoration of the immune response (by 
treating HIV/AIDS or reversing immunosuppression) which can lead to 
the development of an immune reconstitution inammatory syndrome 
(PML-IRIS).
Parenchymal bacterial infections
Cerebral abscess
Bacteria may enter the cerebral substance through penetrating injury, 
by direct spread from paranasal sinuses or the middle ear, or secondary 
to sepsis. Untreated congenital heart disease is a recognised risk fac-
tor. The site of abscess formation and the likely causative organism are 
both related to the source of infection (Box 28.68). Initial infection leads 
to local suppuration followed by loculation of pus within a surrounding 
wall of gliosis, which in a chronic abscess may form a tough capsule. 
Haematogenous spread may lead to multiple abscesses.
Clinical features
A cerebral abscess may present acutely with fever, headache, mening-
ism and drowsiness, but more commonly presents over days or weeks 
as a cerebral mass lesion with little or no evidence of infection. Seizures, 
raised intracranial pressure and focal hemisphere signs occur alone or in 
combination. Distinction from a cerebral tumour may be impossible on 
clinical grounds.
Investigations
Lumbar puncture is potentially hazardous in the presence of raised 
intracranial pressure and CT should always precede it. CT reveals sin-
gle or multiple low-density areas, which show ring enhancement with 
contrast and surrounding cerebral oedema (Fig. 28.34). There may be 
an elevated white blood cell count and ESR in patients with active local 
infection. The possibility of cerebral toxoplasmosis or tuberculous dis-
ease secondary to HIV infection should always be considered. MRI with 
diffusion weighted imaging may be helpful in distinguishing between 
cerebral abscess (hyperintense) and tumour (hypointense or variable 
increase lower than found in abscess).
Management and prognosis
Antimicrobial therapy is indicated once the diagnosis is made. The likely 
source of infection should guide the choice of antibiotic (see Box 28.68). 
Surgical drainage by burr-hole aspiration or excision may be necessary, 
especially where the presence of a capsule may lead to a persistent 
focus of infection. Epilepsy frequently develops and is often resistant to 
treatment.
Despite advances in therapy, mortality remains 10%–20% and may 
partly relate to delay in diagnosis and treatment.
Lyme disease
Infection with Borrelia burgdorferi can cause numerous neurological 
problems, including polyradiculopathy, meningitis, encephalitis and 
mononeuritis multiplex.
Neurosyphilis
Neurosyphilis may present as an acute or chronic process and may 
involve the meninges, blood vessels and/or parenchyma of the brain and 
spinal cord. The decade to 2008 saw a 10-fold increase in the incidence 
of syphilis. The clinical manifestations are diverse and early diagnosis and 
treatment are essential.
Clinical features
The clinical and pathological features of the three most common pres-
entations are summarised in Box 28.69. Neurological examination reveals 
signs indicative of the anatomical localisation of lesions. Delusions of 
grandeur suggest general paresis of the insane, but more commonly 
there is simply progressive dementia. Small and irregular pupils that 
react to convergence but not light, as described by Argyll Robertson 
(see Box28.21), may accompany any neurosyphilitic syndrome but most 
commonly tabes dorsalis.
Investigations
Routine screening for syphilis is warranted in many neurological patients. 
Treponemal antibodies are positive in the serum in most patients, but 
28.68 Aetiology and treatment of bacterial cerebral abscess
Site of 
abscess
Source of 
infection
Likely  
organisms
Recommended 
treatment
Frontal  
lobe
Paranasal 
sinuses
Streptococci
Cefotaxime 2–3 g 
IV 4 times daily plus
Teeth
Anaerobes
Metronidazole 
500 mg IV 3 times 
daily
Temporal 
lobe 
Cerebellum
Middle ear
Streptococci 
Enterobacterales
Ampicillin 2–3 g IV 
3 times daily plus
Pseudomonas 
species 
Anaerobes
Metronidazole 
500 mg IV 3 times 
daily plus either
Sphenoid  
sinus 
Pseudomonas
species
Ceftazidime 2 g IV 
3 times daily or
Anaerobes  
Gentamicin* 5 mg/kg 
IV daily
Any site 
Multiple
Penetrating 
trauma
Staphylococci 
Clostridium 
species
Vancomycin 
15–20 mg/kg IV 
2–3 times daily 
plus
Metastatic 
(bacteraemia 
or endocarditis) 
and  
cryptogenic
Streptococci
Metronidazole 
500 mg IV 3 times 
daily
Anaerobes
Staphylococci
*Monitor gentamicin levels.
(IV = intravenous)

[[p1241]]
Infections of the nervous system    1179
28
CSF examination is essential if neurological involvement is suspected. 
Active disease is suggested by an elevated cell count, usually lympho-
cytic, and the protein content may be elevated to 0.5–1.0 g/L. Serological 
tests in CSF are usually positive but progressive disease can occur with 
negative CSF serology.
Management
Aqueous crystalline penicillin G intravenously or intramuscular injec-
tion of procaine benzylpenicillin (procaine penicillin) and probenecid 
for 10–14 days is essential in the treatment of neurosyphilis of all 
types. Further courses of penicillin must be given if symptoms are not 
relieved, if the condition continues to advance or if the CSF contin-
ues to show signs of active disease. The cell count returns to normal 
within 3 months of completion of treatment, but the elevated protein 
takes longer to subside and some serological tests may never revert to 
normal. Evidence of clinical progression at any time is an indication for 
renewed treatment.
The spinal cord can be involved by other infections, including HTLV1, 
TB, bilharzia and echinococcus.
Parenchymal parasitic infections
Neurocysticercosis
Neurocysticercosis is the commonest parasitic neurological disease 
globally. Most infections occur in low-resource regions, but it occurs 
in high-resource regions in travellers and immigrants. Cysts may be 
asymptomatic, often for years, or symptomatic, the symptoms depend-
ing on the site of the cysts. Seizures are the commonest manifestation. 
Parenchymal cysts occur in the brain or in the convexity sulci, while extra-
parenchymal cysts occur in the ventricles, cisterns and the spinal cord, 
and present most often with raised intracranial pressure. Investigation 
and management are discussed on p. 342.
Cerebral malaria
Cerebral malaria should be suspected in anyone presenting with fever, 
altered awareness or behaviour living in or returning from travel to a 
malaria endemic area. Drowsiness may progress over a few days, 
but coma can occur within hours. Level of consciousness may uc-
tuate and seizures occur, but focal neurological signs are unusual. 
The eyes frequently diverge with roving eye movements, but cranial 
nerve involvement and papilloedema are uncommon and suggest other 
causes, e.g. meningitis. Cerebral malaria is a serious condition with a 
case fatality rate of 15%–20% and requires rapid diagnosis and treat-
ment (see Box.13.56).
Neuroschistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis is commonest in sub-Saharan Africa and neuroschis-
tosomiasis should be considered in individuals in endemic areas and 
returning travellers presenting with neurological signs. The brain, but 
more commonly spine (particularly conus medullaris) and cauda equina 
can be involved. Spinal cord involvement often results in a rapidly pro-
gressive transverse myelitis, leg pain, bladder and bowel involvement. 
Investigation and management are discussed on p. 338.
B
A
Fig. 28.34 Right temporal cerebral abscess (arrows), with surrounding oedema and midline shift to the left.
28.69 Clinical and pathological features of neurosyphilis
Type and interval from 
primary infection
Pathology
Clinical features
Meningovascular
(5 to 12 years)*
Endarteritis obliterans
Stroke
Meningeal exudate 
(often basal meningitis)
Cranial nerve palsies 
Seizures/mass lesion
Granuloma (gumma)
General paralysis  
of the insane
(2–15 years)*
Degeneration in 
cerebral cortex/
cerebral atrophy
Dementia 
Tremor 
Bilateral upper motor 
signs
Thickened meninges
Delusions
Paranoia
Tabes dorsalis
(5–20 years)*
Degeneration of 
sensory neurons
Lightning pains 
Sensory ataxia
Wasting of dorsal 
columns
Visual failure 
Abdominal crises
Optic atrophy
Incontinence
Trophic changes
Any of the above
Argyll Robertson pupils 
(see Box 28.21)
*All forms can occur earlier or later than noted.

[[p1242]]
1180    NEUROLOGY
Parenchymal fungal infections
Fungal infections of brain parenchyma are uncommon but occur par-
ticularly in the immunocompromised, in the presence of intraventricular 
devices and as an extension of sinus infection.
Diseases caused by bacterial toxins
Tetanus
This disease results from infection with Clostridium tetani, a commensal 
in the gut of humans and domestic animals that is found in soil. Infection 
enters the body through wounds, which may be trivial. It is rare in the 
UK, occurring mostly in gardeners and farmers, but a recent increase 
has been seen in injection drug users. By contrast, the disease is com-
mon in many countries, where dust contains spores derived from animal 
and human excreta. Unhygienic practices soon after birth may lead to 
infection of the umbilical stump or site of circumcision, causing tetanus 
neonatorum. Tetanus is still one of the major killers of adults, children and 
neonates in low-income countries, where the mortality rate can be nearly 
100% in the newborn and around 40% in others.
In circumstances unfavourable to growth of the organism, spores are 
formed and these may remain dormant for years in the soil. Spores ger-
minate and bacilli multiply only in the anaerobic conditions that occur 
in areas of tissue necrosis or if the oxygen tension is lowered by the 
presence of other organisms, particularly if aerobic. The bacilli remain 
localised but produce an exotoxin with an afnity for motor nerve endings 
and motor nerve cells.
The anterior horn cells are affected after the exotoxin has passed into 
the blood stream and their involvement results in rigidity and convulsions. 
Symptoms rst appear from 2 days to several weeks after injury: the 
shorter the incubation period, the more severe the attack and the worse 
the prognosis.
Clinical features
By far the most important early symptom is trismus – spasm of the mas-
seter muscles, which causes difculty in opening the mouth and in mas-
ticating; hence the name ‘lockjaw’. Lockjaw in tetanus is painless, unlike 
the spasm of the masseters due to dental abscess, septic throat or other 
causes. Conditions that can mimic tetanus include functional neurolog-
ical disorders and phenothiazine overdosage, or overdose in injection 
drug users.
In tetanus, the tonic rigidity spreads to involve the muscles of the 
face, neck and trunk. Contraction of the frontalis and the muscles at 
the angles of the mouth leads to the so-called ‘risus sardonicus’. There 
is rigidity of the muscles at the neck and trunk of varying degree. The 
back is usually slightly arched (‘opisthotonus’) and there is a board-like 
abdominal wall.
In the more severe cases, violent spasms lasting for a few seconds 
to 3–4 minutes occur spontaneously, or may be induced by stimuli such 
as movement or noise. These episodes are painful and exhausting, and 
suggest a grave outlook, especially if they appear soon after the onset of 
symptoms. They gradually increase in frequency and severity for about 
1 week and the patient may die from exhaustion, asphyxia or aspiration 
pneumonia. In less severe illness, periods of spasm may not commence 
until a week or so after the rst sign of rigidity, and in very mild infections 
they may never appear. Autonomic involvement may cause cardiovascu-
lar complications, such as hypertension. Rarely, the only manifestation of 
the disease may be ‘local tetanus’ – stiffness or spasm of the muscles 
near the infected wound – and the prognosis is good if treatment is com-
menced at this stage.
Investigations
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds. Laboratory testing supports 
the diagnosis, but treatment should not be delayed while waiting for 
results. Wound tissue samples or a wound swab may be sent in cooked 
meat broth for PCR and culture of C. tetani. Serum samples should be 
collected, before immunoglobulin is given, for tetanus toxin and antibod-
ies against tetanus toxoid.
Management
Established disease
Management of established disease should begin as soon as possible, 
as shown in Box 28.70
Prevention
Tetanus can be prevented by immunisation and prompt treatment of 
contaminated wounds by débridement and antibiotics. In patients with 
a contaminated wound, a 7–10-day course of metronidazole (500 mg 
intravenously every 6–8 hours) or penicillin G (2–4 million units every 
4–6hours) are recommended. Alternative antibiotics include tetracy-
clines, macrolides, clindamycin, cephalosporins and chloramphenicol. 
Tetanus toxoid containing vaccine and human tetanus immunoglob-
ulin use should follow local guidelines, and depend on the level of 
risk associated with a wound, prior immunisation and time since last 
tetanus vaccination.
Botulism
Botulism is caused by the neurotoxins of Clostridium botulinum, which 
are extremely potent and cause disease after ingestion of even picogram 
amounts. Its classical form is an acute onset of bilateral cranial neuropa-
thies associated with symmetric descending weakness.
Anaerobic conditions are necessary for the organism's growth. It 
may contaminate and thrive in many foodstuffs, where sealing and 
preserving provide the requisite conditions. Contaminated honey has 
been implicated in infant botulism, in which the organism colonises the 
gastrointestinal tract. Wound botulism is a growing problem in injection 
drug users.
The toxin causes predominantly bulbar and ocular palsies (difculty 
in swallowing, blurred or double vision, ptosis), progressing to limb 
weakness and respiratory paralysis. Criteria for the clinical diagnosis are 
shown in Box 28.71
Management includes assisted ventilation and general support-
ive measures until the toxin eventually dissociates from nerve endings 
6–8 weeks following ingestion. A polyvalent antitoxin is available for 
28.70  Treatment of tetanus (consult local guidance)
Neutralise absorbed toxin
 Human tetanus antitoxin IM/IV (local guidance varies) or where human 
tetanus antitoxin is not available (e.g. in the UK), IVIG (human intravenous 
immunoglobulin) IV*
Prevent further toxin production
 Débride wound
 Give metronidazole 500 mg IV every 6–8 hours ideally, or penicillin G  
2–4 million units IV every 4–6 hours for 7–10 days
Control spasms
 Nurse in a quiet room
 Avoid unnecessary stimuli
 Give IV diazepam
 If spasms continue, paralyse patient and ventilate
General measures
 Maintain hydration and nutrition
 Treat secondary infections
 Vaccination following recovery
(IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous)
*For dose, depending on specic IVIG used, see https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/le/820628/Tetanus_information_for_
health_professionals_2019.pdf

[[p1243]]
Infections of the nervous system    1181
28
post- exposure prophylaxis and for the treatment of suspected botu-
lism. Itspecically neutralises toxin types A, B and E and is not effective 
against infant botulism (in which active growth of the organism allows 
continued toxin production).
Prion diseases
Prions are unique amongst infectious agents in that they are devoid 
of any nucleic acid. They appear to be transmitted by acquisition of a 
normal mammalian protein (prion protein, PrPC) that is in an abnormal 
conformation (PrPSC, containing an excess of beta-sheet protein). The 
result is accumulation of protein that forms amyloid in the CNS, caus-
ing a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) across several 
species.
Human prion diseases (Box 28.72) are characterised by the histo-
pathological triad of cortical spongiform change, neuronal cell loss and 
gliosis. Associated with these changes there is deposition of amyloid, 
made up of an altered form of a normally occurring protein, the prion 
protein. Prion proteins are not inactivated by cooking or conventional 
sterilisation, and transmission is thought to occur by consumption of 
infected CNS tissue or by inoculation (e.g. via depth EEG electrodes, 
corneal grafts, cadaveric dura mater grafts and pooled cadaveric growth 
hormone preparations). The same diseases can occur in an inherited 
form, due to mutations in the PrP gene.
The apparent transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
(BSE) to humans was thought to be responsible for the emergence of a 
new variant of Creutzfeld–Jakob disease (vCJD) in the UK (see below). 
This outbreak led to nationwide precautionary measures, such as leuco-
depletion of all blood used for transfusion, and the mandatory use of 
disposable surgical instruments wherever possible for tonsillectomy, 
appendicectomy and ophthalmological procedures.
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) is the best-characterised human TSE. 
Some 10% of cases arise from a mutation in the gene coding for the 
prion protein. The sporadic form is the most common, occurring in 
middle-aged to older patients. Clinical features usually involve a rapidly 
progressive dementia, with myoclonus and a characteristic EEG pattern 
(repetitive slow-wave complexes), although a number of other features, 
such as visual disturbance or ataxia, may also be seen. These are par-
ticularly common in CJD transmitted by inoculation (e.g. by infected dura 
mater grafts). Death occurs after a mean of 4–6 months. There is no 
effective treatment.
Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
This type of CJD (vCJD) emerged in the late 1990s, affecting a small 
number of patients in the UK. The causative agent appears to be identi-
cal to that causing BSE in cows, and the disease may have been a result 
of the epidemic of BSE in the UK a decade earlier. Patients affected 
by vCJD are typically younger than those with sporadic CJD and pres-
ent with neuropsychiatric changes and sensory symptoms in the limbs, 
followed by ataxia, dementia and death. Progression is slightly slower 
than in patients with sporadic CJD (mean time to death is over a year). 
Characteristic EEG changes are not present, but MRI brain scans show 
typical high-signal changes in the pulvinar thalami in a high proportion 
of cases (Fig. 28.35). Brain histology is distinct, with very orid plaques 
containing the prion proteins. Abnormal prion protein has been identied 
in tonsil specimens from patients with vCJD, leading to the suggestion 
that the disease could be transmitted by reticulo-endothelial tissue (like 
TSEs in animals but unlike sporadic CJD in humans). It was the emer-
gence of this form of the disorder that led to the changes in public health 
and farming policy in the UK; while the incidence of vCJD has declined 
dramatically, surveillance and research continue.
28.71 US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) denition of 
botulism
Three main syndromes
 Infantile
 Food-borne
 Wound infection
Clinical features
 Absence of fever
 Symmetrical neurological decits
 Patient remains responsive
 Normal or slow heart rate and normal blood pressure
 No sensory decits with the exception of blurred vision
28.72 Prion diseases affecting humans
Disease
Mechanism
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Sporadic
Unknown: spontaneous PrPC to PrPSC
conversion or somatic mutation
Familial
Genetic: mutations in the PrP gene
Variant
Dietary ingestion: infection from bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy
Gerstmann–Sträussler– 
Scheinker disease
Genetic: mutations in the PrP gene
Fatal familial insomnia
Genetic: mutations in the PrP gene
Sporadic fatal insomnia
Genetic: spontaneous PrPC to PrPSC
conversion or somatic mutation
Kuru
Dietary: ingestion of affected human brain
Fig. 28.35 Magnetic resonance imaging in variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.
Arrows indicate bilateral pulvinar hyperintensity.

[[p1244]]
1182    NEUROLOGY
Intracranial mass lesions and raised 
intracranial pressure
Many different types of mass lesion may arise within the intracranial 
cavity (Box 28.73). In low-income countries tuberculoma and other 
infections are frequent causes, but in the West intracranial haem-
orrhage and brain tumours are more common. The clinical features 
depend on the site of the mass, its nature and its rate of expansion. 
Symptoms and signs (see Box 28.74) are produced by a number of 
mechanisms.
Raised intracranial pressure
Raised intracranial pressure (RICP) may be caused by mass lesions, 
cerebral oedema, obstruction to CSF circulation leading to hydroceph-
alus, impaired CSF absorption and cerebral venous obstruction (see 
Box28.73).
Clinical features
In adults, intracranial pressure is less than 10–15 mmHg. The features 
of RICP are listed in Box 28.74. The speed of pressure increase inu-
ences presentation. If it is slow, compensatory mechanisms may occur, 
including alteration in the volume of uid in CSF spaces and venous 
sinuses, minimising symptoms. Rapid pressure increase (as in aggres-
sive tumours) does not permit these compensatory mechanisms to take 
place, leading to early symptoms, including sudden death. Papilloedema 
is not always present, either because the pressure rise has been too 
rapid or because of anatomical anomalies of the meningeal sheath of 
the optic nerve.
A false localising sign is one in which the pathology is remote from 
the site of the expected lesion; in RICP, the 6th cranial nerve (unilateral 
or bilateral) is most commonly affected but the 3rd, 5th and 7th nerves 
may also be involved. Sixth nerve palsies are thought to be due either 
to stretching of the long slender nerve or to compression against the 
petrous temporal bone ridge. Transtentorial herniation of the uncus may 
compress the ipsilateral 3rd nerve and usually involves the pupillary bres 
rst, causing a dilated pupil; however, a false localising contralateral 3rd 
nerve palsy may also occur, perhaps due to extrinsic compression by the 
tentorial margin. Vomiting, coma, bradycardia and arterial hypertension 
are later features of RICP.
The rise in intracranial pressure from a mass lesion may cause dis-
placement of the brain. Downward displacement of the medial temporal 
lobe (uncus) through the tentorium due to a large hemisphere mass may 
cause ‘temporal coning’ (Fig. 28.36). This may stretch the 3rd and/or 6th 
cranial nerves or cause pressure on the contralateral cerebral peduncle 
(giving rise to ipsilateral upper motor neuron signs) and is usually accom-
panied by progressive coma. Downward movement of the cerebellar 
tonsils through the foramen magnum may compress the medulla – ‘ton-
sillar coning’ (Fig. 28.37). This may result in brainstem haemorrhage and/
or acute obstruction of the CSF pathways. As coning progresses, coma 
and death occur unless the condition is rapidly treated.
28.73 Common causes of raised intracranial pressure
Mass lesions
 Intracranial haemorrhage (traumatic or spontaneous):
Extradural haematoma
Subdural haematoma
Intracerebral haemorrhage
 Cerebral tumour (particularly posterior fossa lesions or high-grade gliomas: see 
Box 28.75)
 Infective:
Cerebral abscess
Tuberculoma
Cysticercosis
Hydatid cyst
 Colloid cyst (in ventricles)
Disturbance of cerebrospinal uid circulation
 Obstructive (non-communicating) hydrocephalus: obstruction within ventricular 
system
 Communicating hydrocephalus: site of obstruction outside ventricular system
Obstruction to venous sinuses
 Cerebral venous thrombosis
 Trauma (depressed fractures overlying sinuses)
Diffuse brain oedema or swelling
 Meningo-encephalitis
 Trauma (diffuse head injury, near-drowning)
 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
 Metabolic (e.g. water intoxication)
 Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
28.74 Clinical features of intracranial mass lesions
Presentation
Features
Seizures
Focal onset ± generalised spread
Focal symptoms
Progressive loss of function
Weakness
Numbness
Dysphasia
Cranial neuropathy
False localising signs
Unilateral/bilateral 6th nerve palsies
Contralateral 3rd nerve (usually 
pupil rst)
Raised intracranial pressure 
(usually aggressive tumours 
causing vasogenic oedema or 
obstructive hydrocephalus)
Headache worse on lying/straining
Vomiting
Diplopia (6th nerve involvement)
Papilloedema
Bradycardia, raised blood pressure
Impaired conscious level
Stroke/TIA-like symptoms
Acute haemorrhage into tumour
Paroxysmal ‘tumour attacks’
Cognitive/behavioural change
Usually frontal mass lesions
Endocrine abnormalities
Pituitary tumours
Incidental nding
Asymptomatic but identied on 
imaging (meningiomas commonly)
(TIA = transient ischaemic attack)
3rd nerve
deformed
Cerebral
tumour
Mid-brain
distorted
Tentorial
margin
Fig. 28.36 Cerebral tumour displacing medial temporal lobe and causing 
pressure on the mid-brain and 3rd cranial nerve.

[[p1245]]
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure    1183
28
Management
Primary management of RICP should be targeted at relieving the 
cause (e.g. surgical decompression of mass lesion, glucocorticoids to 
reduce vasogenic oedema or shunt procedure to relieve hydrocepha-
lus). Supportive treatment includes maintenance of uid balance, blood 
pressure control, head elevation and use of diuretics such as mannitol. 
Intensive care support may be needed.
Brain tumours
Primary brain tumours are a heterogeneous collection of neoplasms 
arising from the brain tissue or meninges and vary from benign to 
highly malignant. Primary malignant brain tumours (Box 28.75) are rare, 
accounting for 1% of all adult tumours but a higher proportion in children. 
The most common benign brain tumour is a meningioma. Primary brain 
tumours do not metastasise due to the absence of lymphatic drainage in 
the brain. There are rare pathological subtypes, however, such as medul-
loblastoma, which do have a propensity to metastasise; the reasons for 
this are not clear. Most cerebral tumours are sporadic but may be asso-
ciated with genetic syndromes such as neurobromatosis or tuberous 
sclerosis. Brain tumours are not classied by the usual TNM system but 
by the World Health Organization (WHO) grading I–IV; this is based on 
histology (e.g. nuclear pleomorphism, presence of mitoses and pres-
ence of necrosis), with grade I the most benign and grade IV the most 
malignant. Gliomas account for 60% of brain tumours, with the aggres-
sive glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV) the most common glioma, 
followed by meningiomas (20%) and pituitary tumours (10%). Although 
the lower-grade gliomas (I and II) may be very indolent, with prognosis 
measured in terms of many years, these may transform to higher-grade 
disease at any time, with a resultant sharp decline in life expectancy.
Most malignant brain tumours are due to metastases, with intracranial 
metastases complicating about 20% of extracranial malignancies. The rate 
is higher with primaries in the bronchus, breast and gastrointestinal tract 
(Fig. 28.38). Metastases usually occur in the white matter of the cerebral or 
cerebellar hemispheres but there are diffuse leptomeningeal types.
Clinical features
The presentation is variable and usually inuenced by the rate of growth. 
High-grade disease (WHO grades III and IV) tends to present with a short 
(weeks) history of mass effect (headache, nausea secondary to RICP), 
while more indolent tumours can present with slowly progressive focal 
neurological decits, depending on their location (see Box 28.74); gen-
eralised or focal seizures are common in either. Headache, if present, is 
usually accompanied by focal decits or seizures, and isolated stable 
headache is almost never due to intracranial tumour.
The size of the primary tumour is of far less prognostic signicance 
than its location within the brain. Tumours within the brainstem will result 
in early neurological decits, while those in the frontal region may be quite 
large before symptoms occur.
Investigations
Diagnosis is by neuroimaging (Figs. 28.39 and 28.40) and pathological 
grading following biopsy or resection where possible. The more malig-
nant tumours are more likely to demonstrate contrast enhancement on 
imaging. If the tumour appears metastatic, further investigation to nd 
the primary is required.
Cerebellar
tonsil
Level of foramen
magnum
Fourth
ventricle
Atlas
Axis
Fig. 28.37 Tonsillar cone. Downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils below 
the level of the foramen magnum.
28.75 Primary brain tumours
Histological type
Common site
Age
Malignant
Glioma (astrocytoma)
Cerebral hemisphere
Adulthood
Cerebellum
Childhood/adulthood
Brainstem
Childhood/young 
adulthood
Oligodendroglioma
Cerebral hemisphere
Adulthood
Medulloblastoma
Posterior fossa
Childhood
Ependymoma
Posterior fossa
Childhood/adolescence
Cerebral lymphoma
Cerebral hemisphere
Adulthood
Benign
Meningioma
Cortical dura
Adulthood (often 
incidental nding)
Parasagittal
Sphenoid ridge
Suprasellar
Olfactory groove
Neurobroma
Acoustic neuroma
Adulthood
Craniopharyngioma
Suprasellar
Childhood/adolescence
Pituitary adenoma
Pituitary fossa
Adulthood
Colloid cyst
Third ventricle
Any age
Pineal tumours
Quadrigeminal cistern
Childhood (teratomas)
Young adulthood (germ 
cell)
Fig. 28.38 Contrast-enhanced computed tomogram of the head showing a 
large metastasis within the left hemisphere (long arrow). There is surrounding 
cerebral oedema, and a smaller metastasis (short arrow) within the wall of the right 
lateral ventricle. The primary lesion was a lung carcinoma.

[[p1246]]
1184    NEUROLOGY
Management
Brain tumours are treated with a combination of surgery, radiotherapy 
and chemotherapy, depending on the type of tumour and the patient. 
Advancing age is the most powerful negative prognostic factor in CNS 
tumours, so best supportive care (including glucocorticoid therapy) may 
be most appropriate in older patients with metastases or high-grade 
disease. Treatment may not always be indicated in low-grade gliomas 
and watchful waiting may be appropriate, although a more aggressive 
approach is increasingly favoured.
Dexamethasone given orally (or intravenously where RICP is acutely or 
severely raised) may reduce the vasogenic oedema typically associated 
with metastases and high-grade gliomas.
Prolactin- or growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas may 
respond well to treatment with dopamine agonists (such as bromocrip-
tine, cabergoline or quinagolide); in this situation, imaging and hormone 
levels may be all that is required to establish a formal diagnosis, preclud-
ing the need for surgery.
Surgical
The mainstay of primary treatment is surgery, either resection (full or par-
tial debulking) or biopsy, depending on the site and likely radiological 
diagnosis. Clearly, if a tumour occurs in an area of brain that is highly 
important for normal function (e.g. motor strip), then biopsy may be the 
only safe surgical intervention but, in general, maximal safe resection 
is the optimal surgical management. Meningiomas and acoustic neu-
romas offer the best prospects for complete removal and thus cure. 
Some meningiomas can recur, however, particularly those of the sphe-
noid ridge, when partial excision is often all that is possible. Thereafter, 
post-operative surveillance may be required, as radiotherapy is effective 
at preventing further growth of residual tumour. Pituitary adenomas may 
be removed by a trans-sphenoidal route, avoiding the need for a crani-
otomy. Unfortunately, gliomas, which account for the majority of brain 
tumours, cannot be completely excised, since inltration spreads well 
beyond the apparent radiological boundaries of the intracranial mass. 
Recurrence is therefore the rule, even if the mass of the tumour is appar-
ently removed completely; partial excision (‘debulking’) may be useful in 
alleviating symptoms caused by RICP, but although there is increasing 
evidence that the degree of surgical excision may have a positive inu-
ence on survival, this has not yet been convincingly demonstrated.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy
In the majority of primary CNS tumours, radiation and chemotherapy 
are used to control disease and extend survival rather than for cure. 
Meningioma and pituitary adenoma offer the best chance of life-long 
remission. The gliomas are incurable; high-grade, WHO grade IV disease 
still carries a median survival of just over 1 year. In this situation, patient 
and family should always be involved in decisions regarding treatment. 
The diagnosis, and often the symptoms, are devastating, and support 
from palliative care and social work is crucial at an early stage. In WHO 
grade III disease, prognosis is a little better (2–4 years), and in rarer, more 
indolent tumours very prolonged survival is possible.
Advances have been made recently in terms of therapeutic outcome. 
Standard care for WHO grade IV glioblastoma multiforme is now com-
bination radiotherapy with temozolomide chemotherapy; although this 
improves median survival of the population from only 12 to 14.5 months, 
up to 25% of patients survive for more than 2 years (compared to approx-
imately 10% with radiotherapy alone). Ten percent will survive more than 
5 years with temozolomide (virtually unheard of with radiotherapy alone). 
Benets are more likely in well-debulked patients who are younger and 
tter. Implantation of chemotherapy gives a small survival benet.
Understanding of the molecular biology of brain tumours has allowed 
the use of biomarkers to guide therapy and prognostic discussions. 
A
B
Fig. 28.39 Magnetic resonance image showing a meningioma in the frontal 
lobe (arrow A) with associated oedema (arrow B).
B
A
Fig. 28.40 Magnetic resonance image of an acoustic neuroma (arrows) in the 
posterior fossa compressing the brainstem. 

[[p1247]]
Intracranial mass lesions and raised intracranial pressure    1185
28
In patients with methylation of the promoter region of the MGMT (methyl 
guanine methyl transferase) gene (about 30% of the population) within 
the tumour, 2-year survival is almost 50%. MGMT reduces the cyto-
toxicity of temozolomide and this mutation also reduces the enzyme's 
activity, rendering the tumour more sensitive to chemotherapy. In grade 
II and III gliomas, the presence of the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) 1p19q 
chromosomal abnormality confers chemosensitivity and thus improves 
prognosis. The presence of a rare mutation in the IDH-1 (isocitrate dehy-
drogenase) gene confers a more favourable prognosis in patients with 
glioblastoma.
There is a small group of highly malignant grade IV tumours that 
can be cured with aggressive therapy. Medulloblastomas have a good 
chance of long-term remission with maximal surgery followed by irradia-
tion of the whole brain and spine; younger patients may also benet from 
concomitant and adjuvant chemotherapy. Older patients do not tolerate 
this, however.
Once tumours relapse, chemotherapy response rates are low and sur-
vival is short in high-grade disease. In the more uncommon low-grade 
tumours, repeated courses of chemotherapy can result in much more 
prolonged survival.
In metastatic disease, radiotherapy offers a modest improvement 
in survival but with costs in terms of quality of life; treatment therefore 
needs careful discussion with the patient. Benets may be superior in 
breast cancer but there is little to separate other pathologies. Occasional 
chemosensitive cancers, such as small-cell lung cancer, may benet 
from systemic chemotherapy but intracerebral metastases represent a 
late stage of disease and have a short prognosis.
Prognosis
The WHO histological grading system is a powerful predictor of prog-
nosis in primary CNS tumours, though it does not yet take account 
of individual biomarkers. For each tumour type and grade, advanc-
ing age and deteriorating functional status are the next most impor-
tant negative prognostic features. The overall 5-year survival rate of 
about 14% in adults masks a wide variation that depends on tumour 
type.
Acoustic neuroma
This is a benign tumour of Schwann cells of the 8th cranial nerve, which 
may arise in isolation or as part of neurobromatosis type 2 (see below). 
When sporadic, acoustic neuroma occurs after the third decade and is 
more frequent in females. The tumour commonly arises near the nerve's 
entry point into the medulla or in the internal auditory meatus, usually 
on the vestibular division. Acoustic neuromas account for 80%–90% of 
tumours at the cerebellopontine angle.
Clinical features
Acoustic neuroma typically presents with unilateral progressive hear-
ing loss, sometimes with tinnitus. Vertigo is an unusual symptom, as 
slow growth allows compensatory brainstem mechanisms to develop. 
In some cases, progressive enlargement leads to distortion of the brain-
stem and/or cerebellar peduncle, causing ataxia and/or cerebellar signs 
in the limbs. Distortion of the fourth ventricle and cerebral aqueduct may 
cause hydrocephalus (see below), which may be the presenting feature. 
Facial weakness is unusual at presentation but facial palsy may follow 
surgical removal of the tumour. The tumour may be identied incidentally 
on cranial imaging.
Investigations
MRI is the investigation of choice (see Fig. 28.40).
Management
Surgery is the treatment of choice. If the tumour can be completely 
removed, the prognosis is excellent, although deafness is a common 
complication of surgery. Stereotactic radiosurgery (radiotherapy) may be 
appropriate for some lesions.
Neurobromatosis
Neurobromatosis encompasses two clinically and genetically separate 
conditions, with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. The more 
common neurobromatosis type 1 (NF1) is caused by mutations in the NF1
gene on chromosome 17, half of which are new mutations. NF1 is charac-
terised by neurobromas (benign peripheral nerve sheath tumours) and skin 
involvement (Fig. 28.41), and may affect numerous systems (Box28.76). 
Neurobromatosis type 2 (NF2) is caused by mutations of the NF2 gene 
on chromosome 22 and is characterised by schwannomas (benign periph-
eral nerve sheath tumours comprising Schwann cells only) with little skin 
involvement; the clinical manifestations are more restricted to the eye 
and nervous system (see Box 28.76). Malignant change may occur in NF1 
neurobromas but is rare in NF2 schwannomas. The prevalence of NF1 
and NF2 is about 20–50 per 100 000 and 1.5 per 100 000, respectively.
Von Hippel–Lindau disease
This rare autosomal dominant disease is caused by mutations of the 
VHL tumour suppressor gene on chromosome 3. It promotes develop-
ment of tumours affecting the kidney, adrenal gland, CNS, eye, inner ear, 
epididymis and pancreas, which may undergo malignant change. Benign 
haemangiomas and haemangioblastomas affect about 80% of patients 
and are mostly cerebellar and retinal.
Paraneoplastic neurological disease
Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes often present before the under-
lying tumour declares itself and cause considerable disability. They are 
discussed in full on page 1165.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is the excessive accumulation of CSF within the brain, 
and may be caused either by increased CSF production, by reduced CSF 
absorption, or by obstruction of the circulation (Fig. 28.42). Symptoms 
range from none to sudden death, depending on the speed at which 
and degree to which hydrocephalus develops. The causes are listed in 
Box 28.77. The terms ‘communicating’ and ‘non-communicating’ (also 
known as obstructive) hydrocephalus refer to blockage either outside or 
within the ventricular system, respectively (Fig. 28.43).
B
B
A
Fig. 28.41 A café au lait spot (arrow A) and subcutaneous nodules (arrows B) 
on the forearm of a patient with neurobromatosis type 1.

[[p1248]]
1186    NEUROLOGY
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a controversial entity, said 
to involve intermittent rises in CSF pressure, particularly at night. It is 
described in old age as being associated with a triad of gait apraxia, 
dementia and urinary incontinence.
Management
Diversion of the CSF by means of a shunt placed between the ventricular 
system and the peritoneal cavity or right atrium may result in rapid relief 
of symptoms in obstructive hydrocephalus. The outcome of shunting in 
NPH is much less predictable and, until a good response can be pre-
dicted, the management of individual cases will remain uncertain.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
This usually occurs in young women with high BMI. The annual inci-
dence is about 3 per 100 000. RICP occurs in the absence of a struc-
tural lesion, hydrocephalus or other identiable cause. The aetiology is 
uncertain but there is an association with obesity in females, perhaps 
inducing a defect of CSF reabsorption by the arachnoid villi. A number 
of drugs may be associated, including tetracycline, vitamin A and reti-
noid derivatives.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with headache, sometimes accompanied by 
diplopia and visual disturbance (most commonly, transient obscura-
tions of vision associated with changes in posture). Clinical examination 
reveals papilloedema but little else. False localising cranial nerve palsies 
(usually of the 6th nerve) may be present. It is important to record visual 
elds accurately for future monitoring.
Investigations
Brain imaging is required to exclude a structural or other cause (e.g. 
cerebral venous sinus thrombosis). The ventricles are typically normal in 
size or small (‘slit’ ventricles). The diagnosis may be conrmed by lum-
bar puncture, which shows raised normal CSF constituents at increased 
pressure (usually > 30 cmH2O CSF).
Management
Management can be difcult and there is no evidence to support any 
specic treatment. Weight loss in overweight patients may be helpful if it 
can be achieved. Acetazolamide or topiramate may help to lower intra-
cranial pressure, the latter perhaps aiding weight loss in some patients. 
Repeated lumbar puncture is an effective treatment for headache but may 
be technically difcult in obese individuals and is often poorly tolerated. 
Patients failing to respond, in whom chronic papilloedema threatens 
vision, may require optic nerve sheath fenestration or a lumbo-peritoneal 
shunt.
28.76 Neurobromatosis types 1 and 2: clinical features
Neurobromatosis 1
Neurobromatosis 2
Skin
Cutaneous/subcutaneous 
neurobromas
Much less commonly affected than 
in NF1
Angiomas
Café au lait patches (usually < 6)
Café au lait patches (> 6)
Cutaneous schwannomas: plaque  
lesions
Axillary/groin freckling
Subcutaneous schwannomas
Hypopigmented patches
Eyes
Lisch nodules (iris bromas)
Cataracts
Glaucoma
Retinal hamartoma
Congenital ptosis
Optic nerve meningioma
Nervous system
Plexiform neurobromas
Vestibular schwannomas
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
tumours
Cranial nerve schwannomas  
(not 1 and 2)
Aqueduct stenosis
Spinal schwannomas
Slight tonsillar descent
Peripheral nerve schwannomas
Cognitive impairment
Cranial meningiomas
Epilepsy
Spinal meningiomas
Spinal/brainstem ependymomas
Spinal/cranial astrocytoma
Bone
Scoliosis
Osteoporosis
Pseudoarthrosis
Cardiorespiratory systems
Pulmonary stenosis
Hypertension
Renal artery stenosis
Compression from neurobroma 
causing restrictive lung defect
Gastrointestinal system
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour 
(GIST)
Duodenal/ampullary neuro-
endocrine tumour
Choroid
plexus
1
4
3
2
Fig. 28.42 The circulation of cerebrospinal uid (CSF). (1) CSF is synthesised 
in the choroid plexus of the ventricles and ows from the lateral and third ventricles 
through the aqueduct to the fourth ventricle. (2) At the foramina of Luschka and 
Magendie it exits the brain, owing over the hemispheres (3) and down around the 
spinal cord and roots in the subarachnoid space. (4) It is then absorbed into the dural 
venous sinuses via the arachnoid villi.
28.77 Causes of hydrocephalus
Congenital malformations
 Aqueduct stenosis
 Chiari malformations
 Dandy–Walker syndrome
 Benign intracranial cysts
 Vein of Galen aneurysms
 Congenital central nervous system 
infections
 Craniofacial anomalies
Acquired causes
 Mass lesions (especially those  
in the posterior fossa)
 Tumour
 Colloid cyst of third ventricle
 Abscess
 Haematoma
 Absorption blockages due to:
Inammation (e.g. meningitis, 
sarcoidosis)
Intracranial haemorrhage

[[p1249]]
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord    1187
28
Head injury
Diagnosis of head trauma is usually clear either from the history or from 
signs of external trauma to the head. Brain injury is more likely with skull 
fracture but can occur without. Individual cranial nerves may be dam-
aged in fractures of the facial bones or skull base. Intracranial effects can 
be substantial and take several forms: extradural haematoma (collection 
of blood between the skull and dura); subdural haematoma (collection 
of blood between the dura and the surface of the brain); intracerebral 
haematoma; or diffuse axonal injury.
Whatever pathology occurs, the resultant RICP may lead to coning 
(see Figs. 28.36 and 28.37). Haematomas are identied by CT and man-
agement is by surgical drainage, usually via a burr hole. Penetrating skull 
fractures lead to increased infection risk. Long-term sequelae include 
headache, cognitive decline and depression, all contributing to signi-
cant social, work, personality and family difculties.
Subdural haematoma may occur spontaneously, particularly in 
patients on anticoagulants, in old age and with alcohol misuse. There 
may or may not be a history of trauma. Patients present with subacute 
impairment of brain function, both globally (obtundation and coma) and 
focally (hemiparesis, seizures). Headache may not be present. The diag-
nosis should always be considered in those who present with reduced 
conscious level.
Beyond the immediate consequences of brain injury, there is increasing 
suspicion of long-term consequences, including dementia, postulated 
after either single (moderate or severe) injuries or even after multiple mild 
injuries, such as in boxers. If substantiated, this would encourage more 
effort to go into prevention of repeated brain injury in sporting contexts.
Disorders of cerebellar function
Cerebellar dysfunction can manifest as incoordination of limb function, 
gait ataxia, speech or eye movements. Acute dysfunction may be caused 
by alcohol or prescription drugs (especially the sodium channel-blocking 
antiepileptic drugs phenytoin and carbamazepine).
Inammatory changes in the cerebellum may cause symptoms in the 
aftermath of some infections (especially herpes zoster) or as a para-
neoplastic phenomenon. The hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias are 
described on page 1169; they manifest as progressive ataxias in mid-
dle and old age, often with other neurological features that aid specic 
diagnosis.
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord
The spinal cord and spinal roots may be affected by intrinsic disease 
or by disorders of the surrounding meninges and bones. The clini-
cal presentation of these conditions depends on the anatomical level 
at which the cord or roots are affected, as well as the nature of the patho-
logical process involved. It is important to recognise when the spinal cord 
is at risk of compression so that urgent action can be taken.
Cervical spondylosis
Cervical spondylosis is the result of osteoarthritis in the cervical spine. It 
is characterised by degeneration of the intervertebral discs and osteo-
phyte formation. Such ‘wear and tear’ is extremely common and radio-
logical changes are frequently found in asymptomatic individuals over the 
age of 50. Spondylosis may be associated with neurological dysfunction. 
In order of frequency, the C5/6, C6/7 and C4/5 vertebral levels affect C6, 
C7 and C5 roots, respectively (Fig. 28.44).
Cervical radiculopathy
Acute onset of compression of a nerve root occurs when a disc prolapses 
laterally. More gradual onset may be due to osteophytic encroachment of 
the intervertebral foramina.
Clinical features
The patient complains of pain in the neck that may radiate in the dis-
tribution of the affected nerve root. The neck is held rigidly and neck 
movements may exacerbate pain. Paraesthesia and sensory loss may 
be found in the affected segment and there may be lower motor neuron 
signs, including weakness, wasting and reex impairment (Fig. 28.45).
Investigations
Where there is no trauma, imaging should not be carried out for isolated 
cervical pain. MRI is the investigation of choice in those with radicular symp-
toms. X-rays offer limited benet, except in excluding destructive lesions, 
and electrophysiological studies rarely add to clinical examination with MRI.
Management
Conservative treatment with analgesics and physiotherapy results in res-
olution of symptoms in the great majority of patients, but a few require 
surgery in the form of discectomy or radicular decompression.
A
B
Fig. 28.43 Magnetic resonance image of hydrocephalus due to aqueduct stenosis. 

[[p1250]]
1188    NEUROLOGY
Cervical myelopathy
Dorsomedial herniation of a disc and the development of transverse 
bony bars or posterior osteophytes may result in pressure on the spinal 
cord or the anterior spinal artery, which supplies the anterior two-thirds 
of the cord (see Fig. 28.44).
Clinical features
The onset is usually insidious and painless but acute deterioration may 
occur after trauma, especially hyperextension injury. Upper motor neuron 
signs develop in the limbs, with spasticity of the legs usually appearing 
before the arms are involved. Sensory loss in the upper limbs is common, 
producing tingling, numbness and proprioception loss in the hands, with 
progressive clumsiness. Sensory manifestations in the legs are much 
less common. Neurological decit usually progresses gradually and dis-
turbance of micturition is a very late feature.
Investigations
MRI (see Fig. 28.44) (or rarely myelography) will direct surgical interven-
tion. The former provides information on the state of the spinal cord at 
the level of compression.
Management
Surgical procedures, including laminectomy and anterior discectomy, 
may arrest progression of disability but neurological improvement is not 
the rule. The decision as to whether surgery should be undertaken may 
be difcult. Manual manipulation of the cervical spine is of no proven 
benet and may precipitate acute neurological deterioration.
Prognosis
The prognosis of cervical myelopathy is variable. In many patients, the 
condition stabilises or even improves without intervention. If progression 
results in sphincter dysfunction or pyramidal signs, surgical decompres-
sion should be considered.
Lumbar spondylosis
This term covers degenerative disc disease and osteoarthritic change 
in the lumbar spine. Pain in the distribution of the lumbar or sacral roots 
(‘sciatica’) is almost always due to disc protrusion but can be a feature 
of other rare but important disorders, including spinal tumour, malignant 
disease in the pelvis and tuberculosis of the vertebral bodies.
Lumbar disc herniation
While acute lumbar disc herniation is often precipitated by trauma (usu-
ally lifting heavy weights while the spine is exed), genetic factors may 
also be important. The nucleus pulposus may bulge or rupture through 
the annulus brosus, giving rise to pressure on nerve endings in the 
spinal ligaments, changes in the vertebral joints or pressure on nerve 
roots.
Pathophysiology
The altered mechanics of the lumbar spine result in loss of lumbar lordo-
sis and there may be spasm of the paraspinal musculature. Root pres-
sure is suggested by limitation of exion of the hip on the affected side if 
the straight leg is raised (Lasègue sign). If the third or fourth lumbar root 
is involved, Lasègue sign may be negative, but pain in the back may be 
induced by hyperextension of the hip (femoral nerve stretch test). The 
roots most frequently affected are S1, L5 and L4; the signs of root pres-
sure at these levels are summarised in Figure 28.46
Clinical features
The onset may be sudden or gradual. Alternatively, repeated episodes 
of low back pain may precede sciatica by months or years. Constant 
aching pain is felt in the lumbar region and may radiate to the buttock, 
thigh, calf and foot. Pain is exacerbated by coughing or straining but may 
be relieved by lying at.
Investigations
MRI is the investigation of choice if available, since soft tissues are well 
imaged. Plain X-rays of the lumbar spine are of little value in the diagnosis 
of disc disease, although they may demonstrate conditions affecting the 
vertebral body. CT can provide helpful images of the disc protrusion and/
or narrowing of exit foramina.
Fig. 28.44 Magnetic resonance image showing cervical cord compression 
(arrow) in cervical spondylosis.
Biceps, deltoid and
spinati
Biceps
C5
Brachioradialis
Supinator
C6
Triceps, fingers and
wrist extensors
Triceps
C7
Reflex loss
Muscle weakness
Sensory loss
(see Fig. 28.10)
Root
Fig. 28.45 Findings in cervical nerve root compression.

[[p1251]]
Disorders of the spine and spinal cord    1189
28
Management
Some 90% of patients with sciatica recover following conservative treat-
ment with analgesia and early mobilisation; bed rest does not help recov-
ery. The patient should be instructed in back-strengthening exercises 
and advised to avoid physical manoeuvres likely to strain the lumbar 
spine. Injections of local anaesthetic or glucocorticoids may be useful 
adjunctive treatment if symptoms are due to ligamentous injury or joint 
dysfunction. Surgery may have to be considered if there is no response 
to conservative treatment or if progressive neurological decits develop. 
Central disc prolapse with bilateral symptoms and signs and disturbance 
of sphincter function requires urgent surgical decompression.
Lumbar canal stenosis
This occurs with a congenitally narrowed lumbar spinal canal, exacer-
bated by the degenerative changes that commonly occur with age.
Pathophysiology
The symptoms of spinal stenosis are thought to be due to local vascu-
lar compromise secondary to the canal stenosis, rendering the nerve 
roots ischaemic and intolerant of the increased demand that occurs on 
exercise.
Clinical features
Patients, who are usually in old age, develop exercise-induced weakness 
and paraesthesia in the legs (‘spinal claudication’). These symptoms pro-
gress with continued exertion, often to the point that the patient can no 
longer walk, but are quickly relieved by a short period of rest. Physical 
examination at rest shows preservation of peripheral pulses with absent 
ankle reexes. Weakness or sensory loss may only be apparent if the 
patient is examined immediately after exercise.
Investigations
The investigation of rst choice is MRI, but contraindications (body habi-
tus, metallic implants) may make CT or myelography necessary.
Management
Lumbar laminectomy may provide relief of symptoms and recovery of 
normal exercise tolerance.
Spinal cord compression
Spinal cord compression is one of the more common neurological emer-
gencies encountered in clinical practice and the usual causes are listed in 
Box 28.78. A space-occupying lesion within the spinal canal may dam-
age nerve tissue either directly by pressure or indirectly by interference 
with blood supply. Oedema from venous obstruction impairs neuronal 
function, and ischaemia from arterial obstruction may lead to necrosis of 
the spinal cord. The early stages of damage are reversible but severely 
damaged neurons do not recover; hence the importance of early diag-
nosis and treatment.
Clinical features
The onset of symptoms of spinal cord compression is usually slow (over 
weeks) but can be acute as a result of trauma or metastases (see Figs. 
28.44, 28.47 and 28.48), especially if there is associated arterial occlu-
sion. The symptoms are shown in Box 28.79
Pain and sensory symptoms occur early, while weakness and sphinc-
ter dysfunction are usually late manifestations. The signs vary according 
to the level of the cord compression and the structures involved. There 
may be tenderness to percussion over the spine if there is vertebral dis-
ease and this may be associated with a local kyphosis. Involvement of 
the roots at the level of the compression may cause dermatomal sensory 
impairment and corresponding lower motor signs. Interruption of bres 
in the spinal cord causes sensory loss and upper motor neuron signs 
below the level of the lesion, and there is often disturbance of sphincter 
function. The distribution of these signs varies with the level of the lesion 
(Box 28.80).
The Brown–Séquard syndrome (see Fig. 28.18E) results if damage is 
conned to one side of the cord; the ndings are explained by the anat-
omy of the sensory tracts (see Fig. 28.11). With compressive lesions, 
there is usually a band of pain at the level of the lesion in the distribution 
of the nerve roots subject to compression.
Investigations
Patients with a history of acute or subacute spinal cord syndrome should 
be investigated urgently, as listed in Box 28.81. The investigation of 
choice is MRI (Fig. 28.47), as it can dene the extent of compression and 
associated soft-tissue abnormality (Fig. 28.48). Plain X-rays may show 
bony destruction and soft-tissue abnormalities. Routine investigations, 
Knee extension
Knee
Femoral
nerve
L4
Ankle dorsiflexion
Ankle inversion
None
L5
Plantar flexion
Ankle
S1
Reflex loss
Muscle weakness
Sensory loss
(see Fig. 28.10)
Root
L3/L4
L4/L5
L5/S1
Disc level
Fig. 28.46 Findings in lumbar nerve root compression.
28.78 Causes of spinal cord compression
Site
Frequency
Causes
Vertebral
80%
Trauma (extradural)
Intervertebral disc prolapse
Metastatic carcinoma (e.g. breast, 
prostate, bronchus)
Myeloma
Tuberculosis
Meninges (intradural, 
extramedullary)
15%
Tumours (e.g. meningioma, 
neurobroma, ependymoma, 
metastasis, lymphoma, leukaemia)
Epidural abscess
Spinal cord 
(intradural, 
intramedullary)
5%
Tumours (e.g. glioma, 
ependymoma, metastasis)

[[p1252]]
1190    NEUROLOGY
including chest X-ray, may provide evidence of systemic disease. If mye-
lography is performed, CSF should be taken for analysis; in cases of 
complete spinal block, this shows a normal cell count with a very ele-
vated protein causing yellow discoloration of the uid (Froin syndrome). 
The risk of acute deterioration after myelography in spinal cord compres-
sion means that the neurosurgeons should be alerted before it is under-
taken. Where a secondary tumour is causing the compression, needle 
biopsy may be required to establish a tissue diagnosis.
Management
Treatment and prognosis depend on the nature of the underlying lesion. 
Benign tumours should be surgically excised, and a good functional 
recovery can be expected unless a marked neurological decit has devel-
oped before diagnosis. Extradural compression due to malignancy is the 
most common cause of spinal cord compression in developed countries 
and has a poor prognosis. Useful function can be regained if treatment, 
such as radiotherapy, is initiated within 24 hours of the onset of severe 
weakness or sphincter dysfunction; management should involve close 
cooperation with both oncologists and neurosurgeons (p. 139).
Spinal cord compression due to tuberculosis is common in some 
areas of the world and may require surgical treatment. This should be 
followed by appropriate antituberculous chemotherapy for an extended 
period. Traumatic lesions of the vertebral column require specialised 
neurosurgical treatment.
Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord
There are many disorders that interfere with spinal cord function due 
to non-compressive involvement of the spinal cord itself. A list of these 
disorders is given in Box 28.82. The symptoms and signs are generally 
similar to those that would occur with extrinsic compression (see Boxes 
28.79 and 28.80), although a suspended sensory loss (see Fig. 28.18F) 
can occur only with intrinsic disease such as syringomyelia. Urinary 
symptoms usually occur earlier in the course of an intrinsic cord disorder 
than with compressive disorders.
Investigation of intrinsic disease starts with imaging to exclude a 
compressive lesion. MRI provides most information about structural 
lesions, such as diastematomyelia, syringomyelia (Fig. 28.49) or intrinsic 
tumours. Non-specic signal change may be seen in the spinal cord in 
inammatory (see Fig. 28.28) or infective conditions and metabolic disor-
ders such as vitamin B12 deciency. Lumbar puncture or blood tests may 
be required to make a specic diagnosis.
SC
N
Fig. 28.47 Axial magnetic resonance image of thoracic spine. A neurobroma 
(N) is compressing the spinal cord (SC) and emerging in a ‘dumbbell’ fashion through 
the vertebral foramen into the paraspinal space.
Fig. 28.48 Computed tomographic myelogram of cervical spine at the level of 
C2 showing bony erosion of vertebra by a metastasis (arrow).
28.79 Symptoms of spinal cord compression
Pain
 Localised over the spine or in a root distribution, which may be aggravated by 
coughing, sneezing or straining
Sensory
 Paraesthesia, numbness or cold sensations, especially in the lower limbs, which 
spread proximally, often to a level on the trunk
Motor
 Weakness, heaviness or stiffness of the limbs, most commonly the legs
Sphincters
 Urgency or hesitancy of micturition, leading eventually to urinary retention
28.80 Signs of spinal cord compression
Cervical, above C5
 Upper motor neuron signs and sensory loss in all four limbs
 Diaphragm weakness (phrenic nerve)
Cervical, C5–T1
 Lower motor neuron signs and segmental sensory loss in the arms; upper 
motor neuron signs in the legs
 Respiratory (intercostal) muscle weakness
Thoracic cord
 Spastic paraplegia with a sensory level on the trunk
 Weakness of legs, sacral loss of sensation and extensor plantar responses
Cauda equina
 Spinal cord ends approximately at the T12/L1 spinal level and spinal lesions 
below this level can cause lower motor neuron signs only by affecting the cauda 
equina
28.81 Investigation of acute spinal cord syndrome
 Magnetic resonance imaging of spine or 
myelography
 Plain X-rays of spine
 Chest X-ray
 Cerebrospinal uid
 Serum vitamin B12

[[p1253]]
Diseases of peripheral nerves    1191
28
Diseases of peripheral nerves
Disorders of the peripheral nervous system are common and may affect 
the motor, sensory or autonomic components, either in isolation or in 
combination. The site of pathology may be nerve root (radiculopathy), 
nerve plexus (plexopathy) or nerve (neuropathy). Neuropathies may 
present as mononeuropathy (single nerve affected), multiple mononeu-
ropathies (‘mononeuritis multiplex’) or a symmetrical polyneuropathy 
(Box 28.83). Cranial nerves 3–12 share the same tissue characteristics 
as peripheral nerves elsewhere and are subject to the same range of 
diseases.
Pathophysiology
Damage may occur to the nerve cell body (axon) or the myelin 
sheath (Schwann cell), leading to axonal or demyelinating neuropa-
thies. The distinction is important, as only demyelinating neuropathies 
are usually susceptible to treatment. Making the distinction requires 
neurophysiology (nerve conduction studies and EMG). Neuropathies 
can occur in association with many systemic diseases, toxins and drugs 
(Box 28.84).
Clinical features
Motor nerve involvement produces features of a lower motor neuron 
lesion. Symptoms and signs of sensory nerve involvement depend on 
the type of sensory nerve involved; small-bre neuropathies are often 
painful. Autonomic involvement may cause postural hypotension, dis-
turbance of sweating, cardiac rhythm and gastrointestinal, bladder and 
sexual functions; isolated autonomic neuropathies are rare and more 
commonly complicate other neuropathies.
Investigations
The investigations required reect the wide spectrum of causes (Box 
28.85). Neurophysiological tests are key in discriminating between 
demyelinating and axonal neuropathies, and in identifying entrapment 
neuropathies. Most neuropathies are of the chronic axonal type.
Entrapment neuropathy
Focal compression or entrapment is the usual cause of a mononeu-
ropathy. Symptoms and signs of entrapment neuropathy are listed in 
Box 28.86. Entrapment neuropathies may affect anyone, but diabetes, 
28.82 Intrinsic diseases of the spinal cord
Type of disorder
Condition
Clinical features
Congenital
Diastematomyelia (spina bida)
Features variably present at birth and deteriorate thereafter
LMN features, deformity and sensory loss of legs
Impaired sphincter function
Hairy patch or pit over low back
Incidence reduced by increased maternal intake of folic acid during 
pregnancy
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Onset usually in adult life
Autosomal dominant inheritance usual
Slowly progressive UMN features affecting legs > arms
Little or no sensory loss
Infective/inammatory
Transverse myelitis due to viruses (HZV),  
schistosomiasis, HIV, MS, sarcoidosis
Weakness and sensory loss, often with pain, developing over hours  
to days
Paraneoplastic
UMN features below lesion
Impaired sphincter function
May predate tumour diagnosis
Vascular
Anterior spinal artery infarct due to  
atherosclerosis, aortic dissection, embolus
Abrupt onset
Anterior horn cell loss (LMN) at level of lesion
Spinal AVM/dural stula
UMN features below it
Spinothalamic sensory loss below lesion but dorsal column sensation 
spared
Onset variable (acute to slowly progressive)
Variable LMN, UMN, sensory and sphincter disturbance
Symptoms and signs often not well localised to site of AVM
Neoplastic
Glioma, ependymoma
Weakness and sensory loss often with pain, developing over months to 
years
UMN features below lesion in cord; additional LMN features in conus
Impaired sphincter function
Metabolic
Vitamin B12 deciency (subacute  
combined degeneration)
Progressive spastic paraparesis with proprioception loss 
Absent reexes due to peripheral neuropathy
Copper deciency
±Optic nerve and cerebral involvement
Nitrous oxide toxicity
Excess dietary zinc
Modies vitamin B12 metabolism
Degenerative
Motor neuron disease
Relentlessly progressive LMN and UMN features, associated bulbar 
weakness
Syringomyelia
No sensory involvement
Gradual onset over months or years, pain in cervical segments
Anterior horn cell loss (LMN) at level of lesion, UMN features below it
Suspended spinothalamic sensory loss at level of lesion, dorsal columns 
preserved (see Figs. 28.18F and 28.49)
(AVM = arteriovenous malformation; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; HZV = herpes zoster virus; LMN = lower motor neuron; MS = multiple sclerosis; UMN = upper motor neuron)

[[p1254]]
1192    NEUROLOGY
excess alcohol or toxins, or genetic syndromes may be predisposing 
causes. Unless axonal loss has occurred, entrapment neuropathies will 
recover, provided the primary cause is removed, either by avoiding the 
precipitation of activity or by surgical decompression.
Multifocal neuropathy
Multifocal neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex) is characterised by lesions 
of multiple nerve roots, peripheral nerves or cranial nerves (Box 28.87). 
Vasculitis is a common cause, either as part of a systemic disease or 
isolated to the nerves, or it may arise on a background of a polyneurop-
athy (e.g. diabetes). Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) with conduction 
block is a rare pure motor neuropathy, typically affecting the arms; it 
is associated with anti-GM1 antibodies in about 50% and responds to 
intravenous immunoglobulin.
Polyneuropathy
A polyneuropathy is typically associated with a ‘length-dependent’ pat-
tern, occurring in the longest peripheral nerves rst and affecting the 
distal lower limbs before the upper limbs. Sensory symptoms and signs 
develop in an ascending ‘glove and stocking’ distribution. In inamma-
tory demyelinating neuropathies, the pathology may be more patchy, 
affecting the upper rather than lower limbs.
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is a heterogeneous group of immune- 
mediated conditions of acute peripheral nerve inammation, with an 
Fig. 28.49 Sagittal magnetic resonance image showing descent of cerebellar 
tonsils and central syrinx. The MRI shows descent of the cerebellar tonsils (top 
arrow), with a large central cord syrinx extending down from the cervical cord (middle 
arrow) to the thoracic cord (bottom arrow).
28.83 Causes of polyneuropathy
Genetic
 Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMT)
 Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP)
 Hereditary sensory ± autonomic neuropathies (HSN, HSAN)
 Familial amyloid polyneuropathy
 Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy
Drugs
 Amiodarone
 Antibiotics (dapsone, isoniazid, 
metronidazole, ethambutol)
 Antiretrovirals
 Chemotherapy (cisplatin, vincristine, 
thalidomide)
 Phenytoin
Toxins
 Alcohol
 Nitrous oxide (recreational use)
 Rarely: lead, arsenic, mercury, 
organophosphates, solvents
Vitamin deciencies
 Thiamin
 Pyridoxine
 Vitamin B12
 Vitamin E
Infections
 Human immunodeciency virus
 Leprosy
 Brucellosis
Inammatory
 Guillain–Barré syndrome
 Chronic inammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
 Vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (also known as 
Wegener granulomatosis), rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus)
 Paraneoplastic (antibody-mediated)
Systemic medical conditions
 Diabetes
 Renal failure
 Sarcoidosis
Malignant disease
 Inltration
Others
 Paraproteinaemias
 Amyloidosis
 Critical illness polyneuropathy/
myopathy
28.84 Common causes of axonal and demyelinating chronic 
polyneuropathies
Axonal
 Diabetes mellitus
 Alcohol
 Uraemia
 Cirrhosis
 Amyloid
 Myxoedema
 Acromegaly
 Paraneoplasm
 Drugs and toxins (see Box 28.83)
 Deciency states (see Box 28.83)
 Hereditary factors
 Infection (see Box 28.83)
 Idiopathic factors
Demyelinating
 Chronic inammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
 Multifocal motor neuropathy
 Paraprotein-associated demyelinating neuropathy
 Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type I and type X
28.85 Investigation of peripheral neuropathy
Initial tests
 Glucose (fasting)
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 
C-reactive protein
 Full blood count
 Urea and electrolytes
 Liver function tests
 Serum protein electrophoresis
 Vitamin B12, folate
 ANA, ANCA, ENA
 Chest X-ray
 HIV testing
If initial tests are negative
 Nerve conduction studies
 Vitamins E and A
 Genetic testing (see Box 28.83)
 Lyme serology
 Serum angiotensin-converting 
enzyme
 Serum amyloid
(ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ANA = antineutrophil antibody;  
ENA = extractable nuclear antigen)

[[p1255]]
Diseases of peripheral nerves    1193
28
incidence of 1–2/100 000/year. In Europe and North America, the most 
common variant is an acute inammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(AIDP). Axonal variants, either motor (acute motor axonal neuropathy, 
AMAN) or sensorimotor, are more common in China and Japan, and 
account for 10% of GBS in Western countries, often associated with 
Campylobacter jejuni. The hallmark is an acute paralysis evolving over 
days or weeks, with loss of tendon reexes. About two-thirds of those 
with AIDP have a prior history of infection, and an autoimmune response 
triggered by the preceding infection is thought to cause peripheral nerve 
inammation. A number of GBS variants have been described, asso-
ciated with specic anti-ganglioside antibodies; the best recognised is 
Miller Fisher syndrome, which involves anti-GQ1b antibodies.
Clinical features
Distal paraesthesia and pain precede muscle weakness that ascends 
rapidly from lower to upper limbs and is more marked proximally than 
distally. Facial and bulbar weakness commonly develops, and respira-
tory weakness requiring ventilatory support occurs in 20% of cases. 
Weakness progresses over a maximum of 4 weeks (usually less). 
Rapid deterioration to respiratory failure can develop within hours. 
Examination shows diffuse weakness with loss of reexes. Miller Fisher 
syndrome presents with internal and external ophthalmoplegia, ataxia 
and areexia.
Investigations
The CSF protein is raised, but may be normal in the rst 10 days. There 
is usually no increase in CSF white cell count (> 50 ×106 cells/L sug-
gests an alternative diagnosis; though the cell count may be consider-
ably higher in HIV infection). Electrophysiological changes may emerge 
after a week or so, with conduction block and multifocal motor slowing, 
sometimes most evident proximally as delayed F waves. Antibodies to 
the ganglioside GM1 are found in about 25%, usually the motor axonal 
form. Other causes of an acute neuromuscular paralysis should be 
considered (e.g. poliomyelitis, botulism, acute intermittent porphyria, 
diphtheria, spinal cord syndromes or myasthenia), via the history and 
examination. Nerve roots are an important site of inammation and 
contrast uptake is sometimes seen here in contrast-enhanced MRI spi-
nal cord imaging.
Management
Active treatment with plasma exchange or intravenous immunoglobu-
lin therapy shortens the duration of ventilation and improves progno-
sis. In severe GBS, both intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and plasma 
exchange started within 2 weeks of onset hasten recovery, with similar 
rates of adverse effects but IVIg treatment is signicantly more likely to 
be completed than plasma exchange. The choice of treatment often 
depends on logistical considerations. Overall, 80% of patients recover 
completely within 3–6 months, 4% die and the remainder suffer resid-
ual neurological disability, which can be severe. Adverse prognostic fea-
tures include older age, rapid deterioration to ventilation and evidence of 
axonal loss on EMG. Supportive measures to prevent pressure sores and 
deep venous thrombosis are essential. Regular monitoring of respiratory 
function (vital capacity) is needed in the acute phase, as respiratory fail-
ure may develop with little warning.
Chronic polyneuropathy
The most common axonal and demyelinating causes of polyneuropathy 
are shown in Box 28.84. A chronic symmetrical axonal polyneuropathy, 
evolving over months or years, is the most common form of chronic 
neuropathy. Diabetes mellitus is the most common cause but in about 
25%–50% no cause can be found.
Hereditary neuropathy
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMT) is an umbrella term for the inherited 
neuropathies. The members of this group of syndromes have different 
clinical and genetic features. The most common CMT is the autosomal 
dominantly inherited CMT type 1, usually caused by a duplication in the 
PMP-22 gene. Common signs are distal wasting (‘inverted champagne 
bottle’ legs), often with pes cavus, and predominantly motor involve-
ment. X-linked and recessively inherited forms of CMT, causing demyeli-
nating or axonal neuropathies, also occur.
28.86 Symptoms and signs in common entrapment 
neuropathies
Nerve
Symptoms
Muscle 
weakness/
muscle wasting
Area of sensory 
loss
Median
(at wrist) 
(carpal tunnel 
syndrome)
Pain and 
paraesthesia on 
palmar aspect 
of hands and 
ngers, waking 
patient from 
sleep. Pain may 
extend to arm 
and shoulder
Abductor pollicis 
brevis
Lateral palm 
and thumb, 
index, middle 
and lateral half 
fourth nger
Ulnar
(at elbow)
Paraesthesia on 
medial border of 
hand, wasting 
and weakness 
of hand muscles
All small hand 
muscles, 
excluding 
abductor pollicis 
brevis
Medial palm 
and little nger, 
and medial half 
fourth nger
Radial
Weakness 
of extension 
of wrist and 
ngers, often 
precipitated 
by sleeping 
in abnormal 
posture, e.g. 
arm over back 
of chair
Wrist and nger 
extensors, 
supinator
Dorsum of 
thumb
Common 
peroneal
Foot drop, 
trauma to head 
of bula
Dorsiexion and 
eversion of foot
Nil or dorsum 
of foot
Lateral 
cutaneous 
nerve of the 
thigh (meralgia 
paraesthetica)
Tingling and 
dysaesthesia on 
lateral border of 
thigh
Nil
Lateral border of 
thigh
28.87 Causes of multifocal mononeuropathy
Axonal (dened on nerve conduction studies)
 Vasculitis (systemic or non-systemic)
 Diabetes mellitus
 Sarcoidosis
 Infection (HIV, hepatitis C, Lyme disease, leprosy, diphtheria)
Focal demyelination with/without conduction block
 Multifocal motor neuropathy
 Multiple compression neuropathies (usually in association with underlying 
disease, such as diabetes or alcoholism)
 Multifocal acquired demyelinating sensory and motor neuropathy (MADSAM)
 Hereditary neuropathy with a predisposition to pressure palsy (autosomal 
dominant, peripheral myelin protein 22 gene)
 Lymphoma

[[p1256]]
1194    NEUROLOGY
Chronic demyelinating polyneuropathy
The acquired chronic demyelinating neuropathies include chronic inam-
matory demyelinating peripheral neuropathy (CIDP), multifocal motor 
neuropathy (see above) and paraprotein-associated demyelinating neu-
ropathy. CIDP typically presents with relapsing or progressive motor and 
sensory changes, evolving over more than 8 weeks (in distinction to the 
more acute GBS). It is important to recognise, as it usually responds to 
intravenous immunoglobulin and other immunotherapies such as gluco-
corticoids or plasma exchange.
Some 10% of patients with acquired demyelinating polyneuropathy 
have an abnormal serum paraprotein, sometimes associated with a 
monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain signicance (MGUS) or lympho-
proliferative malignancy. Those with distal sensory involvement and 
prominent neuropathic tremor may also demonstrate positive antibodies 
to myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG antibodies).
Brachial plexopathy
Trauma usually damages either the upper or the lower parts of the bra-
chial plexus, according to the mechanics of the injury. The clinical fea-
tures depend on the anatomical site of the damage (Box 28.88). Lower 
parts of the brachial plexus are vulnerable to inltration from breast or 
apical lung tumours (Pancoast tumour) or damage by therapeutic irra-
diation. The lower plexus may also be compressed by a cervical rib or 
brous band between C7 and the rst rib at the thoracic outlet.
Neuralgic amyotrophy (also known as brachial neuritis) presents as 
an acute brachial plexopathy of probable inammatory origin. Severe 
shoulder pain precedes the appearance of a patchy upper brachial 
plexus lesion, with motor and/or sensory involvement. There is no 
specic treatment and recovery is often incomplete; it may recur in 
about 25% and there is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary form. 
The appearance of vesicles should indicate the alternative diagnosis 
of motor zoster.
Lumbosacral plexopathy
Lumbosacral plexus lesions may be caused by neoplastic inltration 
or compression by retroperitoneal haematomas. A small-vessel vas-
culopathy can produce a unilateral or bilateral lumbar plexopathy in 
association with diabetes mellitus (‘diabetic amyotrophy’) or an idio-
pathic form in non-diabetic patients. This presents with painful wasting 
of the quadriceps with weakness of knee extension and an absent knee 
reex.
Spinal root lesions
Spinal root lesions (radiculopathy) are described above. Clinical features 
include muscle weakness and wasting and dermatomal sensory and 
reex loss, which reect the pattern of the roots involved. Pain in the 
muscles innervated by the affected roots may be prominent.
Diseases of the neuromuscular junction
Myasthenia gravis
This is the most common cause of acutely evolving, fatigable weakness 
and preferentially affects ocular, facial and bulbar muscles.
Pathophysiology
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease, most commonly (80% of 
cases) caused by antibodies to acetylcholine receptors in the post-junc-
tional membrane of the neuromuscular junction. The resultant blockage 
of neuromuscular transmission and complement-mediated inammatory 
response reduces the number of acetylcholine receptors and damages 
the end plate (Fig. 28.50). Other antibodies can produce a similar clinical 
picture, most notably autoantibodies to muscle-specic kinase (MuSK), 
which is involved in the regulation and maintenance of acetylcholine 
receptors.
About 15% of patients (mainly those with late onset) have a thy-
moma, most of the remainder displaying thymic follicular hyperplasia. 
Myasthenic patients are more likely to have associated organ- specic 
autoimmune diseases. Triggers are not always evident but some 
drugs (e.g. penicillamine) can precipitate an antibody-mediated 
myasthenic syndrome that may persist after drug withdrawal. Other 
drugs, especially aminoglycosides and quinolones, may exacerbate 
the neuromuscular blockade and should be avoided in patients with 
myasthenia.
Clinical features
Myasthenia gravis usually presents between the ages of 15 and 50 
years and there is a female preponderance in younger patients. In older 
patients, males are more commonly affected. It tends to run a relapsing 
and remitting course.
The most evident symptom is fatigable muscle weakness; move-
ment is initially strong but rapidly weakens as muscle use continues. 
Worsening of symptoms towards the end of the day or following exercise 
is characteristic. There are no sensory signs or signs of involvement of 
the CNS, although weakness of the oculomotor muscles may mimic a 
central eye movement disorder. The rst symptoms are usually intermit-
tent ptosis or diplopia but weakness of chewing, swallowing, speaking or 
limb movement also occurs. Resting of the eyelids (looking downwards) 
may be followed by increased reex elevation with up-gaze (so-called 
Cogan's lid twitch sign). Any limb muscle may be affected, most com-
monly those of the shoulder girdle; the patient is unable to undertake 
tasks above shoulder level, such as combing the hair, without frequent 
rests. Respiratory muscles may be involved and respiratory failure is 
an avoidable cause of death. Aspiration may occur if the cough is inef-
fectual. Ventilatory support is required where weakness is severe or of 
abrupt onset. Subtypes of myasthenia gravis include ocular myasthenia, 
where disease is often conned to eye muscles, and generalised myas-
thenia, where more widespread muscle involvement is seen which can 
include bulbar and respiratory muscles. There is often overlap between 
these subtypes. Congenital (genetic) forms of myasthenia also exist and 
do not have an autoimmune basis.
Investigations
Serological investigations play an important role in the diagnosis of 
myasthenia gravis. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies are highly spe-
cic, but seronegative cases also exist and further serological testing, 
e.g. for MuSK antibodies, should be performed if AChR antibodies are 
negative. Anti-MuSK antibodies are associated with prominent bulbar 
involvement.
Neurophysiological assessment is important in establishing the diag-
nosis. Repetitive stimulation during nerve conduction studies may show 
a characteristic decremental response if the muscle has been clinically 
affected. Specialised single bre EMG changes such as ‘jitter’ may 
also be seen. All patients should have a thoracic CT or MRI to exclude 
28.88 Physical signs in brachial plexus lesions
Site
Affected muscles
Sensory loss
Upper plexus
Biceps, deltoid, spinati, 
rhomboids, brachioradialis 
(triceps, serratus anterior)
Patch over deltoid
Lower plexus
All small hand muscles, claw 
hand (ulnar wrist exors)
Ulnar border of hand/
forearm
Thoracic outlet 
syndrome
Small hand muscles, ulnar 
forearm
Ulnar border of hand/
forearm/upper arm

[[p1257]]
Diseases of muscle    1195
28
thymoma, especially those without anti-acetylcholine receptor antibod-
ies. Screening for associated autoimmune disorders, particularly thyroid 
disease, is important.
Intravenous injection of the short-acting anticholinesterase edropho-
nium bromide (the Tensilon test) is less widely used than before and 
requires specialist involvement in cases where there is diagnostic doubt. 
Structural imaging (e.g. MRI of brainstem) may be needed to exclude 
alternative diagnoses that can cause ocular-bulbar weakness.
Management
The goals of treatment are to maximise the activity of acetylcholine at 
remaining receptors in the neuromuscular junctions and to limit or abolish 
the immunological attack on motor end plates.
The duration of action of acetylcholine is prolonged by inhibiting ace-
tylcholinesterase. The most commonly used anticholinesterase drug is 
pyridostigmine. Muscarinic side-effects, including diarrhoea and colic, 
may be controlled by propantheline.
Myasthenia gravis can cause life-threatening disease, often referred 
to as ‘myasthenic crisis’, when bulbar and respiratory failure occurs. 
Prompt acute immunotherapy, often using intravenous immunoglobulin 
or plasma exchange is required, together with a longer-term immuno-
suppressive approach. Supportive respiratory care, and early involve-
ment of intensive care teams, is important during these periods.
Immunological treatment of myasthenia is outlined in Box 28.89. 
Thymoma should be managed with joint oncology and thoracic surgery 
input. Prognosis is variable and remissions may occur spontaneously. 
When myasthenia is entirely ocular, prognosis is excellent and disability 
slight. Younger seropositive patients with generalised disease may bene-
t from thymectomy in the absence of thymoma, while older patients are 
less likely to have a remission despite treatment. Rapid progression of 
the disease more than 5 years after onset is uncommon.
Some medications, such as aminoglycoside antibiotics, can worsen 
myasthenia gravis.
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Other rarer conditions can present with muscle weakness due to 
impaired transmission across the neuromuscular junction. The most 
common of these is the Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), 
which can occur as an inammatory or paraneoplastic phenom-
enon. Antibodies to pre-synaptic voltage-gated calcium channels (see 
Fig. 28.50) impair transmitter release. Patients may have autonomic 
dysfunction (e.g. dry mouth) in addition to muscle weakness but the 
cardinal clinical sign is absence of tendon reexes, which return after 
sustained contraction of the relevant muscle. The condition is asso-
ciated with underlying malignancy in a high percentage of cases 
and investigation must be directed towards identifying any neo-
plasm. Diagnosis is made electrophysiologically on the presence of 
post-tetanic potentiation of motor response to nerve stimulation at a 
frequency of 20–50/sec. Treatment is with 3,4-diaminopyridine, or pyri-
dostigmine and immunosuppression.
Diseases of muscle
Muscle disease, either hereditary or acquired, is rare. Most typically, it 
presents with a proximal symmetrical weakness. Diagnosis is depend-
ent on recognition of clinical clues, such as cardiorespiratory involve-
ment, evolution, family history, exposure to drugs, the presence of 
contractures, myotonia and other systemic features, and on investi-
gation ndings, most importantly EMG and muscle biopsy. Hereditary 
syndromes include the muscular dystrophies, muscle channelopathies, 
Motor
neuron
Lambert–Eaton syndrome
Antibodies to pre-synaptic
calcium channels
Acetylcholine
packets released
by calcium influx
Acetylcholine
Ca2+
Voltage-gated
  calcium channel
Acetylcholine
receptor
Acetylcholinesterase
removes acetylcholine
from neuromuscular
junction
Sodium channels
in clefts amplify
potential change
Depolarisation
of muscle
membrane
In myasthenia
end plate is subject
to cell-mediated
immune assault
(end plate simplified)
Myasthenia gravis
Antibodies to
acetylcholine
receptors
Fig. 28.50 Myasthenia gravis and Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS). In myasthenia there are antibodies to the acetylcholine receptors on the post-synaptic 
membrane, which block conduction across the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Myasthenic symptoms can be transiently improved by inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (e.g. with 
Tensilon – edrophonium bromide), which normally removes the acetylcholine. A cell-mediated immune response produces simplication of the post-synaptic membrane, further 
impairing the ‘safety factor’ of neuromuscular conduction. In LEMS, antibodies to the pre-synaptic voltage calcium channels impair release of acetylcholine from the motor nerve 
ending; calcium is required for the acetylcholine-containing vesicle to fuse with the pre-synaptic membrane for release into the NMJ.

[[p1258]]
1196    NEUROLOGY
metabolic myopathies (including mitochondrial diseases) and congen-
ital myopathies.
Muscular dystrophies
These are inherited disorders with progressive muscle destruction and 
may be associated with cardiac and/or respiratory involvement and 
sometimes non-myopathic features (Box 28.90). Myotonic dystrophy is 
the most common, with a prevalence of about 12/100 000.
Clinical features
The pattern of the clinical features is dened by the specic syndromes. 
Onset is often in childhood, although some patients, especially those 
with myotonic dystrophy, may present as adults. Wasting and weakness 
are usually symmetrical, without fasciculation or sensory loss, and ten-
don reexes are usually preserved until a late stage. Weakness is usually 
proximal, except in myotonic dystrophy type 1, when it is distal.
Investigations
The diagnosis can be conrmed by specic molecular genetic testing, 
supplemented with EMG and muscle biopsy if necessary. Creatine 
kinase is markedly elevated in the dystrophinopathies (Duchenne and 
Becker) but is normal or moderately elevated in the other dystrophies. 
Screening for an associated cardiac abnormality (cardiomyopathy or 
dysrhythmia) is important.
Management
There is no specic therapy for most of these conditions but phys-
iotherapy and occupational therapy help patients cope with their 
28.89 Immunological treatment of myasthenia
Acute treatments
Intravenous immunoglobulin
 Lowers production of antibodies and rapidly reduces weakness
Plasma exchange
 Removing antibody from the blood may produce marked improvement; this is 
usually brief, so is normally reserved for myasthenic crisis or for pre-operative 
preparation
Long-term treatments
Glucocorticoid treatment
 Improvement can be preceded by marked exacerbation of myasthenic 
symptoms, so treatment should be initiated cautiously in an environment where 
deterioration can be managed. In an outpatient setting many neurologists 
start corticosteroids at a low dose and increase gradually. If urgent high-dose 
steroids are needed this may require hospital admission
 Usually necessary to continue for months or years, risking adverse effects
Pharmacological immunosuppression treatment
 Azathioprine 2.5 mg/kg daily reduces the necessary dosage of glucocorticoids 
and may allow withdrawal. Effect on clinical features may be delayed for months
 Mycophenolate mofetil and rituximab are both used, although high-quality 
evidence is currently lacking
Thymectomy
 Likely to be required for thymoma
 Should be considered in any antibody-positive patient under 45 years with 
symptoms not conned to extraocular muscles, unless the disease has been 
established for more than 7 years
28.90 The muscular dystrophies
Type
Genetics
Age of onset
Muscles affected
Other features
Myotonic dystrophy  
(DM1)
Autosomal dominant; expanded 
triplet repeat DMPK gene
Any
Face (including ptosis), 
sternomastoids, distal limb, 
generalised later
Myotonia, cognitive 
impairment, cardiac 
conduction abnormalities, 
lens opacities, frontal 
balding, hypogonadism
Proximal myotonic  
myopathy (PROMM;  
DM2)
Autosomal dominant; quadruplet 
repeat expansion in CNBP gene
8–50 years
Proximal, especially thigh, 
sometimes muscle  
hypertrophy
As for DM1 but cognition 
not affected
Muscle pain
Duchenne
X-linked; deletions in dystrophin
gene Xp21
< 5 years
Proximal and limb girdle
Cardiomyopathy and 
respiratory failure
Becker
X-linked; deletions in dystrophin
gene Xp21
Childhood/early 
adulthood
Proximal and limb girdle
Cardiomyopathy common  
but respiratory failure 
uncommon
Limb girdle
Many mutations on different 
chromosomes
Childhood/early 
adulthood
Limb girdle
Very variable depending 
on genetic subtype, 
some involve cardiac and 
respiratory systems
Facioscapulohumeral  
(FSH)
Autosomal dominant;  
tandem repeat deletion  
chromosome 4q35
7–30 years
Face and upper limb girdle,  
distal lower limb weakness
Pain in shoulder girdle 
common, deafness
Cardiorespiratory  
involvement rare
Oculopharyngeal
Autosomal dominant and recessive; 
triplet repeat  
expansion in PABP2 gene 
chromosome 14q
30–60 years
Ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, 
dysphagia, tongue weakness
Mild lower limb weakness
Emery–Dreifuss
X-linked recessive; mutations in 
emerin gene
4–5 years
Humero-peroneal, proximal limb 
girdle later
Contractures develop  
early
Cardiac involvement leads 
to sudden death

[[p1259]]
Diseases of muscle    1197
28
disability. Glucocorticoids can be used in Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
but side-effects should be anticipated and avoided by dose modication. 
Treatment of associated cardiac failure or arrhythmia (with pacemaker 
insertion if necessary) may be required; similarly, management of res-
piratory complications (including nocturnal hypoventilation) can improve 
quality of life. Improvements in non-invasive ventilation have led to sig-
nicant improvements in survival for patients with Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy. Genetic counselling is important.
Inherited metabolic myopathies
There are a large number of rare inherited disorders that interfere with 
the biochemical pathways that maintain the energy supply (adenosine 
triphosphate, ATP) to muscles. These are mostly recessively inherited 
deciencies in the enzymes necessary for glycogen or fatty acid (β-oxida-
tion) metabolism (Box 28.91). They typically present with muscle weak-
ness and pain.
Mitochondrial disorders
Mitochondrial diseases are discussed on page 47. Mitochondria are 
present in all tissues and dysfunction causes widespread effects on 
vision (optic atrophy, retinitis pigmentosa, cataracts), hearing (sensor-
ineural deafness) and the endocrine, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal 
and renal systems. Any combination of these should raise the suspicion 
of a mitochondrial disorder, especially if there is evidence of maternal 
transmission.
Mitochondrial dysfunction can be caused by alterations in either 
mitochondrial DNA or genes encoding for oxidative processes. Genetic 
abnormalities or mutations in mitochondrial DNA may affect sin-
gle  individuals and single tissues (most commonly muscle). Thus, 
patients with exercise intolerance, myalgia and sometimes recurrent 
myoglobinuria may have isolated pathogenic mutations in genes encod-
ing for oxidation pathways.
Inherited disorders of the oxidative pathways of the respiratory chain in 
mitochondria cause a group of disorders, either restricted to the muscle 
or associated with non-myopathic features (Box 28.92). Many of these 
mitochondrial disorders are inherited via the mitochondrial genome, 
down the maternal line. Diagnosis is based on clinical appearances, 
supported by muscle biopsy appearance (usually with ‘ragged red’ and/
or cytochrome oxidase-negative bres), and specic mutations either on 
blood or, more reliably, muscle testing. Mutations may be due either to 
point mutations or to deletions of mitochondrial DNA.
A disorder called Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is charac-
terised by acute or subacute loss of vision, most frequently in males, due 
to bilateral optic atrophy. Three point mutations account for more than 
90% of LHON cases.
Channelopathies
Inherited abnormalities of the sodium, calcium and chloride ion channels 
in striated muscle produce various syndromes of familial periodic paral-
ysis, myotonia and malignant hyperthermia, which may be recognised 
by their clinical characteristics and potassium abnormalities (Box 28.93). 
Genetic testing is available.
Acquired myopathies
These include the inammatory myopathies, or myopathy associated 
with a range of metabolic and endocrine disorders or drug and toxin 
exposure (Fig. 28.51).
28.91 Inherited disorders of muscle metabolism
Disease
Clinical features
Diagnosis
Carbohydrate (glycogen) metabolism
Myophosphorylase 
deciency (McArdle 
disease): autosomal 
recessive
Exercise-induced 
myalgia, stiffness, 
weakness (with 
‘second wind’ 
phenomenon), 
myoglobinuria
Creatine kinase (CK) 
elevated
Muscle biopsy
Enzyme assay
Acid maltase deciency 
(Pompe disease): 
autosomal recessive
Infantile form: death 
within 2 years
CK elevated
Childhood: death in 
twenties or thirties
Blood lymphocyte 
analysis for glycogen 
granules
Adult: progressive 
proximal myopathy with 
respiratory failure
Muscle biopsy
Enzyme assay
Lipid metabolism (β-oxidation)
Carnitine-palmitoyl 
transferase (CPT) 
deciency
Myalgia after exercise, 
myoglobinuria, 
weakness
CK normal between 
attacks
Urinary organic acids
Enzyme assays
Muscle biopsy
28.92 Mitochondrial syndromes
Syndrome
Clinical features
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red 
bres (MERRF)
Myoclonic epilepsy, cerebellar 
ataxia, dementia, sensorineural 
deafness ± peripheral 
neuropathy, optic atrophy and 
multiple lipomas
Mitochondrial myopathy, 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and 
stroke-like episodes (MELAS)
Episodic encephalopathy, 
stroke-like episodes often 
preceded by migraine-like 
headache, nausea and vomiting
Chronic progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)
Progressive ptosis and external 
oculomotor palsy, proximal 
myopathy ± deafness, ataxia 
and cardiac conduction defects
Kearns–Sayre syndrome
Like CPEO but early age of 
onset (< 20 years), heart block, 
pigmentary retinopathy
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal 
encephalomyopathy (MNGIE)
Progressive ptosis, 
external oculomotor palsy, 
gastrointestinal dysmotility 
(often pseudo-obstruction), 
diffuse leucoencephalopathy, 
thin body habitus, peripheral 
neuropathy and myopathy
Neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis 
pigmentosa (NARP)
Weakness, ataxia and 
progressive loss of vision, along 
with dementia, seizures and 
proximal weakness

[[p1260]]
1198    NEUROLOGY
28.93 Muscle channelopathies
Channel
Muscle disease
Gene and inheritance
Clinical features
Sodium
Paramyotonia congenita
SCN4A (17q35)
Cold-evoked myotonia with episodic weakness provoked 
by exercise and cold
Autosomal dominant
Potassium-aggravated myotonia
SCN4A
Pure myotonia without weakness provoked by potassium
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis
SCN4A
Brief (mins to hours), frequent episodes of weakness 
provoked by rest, cold, potassium, fasting, pregnancy, 
stress
Autosomal dominant
Less common than hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
SCN4A
Longer (hours to days) episodic weakness triggered by 
rest, carbohydrate loading, cold
Autosomal dominant  
(one-third new mutations)
Chloride
Myotonia congenita:
 Thomsen disease
CLCN1
Myotonia usually mild, little weakness
 Becker disease
Autosomal dominant
Myotonia often severe, transient weakness
CLCN1
Autosomal recessive
Calcium
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
CACNA1S
Episodic weakness triggered by carbohydrate meal
Malignant hyperthermia
Autosomal dominant
Hyperpyrexia due to excess muscle activity, precipitated 
by drugs, usually anaesthetic agents; most common 
cause of death during general anaesthetic
CACNA1S, CACNL2A
Autosomal dominant
Potassium
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis with  
cardiac arrhythmia
KCNJ2
Similar to hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, associated 
with cardiac and non-myopathic features (skeletal and 
facial)
Autosomal dominant
Ryanodine 
receptor
Malignant hyperthermia
RYR1 (19q13)RYR1
As malignant hyperthermia above
Central core and multicore disease
Mostly autosomal dominant
Present in infancy with mild progressive weakness
Inflammatory
 Polymyositis
 Dermatomyositis
 Inclusion body myositis
   (predominantly distal effects) 
Drugs
 Glucocorticoids
 Statins
 Amiodarone
 β-blockers
 Opiates
 Chloroquine
 Ciclosporin
 Vincristine
 Clofibrate
 Zidovudine
Paraneoplastic
 Carcinomatous neuromyopathy
 Dermatomyositis
Toxic
 Alcohol (chronic and acute syndromes)
 Amphetamines/cocaine/heroin
 Vitamin E
 Organophosphates
 Snake venoms
Endocrine/metabolic
 Hypothyroidism
 Hyperthyroidism
 Acromegaly
 Cushing’s syndrome
   (including iatrogenic)
 Addison’s disease
 Conn syndrome
 Osteomalacia
 Hypokalaemia (liquorice, diuretic and purgative abuse)
 Hypercalcaemia (disseminated bony metastases) 
Fig. 28.51 Causes of acquired proximal myopathy.

[[p1261]]
28
Further information    1199
Further information
Journal articles
Evidence-Based Guideline: Treatment of Convulsive Status Epilepticus in Children 
and Adults: Report of the Guideline Committee of the American Epilepsy 
Society. Epilepsy Curr 2016; 16(1):48–61.
Operational classication of seizure types by the International League Against 
Epilepsy. Epilepsia 2017; 58(4):522–530.
Scolding N, Barnes D, Cader S, etal. Association of British Neurologists: revised 
(2015) guidelines for prescribing disease-modifying treatments in multiple 
sclerosis. Pract Neurol 2015;15(4):1–7.
Sussman J, Farrugia ME, Maddison P, etal. Myasthenia gravis: Association of 
British Neurologists’ management guidelines. Pract Neurol 2015;15:199–206.
UK joint specialist societies guideline on the diagnosis and management of acute 
meningitis and meningococcal sepsis in immunocompetent adults. J Infect 
2016; 72:405–438.
Websites
myana.org American Neurological Association.
brainandspine.org.uk Brain and Spine Foundation
dizziness-and-balance.com/disorders Diagnosing benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo.
epilepsydiagnosis.org International League Against Epilepsy: free access to videos 
of different seizure types and clinical summaries of the epilepsies.
headinjurysymptoms.org Symptoms and management of mild and moderate 
head injury.
ihs-classication.org/en/ International Headache Society: full access to 3rd edition 
of International Classication of Headache Disorders.
neurosymptoms.org Advice on managing functional neurological symptoms.
ninds.nih.gov National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
sign.ac.uk Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network: SIGN 107 Diagnosis and 
management of headache in adults; SIGN 110 Early management of patients 
with a head injury; SIGN 113 Diagnosis and pharmacological management 
of Parkinson’s disease; SIGN 143 Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in 
adults; SIGN 155 Pharmacological management of migraine.
wfneurology.org World Federation of Neurology.

[[p1262]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p1263]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 28.1. A patient describes a two-day history of progressive tingling 
and numbness, starting in both feet but now including both arms. 
She has difculty walking today. Examination shows mildly reduced 
sensation in arms and legs and mild weakness, with reduced 
reexes. Where is the most likely location of the lesion?
A. Cerebral hemispheres
B. Spinal cord
C. Nerve roots and peripheral nerve
D. Neuromuscular junction
E. Muscle
Answer: C.
The symmetrical involvement of both sensory and motor modalities, 
together with reduced reexes, is consistent with a peripheral nerve 
localisation. Evolution of symptoms over this time course suggests an 
inammatory cause, such as Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). Prompt 
recognition is important since bulbar and respiratory weakness can 
develop, and supportive care, including respiratory support, can be 
required. GBS responds to treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin 
or plasma exchange. Neuromuscular disease and muscle disease do 
not cause sensory disturbance, and lesions in the spinal cord or cerebral 
hemispheres are usually associated with brisk reexes.
 28.2. Which of the following statements about neuroimaging is true?
A. Computed tomography should always be performed before 
lumbar puncture in suspected meningitis
B. Computed tomography is the investigation of choice for a 
thunderclap headache
C. Accurate imaging of cerebral blood vessels requires invasive 
angiography
D. A diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) always requires mag-
netic resonance (MR) imaging
E. Parkinson’s disease should only be diagnosed following a 
positive dopamine active transporter (DAT) scan
Answer: B.
Thunderclap headache (a very severe headache of abrupt onset, 
reaching maximum intensity within 60 seconds) should always raise the 
possibility of a serious underlying cause and is a medical emergency. An 
important cause is subarachnoid haemorrhage. Computed tomography 
is a rapid and widely available imaging modality for detection of acute 
bleeding. Modern neuroimaging allows blood vessels to be visualised 
without the need for invasive angiography. MR imaging plays an impor-
tant role in the diagnosis of MS by helping to demonstrate dissemination 
of lesions in time and space, and excluding alterative diagnoses; however, 
MS can also be diagnosed in settings where MR imaging is not available.
 28.3. A 65-year-old man from the UK presents with a three-day 
history of bilateral leg weakness and numbness. Last year he had 
an episode of left optic neuritis, which did not fully resolve. On 
examination he is afebrile, with severe bilateral leg weakness (MRC 
power grade 1/5 throughout) and has brisk lower limb reexes with 
a sensory level at T4. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows 
an inammatory lesion in the thoracic spinal cord stretching from 
T3 to T7. What is the most specic diagnostic investigation to be 
performed next?
A. Cerebrospinal uid (CSF) analysis for oligoclonal bands
B. CSF analysis for schistosomiasis
C. Blood test for aquaporin-4 antibodies
D. MRI of the head
E. Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)
 Answer: C.
The clinical syndrome is severe optic nerve and spinal cord inam-
mation, with imaging evidence of longitudinally extensive transverse 
myelitis (LETM). While optico-spinal inammation is most commonly 
seen in multiple sclerosis (MS), the severe nature of both lesions and 
the long spinal cord lesion (over 3 vertebral segments in length) are not 
typical for MS. While infections, including schistosomiasis, can cause 
long spinal cord lesions, the most likely cause for this clinical picture 
is neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), and aquaporin-4 
antibodies are highly specic for this diagnosis. NMOSD can also occur 
with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies, as well as 
seronegative cases.
 28.4. Which of the following statements about cryptococcal meningi-
tis is true?
A. Only immunosuppressed individuals develop cryptococcal 
meningitis
B. Cryptococcal meningitis is a cause of high cerebrospinal 
uid protein and glucose
C. Cerebrospinal uid India ink test is the investigation of 
choice for cryptococcal meningitis
D. High cerebrospinal uid pressure in cryptococcal meningitis 
is treated with frequent, often daily, lumbar punctures
E. Cryptococcal antigen may be present in cerebrospinal uid, 
but not in the serum
Answer: D.
Although cryptococcal meningitis (CM) usually occurs in the immuno-
suppressed, it can occur in the immunocompetent.CM results in a high 
cerebrospinal uid (CSF) protein and low CSF glucose. Cryptococcal 
antigen is present in the CSF and sometimes the serum. The India ink 
test is still used in some regions but sensitivity is limited, particularly in 
non-HIV-related CM. High CSF pressure in CM is treated with frequent, 
sometimes daily, lumbar punctures.
 28.5. Which of the following statements about seizures is true?
A. All patients who have had a conrmed seizure should be 
told not to drive
B. The electroencephalogram (EEG) is always abnormal in 
people with epilepsy
C. Neuroimaging should be performed on all individuals who 
have had a generalized seizure
D. Neuroimaging is not required forindividuals who have had a 
focal seizure
E. Anticonvulsants should be started after a rst seizure
Answer: A.
It is the physician’s prime duty to ensure that the patient is aware of the 
legal obligation to stop driving and inform the relevant driving authority 
after having a single seizure. In the UK, patients are usually eligible to 
drive a motor vehicle six months after a single seizure provided there are 
no factors that would increase the risk of further seizure. There are far 
more stringent criteria for heavy goods and public service vehicle drivers. 
EEG can be normal in people with epilepsy, and neuroimaging is particu-
larly important in individuals who have focal-onset seizures.

[[p1264]]
Stroke medicine
29
W Whiteley
R Woodeld
Clinical examination in stroke 1202
Functional anatomy and physiology 1204
Investigations 1204
Presenting problems 1205
Weakness 1205
Speech disturbance 1205
Visual decit 1205
Visuo-spatial dysfunction 1205
Ataxia 1205
Headache 1206
Seizure 1206
Coma 1206
Stroke 1206
Pathophysiology 1206
Clinical features 1207
Investigations 1208
Blood tests 1210
Management 1211
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 1214
Clinical features 1214
Investigations 1215
Management 1216
Cerebral venous disease 1216
Clinical features 1216
Investigations and management 1216

[[p1265]]
1202    STROKE MEDICINE
Clinical examination in stroke 
Blood pressure, carotid bruits
and cardiac auscultation
Higher cerebral function
Dysphasia or dysarthria
Attention and neglect
Abbreviated mental test
Cranial nerve function
Swallow
Horner syndrome
Internuclear opthalmoplegia
Cranial nerve palsy, e.g. 3rd, 6th,
7th or 12th
Visual field loss
Cranial nerve function
Swallow
Horner syndrome
Internuclear opthalmoplegia
Cranial nerve palsy, e.g. 3rd, 6th,
7th or 12th
Visual field loss
General appearance
Conscious level
Gaze deviation
Facial symmetry
1
Gait
Sitting balance
Standing balance
Ataxic gait pattern
Hemiparetic gait pattern
Sensory system
Touch sensation
Cortical sensory function: sensory
inattention or neglect
Joint position sense
3
4
Motor system
Tone
Strength, including pronator drift
Co-ordination
Tendon reflexes
Plantar reflexes
5
2
Left pronator drift
Extensor plantar reflex
Fanning
of toes
Up
Atrial fibrillation
Left upper motor neuron pattern
of facial weakness
Pulse
Rate and rhythm
Loud
Loud
OS
A2P2
MDM
1
2
3
4
Visual field defect – left
homonymous hemianopia
5
6
6
7
8
7
8

[[p1266]]
Clinical examination in stroke     1203
29
General examination
Skin
 Xanthelasma
 Rash (e.g. vasculitic, splinter haemorrhages)
 Colour change (limb ischaemia, deep vein thrombosis)
 Pressure sores or early pressure injury
Eyes
 Diabetic retinopathy
 Hypertensive retinopathy
 Cholesterol emboli
 Papilloedema (unexpected in stroke)
 Subhyaloid haemorrhages (after subarachnoid haemorrhage)
Cardiovascular system
 Atrial brillation
 Blood pressure (high or low)
 Carotid bruit
 Cardiac murmurs (source of embolism, e.g. endocarditis)
 Peripheral pulses and bruits (generalised arteriopathy)
Respiratory system
 Signs of pulmonary oedema or infection
 Oxygen saturation
Abdomen
 Palpable bladder (urinary retention)
 Organomegaly
Locomotor system
 Injuries sustained during collapse  
(e.g. hip fracture)
 Comorbidities that inuence recovery  
(e.g. osteoarthritis) 
Rapid clinical assessment of suspected stroke
Exclusion of hypoglycaemia
 Bedside blood glucose testing
Measure blood pressure
 Signicant hypertension may require treatment (e.g. in acute intracerebral 
haemorrhage, or if thrombolysis is being considered)
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
A formalised neurological examination and a measure of stroke severity which can  
be useful for organising acute stroke assessment, monitoring and communicating 
stroke severity.
1A Level of consciousness
Alert; keenly responsive
0
Arouses to minor stimulation
+1
Arouses to pain
+2
Abnormal postures or unresponsive
+3
1B Ask month and age
Both questions right
0
One question right or dysarthric or intubated
+1
No questions right or aphasic
+2
1C Ask to ‘close eyes’ and ‘squeeze hands’
Performs both tasks
0
Performs one task
+1
Performs no tasks
+2
2 Horizontal extraocular movements
Normal
0
Partial gaze palsy: can be overcome or corrects
+1
Complete gaze palsy: cannot be overcome
+2
3 Visual elds
No visual loss
0
Partial hemianopia
+1
Complete hemianopia
+2
Bilateral blindness or hemianopia
+3
4 Facial palsy
Normal symmetry
0
Minor paralysis (at nasolabial fold)
+1
Partial paralysis (lower face only)
+2
Unilateral or bilateral complete paralysis
+3
5A Left arm motor drift (ask patient to hold out arm for 10 seconds while you 
count aloud)
No drift for 10 seconds
0
Drift, but doesn’t hit bed
+1
Drift and hits bed, or some effort against gravity
+2
No effort against gravity
+3
No movement
+4
5B Right arm motor drift (perform and score following instructions for left arm)
6A Left leg motor drift (ask patient to raise leg for 5 seconds while you count 
aloud)
No drift for 5 seconds
0
Drift, but doesn’t hit bed
+1
Drift and hits bed, or some effort against gravity
+2
No effort against gravity
+3
No movement
+4
6B Right leg motor drift (perform and score following instructions for  
left leg)
7 Limb ataxia (nger–nose–nger and heel–shin testing, all four limbs)
No ataxia or doesn’t understand or paralysed
0
Ataxia in one limb
+1
Ataxia in two limbs
+2
8 Sensation
Normal, no sensory loss
0
Mild–moderate sensory loss
+1
Complete sensory loss or unresponsive
+2
9 Language (check comprehension ‘lift your arms’, ‘close your eyes’. Ask 
the patient to name people or objects, e.g ‘nurse’, ‘pen’, ‘watch’, to check for 
nominal dysphasia)
Normal, no dysphasia
0
Mild–moderate dysphasia but no major limitation
+1
Severe dysphasia, e.g meaning of speech is unclear
+2
Global aphasia or mute or coma
+3
10 Dysarthria (check articulation, e.g repeat ‘tip-top’, or ‘fty-fty’)
Normal or intubated and unable to test
0
Mild–moderate, e.g slurring but understandable
+1
Severe, unintelligible or mute
+2
11 Inattention (test sensation and visual elds on both sides simultaneously. 
The affected side will not be felt or seen)
Inattention to one modality (sense or vision)
+1
Inattention to both modalities or severe neglect (e.g 
doesn’t recognise own hand)
+2
Score (0 to 42): 0 to 5 mild, 5 to 15 moderate, more than 16 severe
Tips: Score what you see, score the rst response (not the best response) and don’t coach the patient.
Check if the patient can sit up or stand without support.
The NIHSS does not measure well the severity of posterior circulation and non-dominant 
hemisphere stroke syndromes.

[[p1267]]
1204    STROKE MEDICINE
A stroke is a sudden onset focal cerebral dysfunction due to vascu
lar disease of the brain (Fig. 29.1). Stroke is the third most common 
cause of disability in the world after ischaemic heart disease and con
genital disorders. In Europe, most strokes (about 80%) are caused by 
cerebral ischaemia and fewer are due to haemorrhage, although there 
are probably a similar number of deaths due to ischaemic and haemor
rhagic stroke worldwide. Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) and cerebral 
venous thrombosis (CVT) are discussed later in this chapter. Vascular 
dementia is described on page 1246.
Functional anatomy and physiology 
The paired internal carotid and vertebral arteries supply blood to the brain. 
Each internal carotid artery bifurcates into the anterior and middle cerebral 
arteries which supply the anterior cerebrum (‘anterior circulation’). The 
vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery (supplying the brainstem, 
cerebellum and pons) which bifurcates into the posterior cerebral arteries 
which supply the posterior cerebrum (‘posterior circulation’) (Fig. 29.2). The 
function of each brain area is described on page 1122. Communicating 
arteries connect the anterior with the posterior and the left with the right 
circulations. These anastomoses form the circle of Willis that – if complete – 
maintains cerebral circulation even if one carotid or vertebral artery is 
blocked. In health, autoregulation maintains a constant cerebral blood 
ow across a wide range of arterial blood pressures to meet the high cere
bral metabolic activity. This autoregulatory mechanism can be disrupted 
after stroke. The venous system is formed by a collection of sinuses over 
the surface of the brain which drain into the jugular veins (Fig. 29.3).
Investigations 
Brain imaging 
Brain imaging helps to determine the cause of stroke symptoms. Non
contrast (unenhanced) computed tomography (CT) scanning is rapid, 
sensitive for intracranial haemorrhage and can show cerebral ischaemia 
or other diagnoses, but does use ionising radiation. In patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of an acute stroke, a CT scan that shows no intra
cerebral haemorrhage makes an ischaemic stroke the likelier diagnosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is more sensitive than CT for 
changes of cerebral ischaemia and provides very detailed images of 
brain anatomy, although it takes longer than CT to perform (Fig. 29.4). 
MRI uses powerful magnets that can interfere with medical devices 
(such as pacemakers) or metal implants, and can be claustrophobic for 
patients. Diffusionweighted MRI adds sensitivity for cerebral ischaemia 
compared with other MRI sequences.
Vascular imaging 
Imaging of the carotid artery and of intra and extracranial vessels 
can inuence practice by demonstrating carotid stenosis which 
guides decisions about carotid endarterectomy, and by showing 
major vessel occlusion in acute stroke which guides decisions about 
thrombectomy.
The rstline imaging techniques for vessels supplying the brain can 
be ultrasound, CT angiography or MR angiography, depending on avail
ability and expertise. Intraarterial angiography is used less frequently as 
a primary investigation, although it is often done during neurointerven
tional procedures to conrm ndings from noninvasive techniques or 
guide treatment (Fig. 29.5). Vascular imaging can show also major ves
sel dissection, changes of cerebral vasculitis, intracranial aneurysms or 
arteriovenous malformations. Transcranial Doppler sonography is used in 
some centres to identify intracranial stenosis or occlusion.
Blood tests 
The choice of blood tests should be guided by the clinical situation. A full 
blood count, electrolytes and renal function are usually indicated. Blood 
glucose (usually fasting) can diagnose unrecognised diabetes (or poor 
diabetes control), lipids (cholesterol fractions and triglycerides) may guide 
lipidlowering therapy, and Creactive protein or erythrocyte sedimenta
tion rate may identify an inammatory response (for example in giant cell 
arteritis or endocarditis).
Stroke
(acute, focal brain dysfunction due to vascular disease)
Total anterior
circulation
stroke (TACS)
(15%)
Partial anterior
circulation
stroke (PACS)
(30%)
Lacunar stroke
(LACS)
(20%)
Posterior
circulation
stroke (POCS)
(20%)
Intracerebral
haemorrhage
(10%)
Subarachnoid
haemorrhage
(5%)
Central venous
thrombosis
(<1%)
Anterior (carotid) circulation
(65%)
Posterior
(vertebrobasilar
circulation)
(20%)
Brain
parenchyma
(10%)
Subarachnoid
space
(5%)
Venous
system
Infarct
(85%)
Arterial
(>99%)
Haemorrhage
(15%)
Infarct
(often develops
secondary
haemorrhage)
Venous
(<1%)
 Embolism
   (cardiac, major vessels)
 Thrombosis in situ
Clinical
classification
Site of lesion
Pathology
Vascular system
Common
pathophysiology
 Thrombosis
   in situ
 Cerebral small
   vessel disease
 Thrombosis
 Embolism
   (cardiac)
 Cerebral small
   vessel disease
 Aneurysm
 Arteriovenous
   malformation
 Aneurysm
 Arteriovenous
   malformation
 Thrombosis
   in situ
Fig. 29.1 A classication of stroke.

[[p1268]]
Presenting problems     1205
29
Anterior cerebral
artery 
Posterior
communicating
artery 
Posterior cerebral
artery
Small perforating
vessels
Anterior
communicating
artery 
Basilar artery 
Vertebral
arteries 
Medial view
Lateral view
Anterior cerebral
artery
Middle cerebral
artery
Posterior cerebral
artery
Internal carotid
arteries
Middle cerebral
artery 
A
B
Fig. 29.2 Arterial circulation of the brain. 
and posterior cerebral artery territories. (B) Adapted from Amin HP, Schindler J. 
Vascular neuroanatomy. In: Amin H, Schindler J (eds), Vascular Neurology Board 
Review. Cham: Springer; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39605-7_3
Monogenic disorders are a rare cause of stroke, and genetic testing 
is usually guided by particular clinical or radiological syndromes (e.g. 
cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy, CADASIL), but needs careful discussion with 
patients and families so the implications of a genetic diagnosis are 
understood.
Lumbar puncture 
Cerebrospinal uid can show evidence of subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
but is not used for most stroke patients.
Cardiac investigations 
A 12lead ECG may show atrial brillation (AF), an important stroke risk 
factor, evidence of prolonged hypertension (left ventricular hypertrophy), 
or previous myocardial infarction. Prolonged ECG monitoring may reveal 
short periods of AF (‘paroxysmal’ AF), which leads to anticoagulation for 
prevention of future ischaemic stroke. Management can change when 
an echocardiogram shows a righttoleft shunt (e.g. a patent foramen 
ovale), endocarditis or a cardiac tumour.
Presenting problems 
Most strokes develop suddenly within a matter of minutes or hours, and 
are one of the differential diagnoses of patients with almost any acute 
focal neurological presentation.
Weakness 
In severe stroke, involvement of large areas of the cortex or smaller areas 
of the deep white matter in the cerebrum or brainstem leads to a hemi
paresis (see Fig. 28.17). Other patterns of weakness include: face only 
(usually an upper motor neuron pattern affecting the lower face only); 
face and arm; leg only (anterior cerebral artery involvement); hand only 
(often a clumsiness); or a quadraparesis (with brainstem stroke).
Speech disturbance 
Stroke can lead to a number of speech abnormalities. Cortical strokes 
(usually dominant frontal or parietal lobe) can cause dysphasia, with dif
culties understanding speech (a receptive dysphasia) or difculties pro
ducing grammatically correct speech (an expressive dysphasia). Stroke 
in the cortex, deep white matter, cerebellum or brainstem can lead to 
slurred speech (dysarthria). More rarely, isolated difculties with reading 
(alexia) or writing (agraphia) occur, but they are more usually associated 
with other symptoms (see Box 28.2).
Visual decit 
Occlusion of the ophthalmic artery by thrombus leads to sudden 
 blindness in one eye. If the blindness is transient, this is called ‘tran
sient monocular blindness’ or ‘amaurosis fugax’. These symptoms 
should lead to a similar search for risk factors and cause as stroke 
symptoms.
Stroke affecting the occipital lobe or optic tracts or radiation leads 
to a contralateral hemianopia or, in smaller lesions, a partial eld defect 
(see p. 1145).
Visuo-spatial dysfunction 
Damage to the nondominant cortex often results in contralateral 
visuospatial dysfunction, e.g. sensory or visual neglect and apraxia 
(inability to perform complex tasks despite normal motor, sensory and 
cerebellar function). Confusion or dysphasia after stroke are sometimes 
misdiagnosed as delirium.
Ataxia 
Stroke causing damage to the cerebellum and its connections can 
 present with an acute ataxia and there may be associated brainstem 
features such as diplopia and vertigo. The differential diagnosis includes 
vestibular disorders.

[[p1269]]
1206    STROKE MEDICINE
Sella turcica
Lesser wing of sphenoid bone
Sphenoparietal sinus
Cavernous sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Transverse sinus
Anterior clinoid process
Superior petrosal sinus
Inferior petrosal sinus
Sagittal sinus
Fig. 29.3 Veins of the brain. Adapted from Anatomy, imaging and surgery of the intracranial dural venous sinuses. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-65377-0.00017-9
A
B
Fig. 29.4 
(A, B) Courtesy of Prof. A. Farrell and Prof. J. Wardlaw.
Headache 
Sudden severe headache is the cardinal symptom of SAH but also occurs 
in intracerebral haemorrhage. Although headache is common in acute 
ischaemic stroke, it is rarely a dominant feature.. Headache also occurs in 
cerebral venous thrombosis and in giant cell arteritis. Migraine is a weak risk 
factor for stroke, and sometimes a stroke can precipitate a migraine attack.
Seizure 
Epileptic seizures are unusual in acute ischaemic stroke. Focal onset 
seizures can occur during stroke recovery, or during acute intracerebral 
haemorrhage or acute cerebral venous thrombosis (particularly of the 
cortical veins).
Coma 
If a stroke patient presents with coma, it is usually due to a large 
intracerebral haemorrhage or brainstem stroke. Cortical ischaemic 
stroke patients can become comatose if they develop space occupying 
cerebral oedema, or develop complications of stroke such as pneumonia 
(see Box 9.31).
Stroke 
Stroke is a common medical emergency. In the UK about 150 per 
100 000 people have a stroke each year. It is commoner with increasing 
age, greater poverty and with vascular risk factors (Box. 29.1).
Pathophysiology 
Cerebral infarction 
Cerebral infarction is usually due to atherothromboembolism. The source 
of embolism can be the heart, particularly when there is AF, or the rup
ture of large artery atherosclerosis and subsequent thromboembolism 

[[p1270]]
Stroke     1207
29
29.1  Risk factors for stroke
Fixed risk factors
 Age
 Sex (male > female)
 Previous vascular event:
Myocardial infarction
Stroke
Peripheral vascular disease
 Genetic mutations e.g.
Cerebral autosomal dominant 
arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy 
(CADASIL)
Sickle cell disease
Risk factors
 Blood pressure
 Cigarette smoking
 High LDL cholesterol
 Diabetes mellitus
 Atrial brillation
 Chronic kidney disease
 Excessive alcohol intake
 Oestrogen-containing drugs:
Oral contraceptive pill
Hormone replacement therapy
 Polycythaemia
 Drugs, e.g. cocaine
 Heart disease:
Congestive cardiac failure
Infective endocarditis
from carotid arteries, vertebral arteries and aortic arch. Intracranial ath
eroma can lead to in situ thrombosis. Occlusion of the small perforating 
lenticulostriate arteries in patients with sporadic or genetic small ves
sel diseases leads to ‘lacunar’ infarctions. Spontaneous cervical artery 
dissection is an important mechanism in younger people. Infarction can 
also be the result of low arterial ow, for example severe hypotension 
(sometimes intraoperative), vessel inammation in children or adults with 
vasculitis, or failure in energy production in mitochondrial disease.
After the occlusion of a cerebral artery, the supply of oxygen, glucose 
and other nutrients to tissue falls, and neuronal functions begin to fail. If 
there are adequate collateral vessels, these may dilate and restore normal 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 29.5 Different techniques for imaging blood vessels. 
(A–D) Courtesy of Dr D. Collie.
blood ow, or maintain a reduced blood ow that keeps tissue alive but 
not active. Cerebral tissue begins to die if there are inadequate collateral 
vessels, or the vessel is not reopened by endogenous thrombol ysis, 
thrombolytic medication or thrombectomy. The process of cell death leads 
to oedema of dying tissue, which can be lifethreatening if it expands to 
increase intracranial pressure. Although reopening blood vessels is of 
overall benet, restoration of blood supply can lead to a secondary injury 
which is most obvious clinically in haemorrhagic transformation of an 
infarct, which is not infrequent (~3%) after thrombolytic therapy,
If the patient survives the acute stages of infarction, healing begins 
with inammation to clear dying tissue, recovery of some neurons and 
reorganisation of some cerebral function to other brain areas.
Intracerebral haemorrhage 
The commonest cause of intracerebral haemorrhage is the rupture of 
small blood vessels. Small vessels can be damaged by hypertension, 
diabetes, amyloid deposition or genetic causes. Rupture of abnormalities 
of larger vessels such as arteriovenous or cavernous malformations, and 
sometimes intracranial aneurysms (which usually presents as SAH) can 
also lead to intracerebral haemorrhage (Fig. 29.6). Haemorrhage leads 
to harm by direct pressure of the haematoma which can continue to 
grow after presentation, mass effect from surrounding oedema, and 
inammation due to degrading blood products. Haemorrhage recovers 
with the resorption of blood products, resolution of oedema, healing of 
neurons and cerebral reorganisation (Box 29.2)
Clinical features 
Both acute stroke and transient ischaemic attack (TIA) are characterised 
by a rapidonset, focal decit of brain function. Symptoms can be transient 
(TIA) or persistent (stroke). The symptoms of a typical stroke progress 
over minutes, affect an identiable area of brain and are ‘negative’ (i.e. 
loss of function) (Box 29.3). If symptoms progress over hours or days, or 

[[p1271]]
1208    STROKE MEDICINE
29.3  Differential diagnosis of stroke and transient 
ischaemic attack
 Seizure, particularly focal
 Syncope if history is unclear
 Sepsis presenting with delirium
 Migraine with aura
 Brain tumours
 Functional neurological symptoms
 Neuropathies
 Vertigo due to labyrinthopathy
 Multiple sclerosis
 Subdural haematoma
 Demyelination
29.4  Characteristic features of stroke and non-stroke 
syndromes (‘stroke mimics’)
Feature
Stroke
Non-stroke
Symptom onset
Sudden (minutes)
Often slower onset
Symptom 
progression
Rapidly reaches 
maximum severity
Often gradual onset
Symptom type
Negative (e.g. 
weakness)
Positive (e.g. abnormal 
movements)
Pattern of decit
Hemispheric pattern
May be non-specic 
with delirium, 
memory loss, balance 
disturbance
Loss of 
consciousness
Uncommon
More common
A
B
Fig. 29.6 CT scans showing intracerebral haemorrhage. 
(A, B) Courtesy of 
Prof. A. Farrell and Prof. J. Wardlaw.
29.2  Risk factor and causes of intracerebral haemorrhage
Disease
Risk factors
Small-vessel disease with 
disruption of vessel wall
Age
Hypertension
Amyloid angiopathy
Familial (rare)
Age
Impaired blood clotting
Anticoagulant therapy
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombolytic therapy
Intracranial venous thrombosis
Vascular anomaly
Arteriovenous malformation
Cavernous haemangioma
Aneurysms
Substance misuse
Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cocaine
if signicant ‘positive’ features are present (e.g. spreading paraesthesiae, 
abnormal movements), other diagnoses are more likely (Box 29.3). 
Persistent or transient symptoms that cannot be localised to one brain 
area, e.g. syncope, amnesia, delirium and dizziness, are more likely to 
have causes other than TIA or stroke (see Fig. 9.4 and Box 29.4). It is 
important to remember that anxiety is common in people presenting with 
stroke or TIA, but also that people with functional neurological disorders 
can present with acute onset weakness or collapse (see Chapter 28).
The clinical syndrome of an ischaemic stroke depends on the arte
rial territory involved and the size of the lesion (see Fig. 29.1). These 
will both have a bearing on management, such as suitability for carotid 
endarterectomy. The presence of a unilateral motor decit, a higher cer
ebral function decit such as aphasia or neglect, or a visual eld defect 
usually places the lesion in the cerebral hemisphere. Ataxia, diplopia, 
vertigo or bilateral weakness usually indicates a lesion in the brainstem 
or cerebellum. Different combinations of these decits dene several 
ischaemic stroke syndromes (Fig. 29.7), which reect the site and size 
of the lesion and may provide clues to the underlying arterial occlusion.
Reduced conscious level usually indicates a largevolume lesion in 
the cerebral hemisphere but may result from a lesion in the brainstem 
or complications such as obstructive hydrocephalus, hypoxia or severe 
systemic infection (usually pneumonia). The combination of severe head
ache and vomiting at the onset of the focal decit is suggestive of intra
cerebral haemorrhage, although headache is also a feature of giant cell 
arteritis and arterial dissection.
The denitions of strokes and TIA, are:
 Transient ischaemic attack (TIA): a transient focal neurological dys
function caused by brain or retinal ischaemia with no evidence of 
infarction, where symptoms resolve within 24 hours.
 Cerebral ischaemic stroke: acute focal neurological dysfunction 
caused by focal infarction at single or multiple sites of brain or retina, 
with evidence of infarction either from neuroimaging or symptom 
duration longer than 24 hours.
 Intracerebral haemorrhage: acute focal neurological disturbance 
caused by haemorrhage within the brain parenchyma or ventricular 
system.
Investigations 
Investigation of suspected stroke aims to conrm the vascular nature 
of a lesion, distinguish infarction from haemorrhage and identify the 
underlying vascular disease and risk factors (Boxes 29.5 and 29.6).

[[p1272]]
Stroke     1209
29
Neuroimaging 
CT is the most widely available method of imaging the brain. It has 
reasonable sensitivity for some nonstroke lesions, such as subdural 
haematomas, subarachnoid haemorrhage and brain tumours, but not 
others, such as the changes of early multiple sclerosis. CT has a high 
sensitivity for acute intracranial haemorrhage (see Fig. 29.6). However, 
soon after symptom onset, CT changes in cerebral infarction may be 
absent, or very subtle. Signs of infarction develop over time but small 
cerebral infarcts may never show up on CT imaging. Immediate brain 
imaging is a help and sometimes essential (see Box 29.7).
Perfusion of brain tissue can be demonstrated with CT after injection 
of contrast media (i.e. CT perfusion scanning). After ischaemic stroke, 
this technique can identify areas of brain with low perfusion that might be 
reversed with thrombolysis or thrombectomy.
MRI scanning times are longer than CT, but MRI diffusion weighted 
imaging (DWI) can detect ischaemia earlier than CT. It may not show 
changes in up to a third of stroke patients (see Fig. 29.4). MRI is more 
sensitive than CT in detecting strokes affecting the brainstem and cer
ebellum, and, unlike CT, can reliably distinguish haemorrhagic from 
ischaemic stroke weeks after the onset. CT and MRI may reveal clues 
as to the nature of the arterial lesion. For example, there may be a small, 
deep lacunar infarct indicating smallvessel disease, or a more periph
eral infarct suggesting other causes (see Fig. 29.7). The location of an 
intracerebral haemorrhage might indicate the presence of an underlying 
vascular malformation, aneurysm or amyloid angiopathy.
A ‘positive scan’ is not needed to make a diagnosis of acute ischae
mic stroke. A typical stroke syndrome with a normal CT (or a CT with no 
acute changes of stroke) means that an ischaemic stroke is the likeliest 
diagnosis. This means clinical skills are very important in stroke diagnosis.
Combination of:
Hemiparesis
Higher cerebral dysfunction
(e.g. aphasia)
Hemisensory loss
Homonymous hemianopia
(damage to optic radiations)
Leg
Total anterior circulation
syndrome (TACS)
Clinical syndrome
Common symptoms
Common cause
CT scan features
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Face
Middle cerebral artery
occlusion
Embolism from heart
or major vessels
Isolated motor loss (e.g. leg only,
arm only, face)
Isolated higher cerebral
dysfunction (e.g. aphasia,
neglect)
Mixture of higher cerebral
dysfunction and motor loss
(e.g. aphasia with right
hemiparesis)
Leg
Partial anterior circulation
syndrome (PACS)
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Face
Occlusion of a branch
of the middle cerebral
artery or anterior
cerebral artery
Embolism from heart
or major vessels
Pure motor stroke – affects
two limbs
Pure sensory stroke
Sensory-motor stroke
No higher cerebral dysfunction
or hemianopia
Leg
Lacunar syndrome (LACS)
Posterior circulation
stroke (POCS)
(lateral view)
Arm
Higher
cerebral
functions
Visual cortex
Cerebellum
Cranial nerve
nuclei
Face
Thrombotic occlusion
of small perforating
arteries
Thrombosis in situ
Homonymous hemianopia
(damage to visual cortex)
Cerebellar syndrome
Cranial nerve syndromes
Occlusion in vertebral,
basilar or posterior
cerebral artery territory
Cardiac embolism or
thrombosis in situ
Fig. 29.7 Clinical and radiological features of the stroke syndromes. The top three diagrams show coronal sections of the brain and the bottom one shows a sagittal 
section. The anatomical locations of cerebral functions are shown with the nerve tracts in green. A motor (or sensory) decit (shown by the areas shaded red) can occur with 
damage to the relevant cortex (PACS), nerve tracts (LACS) or both (TACS). The corresponding CT scans show horizontal slices at the level of the lesion, highlighted by the arrows.

[[p1273]]
1210    STROKE MEDICINE
Vascular imaging 
It is important to identify carotid stenosis in patients with recent ischae
mic stroke or TIA. The presence or absence of a carotid bruit is not a 
reliable indicator of the degree of carotid stenosis. Carotid stenosis can 
be noninvasively identied with duplex ultrasound, magnetic resonance 
or computed tomography angiography (MRA or CTA) (see Fig. 29.5), or 
very occasionally with intraarterial contrast radiography. Although many 
patients have intracranial, vertebral artery or aortic arch atherosclero
sis, at the time of writing there are no evidencedbased interventions for 
these lesions. In patients with spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage, 
imaging (MRA, CTA or CT venogaphy (CTV)) may identify an underlying 
macrovascular cause, e.g intracranial aneurysm, arteriovenous malfor
mation (AVM), or venous sinus thrombosis (see Fig. 29.5). CTA is an 
important technique to demonstrate large artery occlusion to identify 
patients who are suitable for thrombectomy.
Cardiac investigations 
Approximately 20% of ischaemic strokes are due to embolism from the 
heart. The most common cause is atrial brillation, but prosthetic heart 
valves, endocarditis, other valve abnormalities and recent myocardial 
infarction may also lead to cardioembolism.
Atrial brillation can be identied on a 12lead ECG, or more prolonged 
ECG recording with devices that can record between a few days and 
many months. A transthoracic or transoesophageal echocardiogram in 
selected stroke patients can identify endocarditis, atrial myxoma, intra
cardiac thrombus or patent foramen ovale (PFO). A PFO is a righttoleft 
cardiac shunt that is usually asymptomatic but can act as a conduit for 
thrombi from the venous system.
Blood tests 
Blood tests can identify high fasting glucose levels, anaemia, electrolyte 
disturbances or evidence of an inammatory response (e.g. in temporal 
29.6  Causes and investigation of unusual causes of stroke
Cause
Investigation
Cerebral infarct
Patent foramen ovale
Echocardiography with bubble 
contrast (including transoesophageal)
Premature atherosclerosis
Serum lipids
Arterial dissection
Non-invasive cervical angiography
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction 
syndromes
Non-invasive cerebral angiography
Thrombophilia
Protein C, protein S
Antithrombin III
Factor V Leiden, prothrombin
Homocystinuria
Urinary amino acids
Methionine loading test
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Anticardiolipin antibodies/lupus 
anticoagulant
Systemic lupus erythematosus
ANA
Vasculitis
ESR
CRP
ANCA
CADASIL
CARASIL
Genetic analysis
Mitochondrial cytopathy
Serum lactate
mitochondrial genetics
Muscle biopsy
Fabry's disease
Alpha-galactosidase levels
Sickle cell disease
Sickle cell studies
Neurovascular syphilis
Syphilis serology
HIV
HIV serology
Infective endocarditis
Blood cultures, echocardiography
Intracerebral haemorrhage
AVM
Non-invasive cerebral angiography
Drug misuse
Drug screen (amphetamine, cocaine)
Coagulopathy
PT and APTT
Platelet count
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Saccular (‘berry’) aneurysm
Vertebral dissection
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; ANCA = antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; APTT = activated 
partial thromboplastin time; AVM = arteriovenous malformation; CADASIL/CARASIL = cerebral 
autosomal dominant/recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; 
CRP = C-reactive protein; CTA = computed tomographic angiography; ESR = erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging; PT = prothrombin time)
29.7  Indications for immediate brain imaging in acute stroke
 Patient on anticoagulants or with abnormal coagulation
 Suitable for reperfusion (thrombolysis)
 Deteriorating conscious level or rapidly progressing decits
 Suspected cerebellar haematoma, to exclude hydrocephalus
29.5 Investigation of a patient with an acute stroke: all of 
these are not necessary in all patients, and should be targeted 
depending on clinical syndrome and suitability for intervention
Diagnostic question
Investigation
Is it a vascular lesion?
Brain imaging
Is it ischaemic or haemorrhagic?
Brain imaging
Is it a subarachnoid haemorrhage?
CT/lumbar puncture
Is there any cardiac source of 
embolism?
ECG
Prolonged ECG monitoring
Echocardiogram
What is the underlying vascular 
disease, where intervention is 
indicated?
Ultrasound of carotids with Doppler
MRA
CTA
Contrast angiography
What are the risk factors for 
stroke?
Full blood count
Cholesterol
Blood glucose
Blood pressure
Is there an unusual cause?
ESR
Serum protein electrophoresis
Clotting/thrombophilia screen
HIV/syphilis serology
(CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomographic angiography; ECG = 
electrocardiogram; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; MRA = magnetic resonance 
angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)
arteritis or vasculitis). Clotting abnormalities are a rare cause of ischaemic 
or haemorrhagic stroke, and tests for thrombophilia or haemophilia without 
other clinical pointers rarely lead to a change in management. However, in 
selected patients (for example those with both venous and arterial events) 
tests for inherited thrombophilia or antiphospholipid antibodies may be 
helpful. Intracranial haemorrhage is frequently due to prescribed anticoag
ulants (direct oral anticoagulants or coumarins like warfarin) and monitoring 
may be important when reversing the effect of these agents.

[[p1274]]
Stroke     1211
29
Management 
Management (Fig. 29.8) is aimed at identifying the cause, minimising the 
volume of brain that is irreversibly damaged, preventing complications 
(Fig. 29.9), reducing the patient's disability and handicap through rehabil
itation, and reducing the risk of recurrent stroke or other vascular events. 
With TIA there is no major persisting brain damage and disability, so the 
priority is to reduce the risk of stroke.
Reperfusion (thrombolysis and thrombectomy) 
Rapid reperfusion in ischaemic stroke can reduce the extent of brain 
damage.
Intravenous thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator 
(alteplase) improves recovery if given within 4.5 hours of symptom onset to 
carefully selected patients. The main contraindications to thrombolysis are 
a high bleeding risk (recent haemorrhage, anticoagulant therapy, recent 
surgery or trauma at a noncompressible site) and delay to treatment: the 
earlier treatment is given, the greater the benet (Fig. 29.10).
Intravenous thrombolysis fails to reperfuse the brain in up to 30% 
of patients presenting with a largevessel occlusion. Mechanical clot 
retrieval (thrombectomy) performed up to 6 hours after onset of symp
toms can greatly improve the chances of avoiding disability in these 
patients (see Fig. 29.8 and Fig. 29.11). Treatment of patients presenting 
later, or where symptoms onset is unknown (e.g. waking from sleep), is 
possible if there is evidence of ‘salvageable’ tissue with brain imaging.
Supportive care 
Rapid admission of patients to a specialised stroke unit facilitates coor
dinated care from a multidisciplinary team and reduces mortality and 
disability amongst survivors. For every 1000 patients managed in a 
stroke unit, an extra 50 will avoid death or longterm disability, com
pared to those managed in nonspecialist wards. Rehabilitation should 
begin at the same time as acute medical management. Dysphagia is 
common and can be detected by an early bedside test of swallowing. 
This allows hydration, feeding and medication to be given safely, if nec
essary by nasogastric tube. In the acute phase, a checklist may be useful 
(Box29.8) to ensure that all the factors that might inuence outcome 
have been addressed.
Neurological decits may worsen during the rst few hours or days 
after their onset. This may be due to further infarction, haemorrhagic 
transformation of infarction (most commonly after thrombolysis), or the 
development of oedema with consequent mass effect. It is important to 
distinguish these patients from those who are deteriorating as a result of 
complications such as hypoxia, sepsis, epileptic seizures or metabolic 
abnormalities that may be reversed more easily. Patients with cerebellar 
haematomas or infarcts with mass effect may develop obstructive hydro
cephalus and some will benet from insertion of a ventricular drain or 
decompressive surgery. Some patients with large haematomas or infarc
tion with massive oedema in the cerebral hemispheres may benet from 
antioedema agents, such as mannitol, or articial ventilation. Surgical 
decompression with hemicraniectomy to reduce intracranial pressure 
should be considered in patients where survival with severe disability is 
acceptable and surgery is possible within 48 hours.
Antiplatelet agents 
In the absence of contraindications, aspirin (300 mg daily) should be 
started immediately after a major ischaemic stroke unless thrombolysis 
has been given, in which case it should be withheld for at least 24 hours. 
Aspirin reduces the risk of early ischaemic stroke recurrence and has 
a small but clinically worthwhile effect on disability (see Fig. 29.8 and 
Fig. 29.12); it may be given by rectal suppository or by nasogastric tube 
in dysphagic patients. In minor ischaemic stroke or TIA, two antiplatelet 
agents (for example clopidogrel and aspirin) for a few weeks reduce the 
risk of early recurrent stroke.
Considerations specic to use of anticoagulants in old age are given 
in Box 29.9
Coagulation abnormalities 
In patients with intracerebral haemorrhage, coagulation abnormalities 
should be reversed as quickly as possible to reduce haematoma expan
sion. This is a problem in patients taking anticoagulant therapy. There is 
no evidence that clotting factors are useful in the absence of a clotting 
defect.
Blood pressure 
Early reduction of blood pressure (<180 mmHg) reduces haematoma 
expansion and may improve the overall outcome in patients with acute 
intracerebral haemorrhage. Blood pressure lowering in acute ischaemic 
stroke does not improve later disability, but reduces intracranial haemor
rhage after thrombolysis.
However, reducing blood pressure is very important in the longer term 
to reduce the risk of recurrent stroke.
Management of risk factors 
The approaches used are summarised in Fig. 29.12. The average risk of 
a further stroke is 5%–10% within the rst week of an ischaemic stroke or 
TIA, 15% over the rst year (including the early period) and 5% per year 
thereafter. Patients with ischaemic stroke or TIA should be offered long
term antiplatelet drugs and statins to lower low density lipoprotein chol
esterol (LDLC). For patients in atrial brillation, the risk can be reduced 
substantially with oral anticoagulation with direct oral anticoagulants or 
warfarin (in selected patients, see Box 29.9). The risk of recurrence after 
Haemorrhagic stroke
Neuroimaging
Ischaemic stroke
Reverse coagulation
abnormality
Eligible for urgent
reperfusion therapy?
Yes (20%)
No (80%)
Aspirin
(NNT 80)
Lower BP
(<140 mmHg)
Intravenous thrombolysis
(NNT 9–20)* and/or
Mechanical thrombectomy
(NNT 8–10)*
Acute stroke unit care (NNT 20)
Identify cause and plan secondary prevention
Clinical diagnosis of stroke
(Box 29.4)
Fig. 29.8 Emergency management of stroke. *Varies with patient selection and 
delay in treatment. (BP = blood pressure; NNT = number needed to treat to avoid 
one death or long-term disability)

[[p1275]]
1212    STROKE MEDICINE
Nurse semi-erect
Avoid aspiration (nil by mouth,
nasogastric tube, possible
gastrostomy)
Complications
Prevention
Treatment
Epileptic seizures
Anticonvulsants
Depression and
anxiety
Be alert for mood disturbance
Explain the process of recovery
Antidepressants and talking therapies
(e.g. cognitive behavioural therapy)
Painful shoulder
Avoid traction injury
Shoulder/arm supports
Physiotherapy
Physiotherapy
Local glucocorticoid
injections
Chest infection
Antibiotics
Physiotherapy
Appropriate aperients and diet
Maintain hydration
Constipation
Appropriate aperients
Avoid catheterisation if possible
Urinary infection
Antibiotics
Frequent turning
Monitor pressure areas
Avoid urine damage to skin
Pressure sores
Nursing care
Pressure-relieving mattress
Maintain hydration
Early mobilisation
Pneumatic compression stockings
Heparin (for high-risk patients only)
Deep vein thrombosis/
pulmonary embolism
Anticoagulation
Maintain normal posture (support weak
limbs and reposition regularly)
Avoid triggers (pain, infection, bowels)
Spasticity and
contractures
Physiotherapy
Orthotics (e.g. splints)
Baclofen, local botox injections
Fig. 29.9 Complications of acute stroke.
1.0
0
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Treatment delay (h)
Odds ratio (95% CI) for good or excellent 
recovery with alteplase
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
Fig. 29.10 Effect of timing of alteplase treatment on recovery from stroke.
The solid blue line shows how the estimated recovery for patients given altepase 
(compared with patients given control treatment) falls as the delay to treatment 
increases. The black box (at 5 hours) shows the point at which treatment with 
alteplase is no more effective than control (the lower 95% condence interval for the 
estimated treatment effect rst crosses 1.0 at this point). From Emberson J et al. The 
Lancet 2014; 384:1929–1935.
both ischaemic and haemorrhagic strokes can be reduced by blood 
pressure reduction, even for those with relatively ‘normal’ blood pres
sures. Patients should stop smoking. The evidence for change in diet 
or increasing exercise is weaker, but it is probable these interventions 
reduce recurrent stroke.
Carotid endarterectomy and arterial angioplasty 
Some patients with a carotid territory ischaemic stroke or TIA have >50% 
stenosis of the carotid artery on the side of the brain lesion. These patients 
have a greater than average risk of stroke recurrence. For those without 
major residual disability, removal of the stenosis by carotid endarterectomy 
reduces the risk of recurrent stroke although the operation itself carries 
about a 3%–4% stroke risk, depending on the surgical centre. Surgery is 
most effective in patients with more severe stenoses (70%–99%) and when 
it is performed within the rst couple of weeks after the TIA or ischaemic 
stroke. Carotid angioplasty and stenting are technically feasible but have 
not been shown to be as effective as endarterectomy for the majority of eli
gible patients. Endarterectomy of asymptomatic carotid stenosis reduces 
stroke risk. but it has a smaller absolute benet. Whilst stenting of other 
arteries (vertebral or intracranial) could reduce stroke incidence, at present 
there is no evidence to support their use in clinical practice.
Rehabilitation 
Stroke survivors are often disabled by reduced mobility or upper limb 
weakness, impaired communication, cognitive impairment, dyspraxia, 
poor coordination, or visual impairment. Around a third of patients 
develop dementia after stroke. A minority have persistent dysphagia and 
some need longterm enteral feeding with a gastrostomy tube. Other 
longterm stroke complications include neuropathic pain (particularly 
common after thalamic stroke), limb spasticity, shoulder pain, epilepsy, 
incontinence, fatigue and anxiety or depression.
The purpose of rehabilitation is to maximise functional recovery and 
prevent complications. The speed and degree of recovery varies between 
individuals. Severe strokes (total anterior circulation syndrome or NIHSS 
score >15) are more likely to cause severe disability and loss of independ
ent living. Other predictors of poor recovery are older age, preexisting 
disability, multimorbidity and preexisting cognitive impairment.
The goals set during rehabilitation should be achievable, and reached 
by discussion between the patient and a multidisciplinary team on a ded
icated stroke unit, including doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, speech 
and language therapists, occupational therapists, psychologists and 
 dieticians. Supportive family and social networks are important.

[[p1276]]
Stroke     1213
29
There are three main phases of recovery. Early recovery (rst few days) 
is due to resolution of cerebral oedema and cerebral reperfusion. The 
second phase – ‘neuroplasticity’ – is when new areas of brain take over 
from damaged areas of brain. This ‘rewiring’ can occur for a year or even 
later after stroke but most happens within the rst few months. Intensive 
rehabilitation should begin as early as possible after the rst 24 hours, 
because very early mobilisation (<24 hr) may be harmful. Repetitive prac
tice of lost skills has been shown to increase neuroplasticity. The third 
phase is adaptive recovery. In this period the patient may learn new strat
egies to live with their disability and provision can be made for mobility 
aids, communication aids, or adaptations to the home. Intense therapy 
in the longer term may be benecial to some patients and is an area of 
active research.
It is important not to underestimate the longterm emotional and nan
cial impacts of stroke. Many stroke survivors face an initial loss of identity, 
loss of income and relationship strain. It is common for stroke survivors 
to feel fear, anxiety, frustration, anger, sadness and a sense of grief over 
physical and mental losses. Stroke survivors hoping to return to educa
tion or work need specialist vocational support.
Barriers to effective rehabilitation include physical illness: post
stroke pneumonia or delirium, which can delay rehabilitation sessions; 
preexisting cognitive impairment or physical frailty; poor motivation 
and apathy (common in nondominant hemisphere strokes); fatigue; 
depression; or pain. When improvements in lost function slow down the 
focus of therapy shifts to adaptive recovery. Milestones can be used to 
discuss rehabilitation goals with patients and their carers and to set out 
realistic expectations for recovery. Physical milestones include sitting 
balance (e.g. 1 minute unsupported sit), followed by standing balance 
(e.g. 1 minute), followed by stepping (e.g. 10 steps on the spot) and 
then walking (e.g. 10 metres).
A
B
C
D
ACA
MCA
 BA
ICA
VA
Fig. 29.11 Imaging of major arteries in ischaemic stroke. 
MR angiography showing normal circle of Willis in the frontal plane. (ACA = anterior cerebral artery; BA = basilar artery; ICA = internal carotid artery; MCA = middle 
cerebral artery; VA = vertebral artery). (A, B) From Li Q, Davis S, Mitchell P, Dowling R, Yan B. PLoS ONE 2014; 9:e96123; (C) from Campbell BCV, Khatri P. The Lancet 2020; 
396:10244; (D) from Aminoff MJ, Daroff RB (eds). Encyclopedia of the neurological sciences. New York: Academic Press; 2003.

[[p1277]]
1214    STROKE MEDICINE
29.8  How to manage a patient with acute stroke
Airway
 Perform bedside swallowing screen and consider nasogastric tube for feeding if 
swallowing is unsafe
Breathing
 Check respiratory rate
Circulation
 Check peripheral perfusion, pulse and blood pressure
Hydration
 If signs of dehydration, give uids parenterally or by nasogastric tube
Nutrition
 Assess nutritional status and provide supplements if needed
 If unable to swallow, consider feeding via nasogastric tube
Medication
 If dysphagic, consider other routes for essential medications
Blood pressure
 Haemorrhagic stroke: consider lowering systolic blood pressure to 
130 140 mmHg and maintain this blood pressure for at least 7 days
 Ischaemic stroke: unless there is heart or renal failure, evidence of hypertensive 
encephalopathy or aortic dissection, do not lower blood pressure abruptly
 Check blood glucose and treat if diabetes is diagnosed
 Avoid hypoglycaemia
Temperature
 If pyrexial, investigate and treat underlying cause
 Control temperature with antipyretics
Pressure areas
 Reduce risk of skin breakdown:
Treat infection
Maintain nutrition
Provide pressure-relieving mattress
Turn immobile patients regularly
Incontinence
 Check for constipation and urinary retention; treat these appropriately
 Avoid urinary catheterisation unless patient is in acute urinary retention or 
incontinence is threatening pressure areas
Prevention of deep vein thrombosis
 Consider intermittent pneumatic compression stockings in immobile patients
Mobilisation
 Avoid bed rest after the rst 24 hours
Research in technologies to assist stroke rehabilitation is ongoing, 
including transcranial direct current stimulation and vagal stimulators 
for motor recovery and mirror therapy for limb pain and visuospatial 
neglect.
Causes of ischaemic stroke 
Large artery atherosclerosis, small vessel disease and cardioembolism 
from AF are the commonest causes of ischaemic stroke. Carotid or vert
ebral artery dissection occasionally leads to stroke . The presenting hist
ory often includes minor injury and face or neck pain. After conrmation on 
angiography (MRA or CTA), treatment is with either antiplatelet drugs or 
anticoagulation, (the latter are more effective). The cause of dissection 
is unknown in most cases, but collagen disorders, e.g. Ehlers−Danlos 
syndrome (type 4), are occasionally responsible.
Giant cell arteritis, a vasculitis of large and mediumsized blood 
vessels, may present with transient monocular blindness, usually with 
head tenderness, shoulder pain or jaw claudication on chewing. It is 
important to identify because blindness can be prevented with steroids. 
Other large artery vasculitis can very rarely present with stroke.
Causes of intracerebral haemorrhage 
Most intracerebral haemorrhages result from disease of the small cer
ebral blood vessels, either due to sporadic small vessel disease or 
amyloid angiopathy. Anticoagulants, given for AF or metal prosthetic 
heart valves, increase the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage but almost 
always to a smaller degree than their reduction in the risk of ischaemic 
stroke.
Arteriovenous or cavernous malformations (‘cavernomas’) are more 
commonly discovered after intracerebral haemorrhage in younger peo
ple. To reduce the risk of further haemorrhage, it is possible to treat some 
of these malformations with surgery or radiosurgery. Arteriovenous mal
formation can be treated by surgical removal, by ligation of the blood 
vessels that feed or drain the lesion, or most often by radiological injec
tion of material to occlude the stula or draining veins. However, treat
ment of these malformations when they are asymptomatic probably 
leads to more harm than benet.
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) (see Fig. 29.1) affects about 6 per 
100 000 of the population per year. SAH is more common in women, 
in older people and in those with a family history, or vascular risk fac
tors (particularly smoking and hypertension). About 30% of patients 
with an aneurysmal SAH die within a month of their bleed; untreated 
survivors have a recurrence (or rebleed) rate of about 40% in the rst 
4 weeks.
Most (85%) SAHs are due to saccular or ‘berry’ aneurysms at bifur
cations of cerebral arteries (see Fig. 29.2), particularly in the circle 
of Willis. The most common sites are in the anterior communicating 
artery (30%), posterior communicating artery (25%) and middle cere
bral artery (20%). There is an increased risk in rstdegree relatives of 
those with saccular aneurysms, in patients with polycystic kidney dis
ease and congenital connective tissue disorders such as Ehlers–Danlos 
syndrome. A minority of SAHs are not associated with aneurysms – the 
clinical syndrome of ‘perimesencephalic haemorrhage’, which have a 
characteristic appearance on CT and a benign prognosis. Small cor
tical surface SAH is thought to be due to amyloid angiopathy. Around 
5% of SAHs are due to arteriovenous malformations or vertebral artery 
dissection.
Clinical features 
SAH usually presents with a sudden, severe, ‘thunderclap’ headache, 
which is usually persistent, often accompanied by vomiting, raised 
blood pressure and neck stiffness or pain. It can occur spontaneously, 
on physical exertion, straining or during sex. There may be loss of con
sciousness so SAH should be considered if a patient is found coma
tose. About 1 patient in 8 with a sudden severe headache has SAH 
and, in view of this, all who present in this way require investigation to 
exclude it (Fig. 29.13).
On examination, the patient may be distressed, in pain, with pho
tophobia. There may be neck stiffness due to subarachnoid blood, 
but this may take some hours to develop. Focal hemisphere signs, 
such as hemiparesis or aphasia, may be present at onset if there is 
an associated intracerebral haematoma. A third nerve palsy may be 
present due to local pressure from an aneurysm of the posterior com
municating artery, and patients presenting with a painful third nerve 
palsy should be investigated urgently for the presence of an expanding 
aneurysm. Fundoscopy may reveal a subhyaloid haemorrhage, which 
represents blood tracking along the subarachnoid space around the 
optic nerve.

[[p1278]]
Subarachnoid haemorrhage     1215
29
Sinus rhythm
Antiplatelet drugs4
 Aspirin 300 mg at once
    then 75 mg daily
 Clopidogrel 75 mg daily
    is effective alternative
Lower cholesterol2
with high intensity
statin after
checking liver
function tests
Anticoagulation3
 if no contraindications.
Direct oral anticoagulants
(DOACs)
Warfarin with target INR 2–3
(or 3.5 if mechanical
prosthetic valve). 
Consider
 Rate control
 Anti-arrhythmic
Carotid
endarterectomy
Refer if > 50%
stenosis on
symptomatic side
Request prolonged ECG
monitoring if cortical
TIAs/stroke
Carotid duplex
Lower BP1
if BP > 130/70 mmHg
1–2 weeks after onset
 Thiazide diuretic
 ACE inhibitor
    (check U & Es)
 Other agents
Lifestyle 
 Smoking cessation
 Lower salt intake
 Lower fat intake
 Lower excess
   alcohol intake
 Increase exercise
 Lose excess weight
Haemorrhagic
Sinus rhythm
If contraindications
to anticoagulation,
e.g. bleeding, falls,
binge drinking,
poor compliance
Thyroid function tests
and
echocardiogram
Atrial fibrillation/
paroxysmal AF
ECG
Ischaemic
Single
typical TIA
Stroke
CT brain scan
or MRI
Fig. 29.12 Strategies for secondary prevention of stroke. 1Lower blood pressure with caution in patients with postural hypotension, renal impairment or severe bilateral 
carotid stenosis. 2Other statins can be used as an alternative to simvastatin in patients on warfarin or digoxin. 3Warfarin and aspirin have been used in combination in patients 
with prosthetic heart valves. 4The combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is indicated short term (≤ 21 days) in patients with high-risk TIA (ABCD2 score > 4) or mild stroke 
(NIHSS <3) and low bleeding risk. Afterwards these patients should continue either aspirin or clopidogrel long term. (ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; AF = atrial 
brillation; BP = blood pressure; CT = computed tomography; ECG = electrocardiogram; INR = International Normalised Ratio; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; 
TIA = transient ischaemic attack; U&Es = urea and electrolytes)
29.9  Anticoagulation in old age
 Randomised trials of anticoagulation versus aspirin in older people with atrial 
brillation demonstrate a halving of the risk of stroke from about 4% to about 
2% per year. Any increased risk of bleeding is much smaller.
 AF and increased risk of stroke: older age and previous stroke increase 
the risk of stroke in the presence of atrial brillation, and bleeding risk with 
anticoagulation.
 Falls risk: older patients are more prone to falls, including head injuries, which 
may increase bleeding risk.
Emergency CT
Traumatic lumbar
punctures
do not cause
xanthochromia in
that specimen
Negative
(<10% of subarachnoid
haemorrhage)
Shows
subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Blood/xanthochromia
CSF
(after
12 hours)
If CT and CSF at
12 hours are negative
the patient has not
had a subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Refer to
neurosurgeons
Resuscitate
Nimodipine 60 mg
Fig. 29.13 Investigation of subarachnoid haemorrhage. (CSF = cerebrospinal 
uid; CT = computed tomography)
Investigations
The diagnosis of SAH can usually be made by a timely CT read by an 
expert radiologist but a negative result does not completely exclude it, 
since small amounts of blood in the subarachnoid space may not be 
detected by CT, especially if the presentation is delayed by more than 
a day (see Fig. 29.13). Lumbar puncture should be performed 12 hours 
after symptom onset if possible, to allow detection of xanthochromia. If 
either of these tests is positive, CT or digital subtraction cerebral angiog
raphy (see Fig. 29.5) is needed to identify an aneurysm.

[[p1279]]
1216    STROKE MEDICINE
Management 
Nimodipine is given to prevent delayed cerebral ischaemia in the acute 
phase. Insertion of platinum coils into an aneurysm (via an endovascular 
procedure) or surgical clipping of the aneurysm neck reduces the risk 
of both early and late recurrent SAH. Coiling is associated with fewer 
perioperative complications and better outcomes than surgical clipping: 
where feasible, it is now the procedure of rst choice. Treatment may 
also be needed for complications of SAH, which include obstructive 
hydrocephalus (that may require drainage via a shunt), delayed cerebral 
ischaemia due to vasospasm (which may be treated with vasodilators), 
hyponatraemia (best managed by uid restriction) and systemic compli
cations associated with immobility, such as chest infection and venous 
thrombosis.
Rehabilitation 
The pattern of recovery after subarachnoid haemorrhage is different to 
ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke, perhaps due to a more widespread 
brain injury. Even those who make a good physical recovery from a mild 
SAH often have problems with headache, thinking, fatigue and change 
in personality. Physical disabilities due to hemiparesis, arm or leg weak
ness or incoordination may relate to ischaemic or haemorrhagic lesions 
following aneurysm rupture.
Cerebral venous disease 
Thrombosis of the cerebral veins and venous sinuses (cerebral venous 
thrombosis) is much less common than arterial thrombosis. The main 
causes are listed in Box 29.10. It may be idiopathic, associated with 
pregnancy, infection of the cranial sinuses, severe dehydration, or due to 
other acquired or inherited thrombophilias.
Clinical features 
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis usually presents with symptoms 
of raised intracranial pressure, seizures and focal neurological symp
toms. The clinical features vary according to the sinus involved (Box 
29.11 and see Fig. 29.3). Cortical vein thrombosis presents with focal 
cortical decits such as aphasia and hemiparesis (depending on the 
area affected), and epilepsy (focal or generalised). Occlusion of the larger 
veins may present with severe illness, but also with a milder illness of 
headache and papilloedema.
Investigations and management 
MR venography demonstrates a lling defect in the affected vessel. 
Anticoagulation, initially with heparin followed by warfarin, is benecial, 
even in the presence of venous haemorrhage. In selected patients, endo
vascular thrombolysis has been advocated. Management of underlying 
causes and complications, such as persistently raised intracranial pres
sure, is important.
29.10 Causes of cerebral venous thrombosis
Predisposing systemic causes
 Dehydration
 Pregnancy
 Behçet's disease
 Thrombophilia
 Hypotension
 Oral contraceptive use
Local causes
 Paranasal sinusitis
 Meningitis, subdural empyema
 Penetrating head and eye wounds
 Facial skin infection
 Otitis media, mastoiditis
 Skull fracture
29.11 Clinical features of cerebral venous thrombosis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
 Proptosis, ptosis, headache, external and internal ophthalmoplegia, 
papilloedema, reduced sensation in trigeminal rst division
 Often bilateral, patient ill and febrile
Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
 Headache, papilloedema, seizures
 Clinical features may resemble idiopathic intracranial hypertension (p. 1186)
 May involve veins of both hemispheres, causing motor and sensory focal 
decits
Transverse sinus thrombosis
 Hemiparesis, seizures, papilloedema
 May spread to jugular foramen and involve cranial nerves 9, 10 and 11
Further information 
Websites 
esostroke.org European Stroke Organisation guidelines.
nhs.uk/conditions/stroke/symptoms NHS website, includes the FAST (face, arms, 
speech, time) acronym used to raise public awareness of the emergency 
nature of stroke.
nice.org.uk/guidance National Institute for Health and Care Excellence CG180 
‘Tools and resources’ includes a patient decision aid – Atrial brillation: 
medicines to help reduce your risk of a stroke – what are the options?
stroke.cochrane.org Systematic reviews of stroke treatments.
chsselearning.org.uk STARs ‒ Stroke Training and Awareness Resources.
mdcalc.com/ Useful calculators for stroke and other disorders.
ed.ac.uk/clinicalsciences/edinburghimaging/educationteaching/shortcourses/
trainingtools/acutecerebralctevaluationstrokestudyaccess How to read a 
CT brain scan in acute stroke.

[[p1280]]
Multiple Choice Questions 
 29.1.  A 75yearold woman presents with a transient episode of right 
facial weakness, right hand weakness and dysarthria, witnessed 
by her daughter. At her clinic appointment she has a blood 
pressure of 175/95 mmHg. Which area of the brain is likely to 
have been involved in her symptoms?
 
A. Right parietal lobe
 
B. Left occipital lobe
 
C. Brainstem
 
D. Left frontal lobe
 
E. All of the above
Answer: D.
The right face and hand weakness makes involvement of the con
tralateral motor cortex, in the precentral gyrus of frontal lobe, most likely.
 29.2.  In the same patient, stenosis of a cervical artery is found on a 
CT angiogram of her neck vessels. Which stenosis or stenoses 
would be an indication for surgical intervention?
 
A. Left internal carotid stenosis
 
B. Right carotid stenosis
 
C. Left vertebral artery stenosis
 
D. Left subclavian stenosis
 
E. Left external carotid stenosis
Answer: A.
Left internal carotid stenosis: stenoses of the other arteries indicates 
large vessel atheroma, but none would be expected to lead to a left 
hemisphere transient ischaemic attack.
 29.3.  For the same patient, a left carotid endartertomy is planned. 
Which of the following treatments should be considered (choose 
all that apply)?
 
A. Carotid endarterectomy only
 
B. Blood pressure lowering
 
C. LDL cholesterol lowering
 
D. Antiplatelet agent
 
E. Anticoagulant
Answer: B, C, D.
Blood pressure lowering, LDL cholesterol lowering and an antiplatelet 
are all indicated here in addition to carotid endarterectomy. An anticoag
ulant is only indicated if atrial brillation is identied.
 29.4.  A 54yearold man has a sudden onset of a severe left 
hemiparesis and left facial weakness. He has no pain. He is 
inattentive to his left side. He has atrial brillation. He arrives 
at the Emergency Department 1 hour after the onset of the 
symptoms. Which are the best differential diagnoses (choose all 
that apply)?
 
A. Ischaemic stroke
 
B. Intracerebral haemorrhage
 
C. Subarachnoid haemorrhage
 
D. Transient ischaemic attack
 
E. Brain tumour
Answer: A. B.
This man has presented with an acute focal neurological decit that is 
severe at 3 hours. This is unlikely to be due to a TIA, and a subarachnoid 
haemorrhage usually presents with headache or, when severe, coma. 
Rarely a bleed from a ruptured aneurysm can be predominantly paren
chymal with little subarachnoid blood. The sudden onset of symptoms 
makes a brain tumour unlikely. Both an intracerebral haemorrhage and 
an ischaemic stroke present with a stroke syndrome.
 29.5.  In the same patient, a CT of the brain is performed within  
30 minutes of his arrival to the Emergency Department, and 
this CT head is normal at rst review. Which of the following 
statements best describes the situation?
 
A.  An ischaemic stroke is the likeliest diagnosis and thromboly
sis is appropriate
 
B.  An ischaemic stroke is the likeliest diagnosis and thromboly
sis is not appropriate
 
C.  Multiple sclerosis is the likeliest diagnosis and steroids are 
most appropriate
 
D. Immediate thrombectomy is the next best step
 
E. Intravenous heparin is appropriate
Answer: A.
A normal CT scan does not preclude a diagnosis of ischaemic 
stroke, which is the most likely diagnosis here. Because this is the 
case, thrombolysis is the most important action; thrombectomy is also 
likely to be indicated, but would need the identication of an occluded 
artery with an angiogram. A sudden onset of severe cortical symptoms 
is not a common presentation of multiple sclerosis. Intravenous hepa
rins do not improve recovery in acute ischaemic stroke, even with atrial 
brillation.

[[p1281]]
Medical ophthalmology
30
JA Olson
Functional anatomy and physiology 1218
Investigation of visual disorders 1222
Perimetry 1222
Imaging 1222
Visual electrophysiology 1223
Presenting problems in ophthalmic disease 1223
Watery/dry eye 1223
Pruritus 1223
Pain/headache 1223
Photophobia/glare 1224
Photopsia 1224
Blurred vision 1224
Loss of vision  1224
Distortion of vision 1225
Eyelid retraction 1225
Optic disc swelling and papilloedema 1226
Proptosis 1226
Optic atrophy 1226
Specialist ophthalmological conditions 1226
Ocular inammation 1226
Infectious conditions 1228
Cataract 1229
Diabetic eye disease 1230
Retinal vascular occlusion 1232
Age-related macular degeneration 1233

[[p1282]]
1218    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
The ability to see is an important aspect of everyday life. Although rarely 
a cause of mortality, visual impairment can have a profoundly negative 
impact on socioeconomic status.
Globally, although refractive errors and cataract remain the main 
causes of visual impairment, signicant progress has occurred in pre-
vention and treatment. Public health measures have reduced diseases 
of poor hygiene and unclean water, such as trachoma and onchocercia-
sis, and greater access to surgery has reduced the burden of untreated 
cataract and glaucoma. However, conditions associated with longevity, 
such as age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and ret-
inal vein occlusion, are increasing.
Traditionally, ophthalmology relied on other specialties to under-
take extraocular investigation and treatment. Medical ophthalmology 
bypasses that co-dependence, allowing patients with visual disorders 
to receive overarching care within ophthalmology. As such, it requires 
a good grounding in medicine and many of its sub-specialties. Medical 
ophthalmology presents a challenge for a medical textbook as it over-
laps with almost all other specialties, but particularly neurology. In this 
book neuro-ophthalmology is mainly covered in Chapter 28. This chapter 
concentrates on intraocular inammation, which was the prime drive to 
create the specialty, and conditions that require intravitreal injection ther-
apy. It does not therefore represent the totality of the medical ophthal-
mologist’s workload.
Ophthalmological conditions that are usually managed within non- 
ophthalmological specialties are discussed in the corresponding 
chapters, although for ease of reference the more common ophthal-
mic features of non-ophthalmological conditions are listed throughout 
this chapter (haematological disease in Box 30.1, diabetes and endo-
crine disease in Box 30.2, cardiovascular disease in Box 30.3, respira-
tory disease in Box 30.4, rheumatological/musculoskeletal disease in 
Box 30.5, gastrointestinal disease in Box 30.6 and skin disease in 
Box 30.7).
Functional anatomy and physiology
Visual pathways, innervation of the eye and the control of eye movement 
are discussed in Chapter 28
Orbit
The orbit is the fat-lled cavity in which the eye is suspended. It is shaped 
like a square pyramid, the perimeter of its base being the orbital rim. The 
orbital periosteum (‘periorbita’) is continuous with the periosteal layer of 
cranial dura mater. The dura and arachnoid form the optic nerve sheath, 
its subarachnoid space containing cerebrospinal uid in continuity with 
the third ventricle.
Eyelid/orbital septum/conjunctiva
In primary gaze, the eyelids just cover the superior and inferior cornea. 
The eyelids contain the orbital septum and the tarsal plate.
Within the tarsal plates, modied sebaceous (Meibomian) glands pro-
duce an oily surfactant to slow tear evaporation.
The conjunctiva, a mucous membrane, lines the posterior surface 
of the eyelid, adhering only to the tarsal plates and the scleral/corneal 
junction. The accessory lacrimal glands provide basal tear production; 
mucus produced by goblet cells stabilises the tear lm by lowering 
 surface tension.
Lacrimal gland/lacrimal drainage
The lacrimal gland lies within the periorbita of the anterolateral roof of 
the orbit. Its secretions (tears) wash away surface irritants and convey 
emotion. Excess tears drain, via canaliculi in the lids, into the lacrimal 
sac, nasolacrimal duct and inferior nasal meatus.
Extraocular muscles
The extraocular muscles (Fig. 30.1) consist of four recti, two obliques and 
one levator. The recti originate from a circular condensation of periorbita, 
the annulus of Zinn, which encircles the superior orbital ssure and the 
optic canal. They extend forwards to insert into the anterior sclera.
The levator palpebrae superioris originates above the optic canal 
and inserts into the tarsal plate and overlying skin of the upper eyelid. 
The superior tarsal muscle (Müller’s muscle) originates from the inferior 
aspect of the levator and also inserts into the tarsal plate.
The superior oblique originates superonasal to the recti, and runs 
along the roof of the orbit, its tendon passing horizontally through the 
trochlea at the orbital rim to insert into the anterior sclera.
The inferior oblique originates from the oor of the anterior orbit, just 
posterior to the lacrimal sac. It turns horizontally, passing beneath the 
inferior rectus, to insert into the inferior anterior sclera.
Eye
The optic vesicle develops from the diencephalon. The eye is therefore 
contiguous with the brain. This is reected in the three-layer structure of 
the eye:
 the sclera/cornea, a brous outer layer analogous to the meningeal 
dura
 the choroid, ciliary body and iris (together known as the uveal tract), 
a vascular middle layer analogous to the pia-arachnoid
 the retina, an inner layer analogous to white matter.
The major structures of the eye are shown in Figure 30.2
During embryogenesis, overlying ectoderm sinks into the neuroecto-
derm of the optic vesicle to form the lens vesicle, thus inducing the optic 
vesicle to form the two-layered optic cup. The inner and outer layers 
of the optic cup form the neurosensory retina and the retinal pigment 
 epithelium, respectively. The intervening space is continuous with the third 
30.1 Ophthalmic features of haematological disease
Condition
Ophthalmic ndings
Severe anaemia of any cause 
(retinopathy of anaemia)
Flame haemorrhages
Cotton wool spots
Roth spots
Pre-retinal haemorrhage
Megaloblastic anaemia
Optic neuropathy
Sickle cell anaemia
Conjunctival vasculopathy
Peripheral retinal neovascularisation
Thalassaemia
Desferrioxamine-associated 
pigmentary retinopathy
Leukaemia (leukaemic 
retinopathy)
Pseudohypopyon
Flame haemorrhages
Roth spots
Retinal oedema
Retinal vein occlusion
Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Central nervous system lymphoma
Lacrimal gland inltration
Posterior uveitis (atypical choroiditis)
Myeloproliferative disorders
Hyperviscosity
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Retinal vein occlusion
Papilloedema
Paraproteinaemias
Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia
Multiple myeloma
Retinal vein engorgement/occlusion
Thrombophilia
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Papilloedema

[[p1283]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1219
30
ventricle of the diencephalon. The cilia on the ependymal cells that line 
the third ventricle are continuous with the cilia on the neurosensory retinal 
cells, and the latter form the outer segments of the photoreceptors (rods 
and cones).
30.2 Ophthalmic features of diabetes and other endocrine 
disease
Condition
Ophthalmic ndings
Diabetes
Proliferative retinopathy
Macular oedema
Small pupils (autonomic neuropathy)
Cataract (including ‘snowake’ cataract)
Thyrotoxicosis (any cause)
Eyelid retraction
Graves’ disease (TSH receptor 
antibody-positive)
Exposure keratopathy
Conjunctival and periorbital oedema
Restrictive ocular motility
Proptosis
Optic neuropathy
Parathyroid disease
Band keratopathy
Corneal calcium deposition
Phaeochromocytoma
Hypertensive retinopathy
Cotton wool spots
Flame haemorrhages
Optic disc oedema with or without 
macular oedema
Cushing’s syndrome
Posterior subcapsular cataract
Diabetic retinopathy
Central serous retinopathy
Thyroid carcinoma
Horner syndrome with absent unilateral 
facial sweating
(TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone)
30.3 Ophthalmic features of cardiovascular disease
Condition
Ophthalmic ndings
Arteriosclerosis
Arteriovenous nipping
Retinal vein occlusion, caused by 
arteriovenous nipping
Retinal artery macroaneurysm
Ischaemic optic neuropathy
Pupil-sparing third and/or sixth nerve palsy, 
caused by infarction of the vasa nervosum
Hypertension
Hypertensive retinopathy
Cotton wool spots
Flame haemorrhages
Optic disc oedema, with or without macular 
oedema
Infective endocarditis
Flame haemorrhages
Roth spots
Endophthalmitis, caused by haematogenous 
spread of infection
Drugs
Vortex keratopathy (corneal epithelial 
deposits), caused by amiodarone (also seen in 
Fabry’s disease)
Bilateral optic neuropathy, caused by 
amiodarone
Thromboembolic 
disorders (including 
thromboembolus from 
atrial brillation)
Retinal artery occlusion, caused by artery-to-
artery embolism
Homonymous hemianopia, caused by embolic 
stroke
30.4  Ophthalmic features of respiratory disease
Condition
Ophthalmic ndings
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Optic disc oedema (type 2 respiratory failure)
Cystic brosis
Diabetic retinopathy
Tuberculosis
Anterior uveitis
Choroidal granuloma
Serpiginous choroiditis
Peripheral retinal arteritis
Optic neuropathy, visual loss and disturbance of 
colour vision (adverse effects of ethambutol and 
isoniazid)
Sarcoidosis
Anterior uveitis (granulomatosis)
Mutton fat keratitic precipitates
Iris nodules
Choroidal granuloma
Panuveitis
Multifocal choroiditis
Retinal periphlebitis
Sicca syndrome, caused by lacrimal gland 
inltration
Exposure keratopathy, caused by corneal exposure 
secondary to facial nerve palsy
Optic neuropathy, caused by optic disc oedema 
secondary to meningeal inltration
Lung cancer
Horner syndrome
Cancer-associated retinopathy
Initially, the hyaloid artery supplies the lens and vitreous. In its nal form, 
the vitreous develops from the retina and the hyaloid artery regresses, 
leaving only the central retinal artery and its branches.
Mesenchyme forms the tarsal plates of the eyelid, the stroma and the 
endothelium of the cornea, the sclera and the choroid.
Surface ectoderm, as well as forming the lens, forms the epidermis of 
the eyelid, the conjunctiva, the epithelium of the cornea and the lacrimal 
gland.
Sclera/cornea
The sclera lends shape to the eye and provides attachment for the ocular 
musculature. It makes up ve-sixths of the eyeball, the other sixth being 
formed by transparent cornea.
The limbus lies at the junction between the cornea and sclera, and 
contains stem cells and Schlemm’s canal. The stem cells allow contin-
uous regeneration of the corneal epithelium. Schlemm’s canal, with its 
overlying trabecular meshwork, drains aqueous uid from the anterior 
chamber into the external veins of the episclera and conjunctiva.
The avascular cornea is nourished by diffusion from the anterior cham-
ber, limbal capillaries and oxygen dissolved in the tear lm. The cornea, 
assisted by the lens and the length of the eye, determines the refractive 
ability of the eye.
The sclera is pierced posteriorly by the optic nerve at the lamina 
 cribrosa, a sieve-like conduit. Its outer layer, the episclera, consists of 
loose connective tissue, separating it from Tenon’s capsule, the soft-tis-
sue socket of the eye.
Choroid, ciliary body and iris – the uveal tract
Posteriorly, the choroid acts as a conduit for branches of the ophthalmic 
artery and veins. The choriocapillaris, a network of wide-bore, fenes-
trated capillaries, abuts the retinal pigment epithelium.
The ciliary body forms the junction between the choroid and the 
iris and lies just inferior to the limbus. Anteriorly, its ciliary processes 
produce aqueous (uid) that circulates through the pupil into the 
anterior chamber. Posteriorly, it constitutes the pars plana and forms 

[[p1284]]
1220    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
30.6 Ophthalmic features of gastrointestinal disease
Malabsorption
 Corneal and conjunctival keratinisation
  Rod photoreceptor 
loss
Chronic pancreatitis
 Diabetic retinopathy
Inammatory bowel disease
 Episcleritis
 Non-necrotising scleritis
 Anterior uveitis
Large bowel tumours
 Atypical congenital retinal pigment epithelium hypertrophy (familial 
adenomatous polyposis)
Inherited liver disease
 Kayser–Fleischer corneal rings, sunower 
cataracts (Wilson’s disease)
 Diabetic retinopathy 
(haemochromatosis)
30.7 Ophthalmic features of skin disease
Rosacea
 Posterior blepharitis
 Keratitis
Acne vulgaris
 Dry eye (adverse effect of 
isotretinoin)
 Papilloedema (adverse effect of 
tetracycline)
Psoriasis
 Anterior uveitis
Eczema
 Atopic keratoconjunctivitis
Urticaria
 Angioedema
Bullous diseases
 Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid
 Stevens–Johnson syndrome
Alopecia areata
 Eyebrow and eyelash loss
Cutaneous melanoma
 Melanoma-associated retinopathy
Skin tumours
 Eyelid tumours (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, 
keratoacanthoma, naevus, melanoma)
Skin infections
 Stye (eyelash folliculitis)
 Acute blepharoconjunctivitis 
(herpes simplex)
 Chronic conjunctivitis (molluscum 
contagiosum)
30.5 Ophthalmic features of rheumatological/musculoskeletal 
disease
Rheumatoid arthritis
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
 Peripheral ulcerative keratitis (‘corneal melt’)
 Painless episcleritis
 Scleritis and 
scleromalacia
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies
 Conjunctivitis (chlamydia-associated sexually 
acquired reactive arthritis, SARA)
 Anterior uveitis
Connective tissue diseases
Dermatomyositis
 Periorbital oedema with violaceous eyelid rash
Sjögren syndrome
 Dry eyes
Treatment effects
 Bull’s eye maculopathy (hydroxychloroquine)
 Viral retinitis 
(immunosuppression)
Systemic vasculitides
Giant cell arteritis
 Central/branch retinal artery occlusion
 Ischaemic optic  
neuropathy
Behçet’s disease
 Occlusive retinal vasculitis (posterior uveitis)
 Anterior uveitis with 
hypopyon
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
 Scleritis with involvement of adjacent cornea 
(sclerokeratitis)
 Retro-orbital inammation 
(see Fig. 26.53)
Polyarteritis nodosa
 Peripheral ulcerative keratitis
 Scleritis
 Retinal arteritis
Others/non-specic
 Necrotising scleritis/sclerokeratitis/peripheral 
ulcerative keratitis
 Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy
 Extraocular myositis (painful diplopia)
 Retinal arteritis
 Pupil-sparing 3rd nerve 
palsy
 6th nerve palsy
 Proptosis
 Occipital lobe infarction
Diseases of bone
Paget’s disease, polyostotic brous dysplasia
 Optic neuropathy
Others/non-specic
 Anterior uveitis (adverse effect of bisphosphonates)
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Superior oblique
Inferior oblique
Orbicularis oculi muscle
(palpebral portion)
Inferior rectus
Lateral rectus (cut)
Levator palpebrae superioris
Fig. 30.1 The extraocular musculature (right eye). Adapted from Batterbury M, 
Bowling B, Murphy C. Ophthalmology. An illustrated colour text, 3rd edn. Ednburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Ltd; 2009.
the attachments for the suspensory ligaments of the lens. The ciliary 
 muscle encircles the eye within the ciliary body. Contraction of this 
muscle relaxes the suspensory ligaments of the lens, bringing near 
objects into focus.

[[p1285]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1221
30
The iris bows gently forwards as it lies against the lens. It is divided into 
a pupillary zone, containing the circumferential sphincter pupillae muscle, 
and a ciliary zone, containing the dilator pupillae.
Retina
The retina consists of the neurosensory retina and the retinal pigment 
epithelium. The two layers are adherent only adjacent to the optic disc 
and at the edge of the pars plana.
Histologically, the centre of the retina is termed the macula lutea, its 
yellowish appearance caused by the presence of the xanthophylls (yel-
low pigments) lutein and zeaxanthin. At the centre of the macula, the 
neurosensory retina dips to form the fovea.
The single-layered retinal pigment epithelium is highly metabolically 
active and is essential for the maintenance and survival of the overlying 
photoreceptors.
The neurosensory retina initiates the visual pathway. Its photore-
ceptors synapse with radially arranged bipolar neurons, which in turn 
synapse with circumferentially arranged optic nerve ganglion cells.
‘Horizontal’ and amacrine cells within the plexiform layers modulate 
neuronal activity between bipolar cells, photoreceptors and the ganglion 
cells. At the fovea, a one-to-one relationship between cones, bipolar 
neurons and ganglion cells leads to the highest acuity. In the peripheral 
retina, many rods converge on to a bipolar neuron, and many bipolar 
neurons converge on to a ganglion cell, leading to lower acuity. In effect, 
the peripheral retina conveys black-and-white sentinel vision, alerting 
the brain to move the higher-acuity colour vision of the fovea into gaze. 
Photoreceptors are specialised neurons that cause neurotransmitters to 
be released in response to light (‘phototransduction’). There are three 
types of photoreceptors: namely, rods, cones and ganglion cells, the 
last of which independently respond to blue light, inuencing circadian 
rhythms.
Lens
The lens is a transparent exible structure suspended between the iris 
and the vitreous. Its exibility enables objects over a range of distances 
to be focused on the retina. It has a capsule, a central nucleus and a 
peripheral cortex. It continues to grow throughout life, becoming less 
exible with age.
Vitreous
The vitreous gel is 99% water and 1% collagen/hyaluronic acid. The 
outer edge (cortex) of the vitreous condenses to form the anterior and 
posterior hyaloid membranes. The base of the vitreous strongly adheres 
to the ora serrata/pars plana and the optic disc rim, where the internal 
limiting membrane of the retina is thinnest. Lesser degrees of adhesion 
occur at the parafoveal retina and along the retinal vessels.
Blood supply of the orbit/eye
The main blood supply of the orbit originates from the intracranial inter-
nal carotid artery. The ophthalmic artery, the rst branch of the internal 
carotid artery, traverses the subarachnoid space to enter the optic canal 
Limbus
Sclera
Choroid
Retina
Fovea
Hyaloid
canal
Retinal
vessels
Optic
nerve
Extraocular muscle
Optic nerve fibres
Ganglion cell
Amacrine cell
Bipolar cell
Horizontal cell
Cone
Rod
Pigment
epithelium
Cornea
Iris
Pupil
Lens
Anterior
chamber
(aqueous)
Ciliary muscle
Ciliary body
Conjunctiva
Vitreous gel
Suspensory
ligaments
Fig. 30.2 The main structures of the eye. The inset shows the arrangement 
of the retinal cells. Inset adapted from Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C (eds). 
Macleod’s Clinical examination, 13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
Elsevier Ltd; 2013.

[[p1286]]
1222    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
within the dural sheath of the optic nerve. On leaving the optic canal, it 
emerges from the dural sheath to course briey along, and then over, the 
optic nerve to reach the medial wall of the orbit.
Several arterial circles are formed. The major arterial circle of the iris 
is formed within the ciliary body by anterior ciliary arteries anastomosing 
with the posterior ciliary arteries. The pial branches of the optic nerve and 
the short ciliary arteries join together, as the circle of Zinn, to supply the 
intraocular optic nerve.
The infraorbital artery, a branch of the maxillary artery, also contributes 
to the orbital blood supply, in particular the inferior rectus, the inferior 
oblique and the lacrimal sac.
The orbit is drained by the superior and inferior ophthalmic veins, 
which converge to drain through the superior orbital ssure into the cav-
ernous sinus.
Investigation of visual disorders
History is the key to diagnosing visual disorders, with examination and 
investigations used to conrm or refute the expectations formed by the 
history.
Perimetry
In the era before modern radiology, manual perimetry was utilised as 
a non-invasive form of ‘neuroimaging’. Nowadays, perimetry is largely 
automated and its main role lies in the monitoring of glaucoma; it also 
has a lesser role in assessing neuro-ophthalmic disorders. All methods 
of perimetry are subjective and rely on patient cooperation and mental 
agility.
Amsler chart
The Amsler chart (Fig. 30.3) is the simplest method of documenting the 
visual eld, and is easy for both patient and clinician to understand and 
perform. It can be used for all forms of visual eld loss but is best suited 
to follow up the central scotomata of macular disorders, which are often 
too subtle for other methods of perimetry.
Tangent/Goldmann kinetic perimetry
Manual perimetry methods, such as tangent screen and Goldmann 
kinetic perimetry, appeal to the non-specialist, as they produce easily 
interpretable contoured maps of the visual eld.
The tangent screen is a piece of black cloth attached to a wall, in front 
of which the operator introduces moving targets into the patient’s eld of 
view. It retains an important role in the positive identication of functional 
peripheral eld loss (tunnel vision) versus pathological peripheral eld loss 
(funnel vision), although the results are somewhat operator-dependent. 
Goldmann perimetry is a mechanical improvement on tangent screen 
perimetry, which utilises targets of varying size and illumination. An auto-
mated version is available.
Automated threshold perimetry
Automated visual elds test the threshold of the eye’s ability to see at var-
ious points within the visual eld, forming complex outputs that can be 
stored digitally. Internal quality assurance mechanisms monitor stability 
of xation, false positives due to trigger-happy patients and false nega-
tives due to performance fatigue. Many patients need practice before 
accurate results are obtained; rst-time elds are rarely reliable and often 
show spurious and misleading ndings.
Most automated perimetry assesses only central vision. Few neuro-
logical disorders start peripherally, the exception being unilateral loss of 
peripheral eld with disease of the anterior pole of the occipital lobe. 
However, retinal pathology, such as retinal detachment and retinitis pig-
mentosa, may be missed if reliance is placed on automated perimetry 
rather than clinical examination.
Visual eld defects on perimetry that affect the whole of the superior 
or inferior half of the visual eld need to be differentiated by confronta-
tion into arcuate visual eld defects, which affect central eld only, and 
altitudinal eld defects, which affect both central and peripheral vision. 
Arcuate visual eld defects localise a lesion to the optic nerve head, 
whereas a lesion anywhere along the optic nerve can cause an altitudinal 
defect.
Imaging
See Figure 30.4
Photography
Digital photography is utilised to document surface anatomy. Colour 
images are ideal for lesions affecting the skin and cornea. For the ret-
ina, however, red-free imaging brings additional benets, particularly for 
discriminating red haemorrhages or abnormal new vessels from the red 
background of the retina. Wide-eld imaging is increasingly replacing the 
need to examine the fundus clinically.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
Optical coherence tomography is the optical equivalent of ultrasound, 
using light rather than sound waves to create its images. It is invaluable, 
not least for assessing the integrity of the layers of the retina and detect-
ing macular oedema of any cause.
Autouorescence
The retinal pigment epithelium contains autouorescent lipofuscin, which 
can be excited by blue- and green-coloured light and captured by digital 
imaging.
Increased autouorescence occurs when there is abnormal accu-
mulation of lipofuscin, as seen with certain inherited retinal dystrophies; 
excess retinal pigment epithelium metabolic activity, such as at the edge 
of evolving atrophic macular degeneration; or drug deposition, such as 
with hydoxychloroquine.
Fundus angiography
Fluorescein angiography is an invasive technique with risks including local 
extravasation of dye at the site of intravenous injection and anaphylaxis. 
Currently, its role is limited to the diagnosis of retinal vasculitis, retinal 
and choroidal neovascularisation, and capillary occlusion. Non-invasive 
Fig. 30.3 Amsler chart. The Amsler chart is a grid of 0.5 cm squares with a dot 
in the centre. The subject is asked to x on the central dot with one eye and any 
distorted or missing lines are recorded.

[[p1287]]
Presenting problems in ophthalmic disease    1223
30
angiography is now possible using optical coherence tomography, but its 
applicability is limited by small eld of view and inability to demonstrate 
ow or leakage.
Indocyanine angiography directly images the choroidal circulation and 
is particularly useful in guiding laser treatment for the choroidal polyps of 
polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy.
Ocular ultrasound
The main role of ultrasound is where the retina is obscured: for instance, 
by cataract or vitreous haemorrhage. It also has an important role in diag-
nosing choroidal melanoma, based on its distinctive internal reectivity.
Visual electrophysiology
Electrophysiology is used to localise disorders to the photoreceptors 
(electroretinogram), the retinal ganglion cells (pattern electroretino-
gram) or the optic pathways (visual evoked potential). The site of pho-
toreceptor involvement can be further localised to specic regions of 
the retina ( multifocal electroretinogram) or the macula itself (pattern 
electroretinogram).
Electrophysiology requires cooperation, correction of refractive errors 
and the ability to xate. Voluntary suppression of the electrical responses 
is possible by simply not focusing on the target. Despite this, it remains 
the investigation of choice for visual symptoms unexplained by clinical 
examination.
Presenting problems in ophthalmic disease
Presenting problems that are ophthalmological manifestations of pre-
dominantly neurological disease (e.g. ptosis, diplopia, oscillopsia, nys-
tagmus and pupillary abnormalities) are discussed in Chapter 28
Watery/dry eye
The most common cause of a watery eye is a dry eye triggering reex 
lacrimation. Patients with dry eye may complain of a foreign body or gritty 
sensation in the eye or intermittent visual blurring, triggered by reduced 
blinking, as occurs when reading or when concentrating on a distant 
object, such as the television.
Pruritus
Common causes of itch are an acute allergic response to either airborne 
allergens or direct contact. A signicant proportion of people are allergic to 
topical chloramphenicol, a rst-line treatment for many minor ocular ailments.
Pain/headache
The key consideration in deciding whether or not ocular pain and/or 
headache originates from the eye is whether there is a ciliary ush (red 
eye) or no ciliary ush (white eye).
Red eye
The presence of a ciliary ush in the region of the limbus is a key nding in 
intraocular causes of pain. The presence of watering or watery discharge 
is not a discriminatory feature, and over-reliance on this symptom often 
results in anterior uveitis being misdiagnosed as viral conjunctivitis. The 
features that are used to distinguish between different causes of red eye 
are illustrated in Figure 30.5
White eye
In the absence of a ciliary ush (see Fig. 30.5), ocular or periorbital pain 
is most commonly caused by migraine.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 30.4 Ocular imaging. 
subject. Distribution of FAF intensity shows typical background signal with reduced signal at the optic disc (absence of autouorescent material) and retinal vessels (absorption). 
(A, B, C and F) Courtesy of Aberdeen Royal Inrmary. (D) From Schmitz-Valckenberg 
S, Fleckenstein M, Hendrik PN, et al. Fundus autouorescence and progression of age-related macular degeneration. Surv Ophthalmol 2009; 54(1):96–117. (E) From Witmer 
MT, Szilárd K. Wide-eld imaging of the retina. Surv Ophthalmol 2013; 58(2):143–154

[[p1288]]
1224    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Pain on eye movement is a cardinal feature of optic neuritis and scleri-
tis. In optic neuritis the eye is white, whereas in scleritis, except for pos-
terior scleritis, it is red.
Posterior scleritis, in which the visible sclera is white, should be diag-
nosed only in the setting of positive signs such as disc swelling and 
exudative retinal detachment, or with conrmation by ocular ultrasound. 
A more common cause of severe ocular/periocular pain, with associated 
photophobia and lacrimation, is cluster headache, which is often misdi-
agnosed as scleritis. Just like scleritis, cluster headache responds to oral 
glucocorticoids, adding to the diagnostic confusion.
Intermittent, subacute angle closure glaucoma can cause headache, 
but usually accompanying corneal oedema causes haloes (a form of 
glare with rainbow colours), elicited by looking at lights or blurring of 
vision.
Giant cell arteritis (see Ch. 26) occasionally presents with sudden pain-
less visual loss in the absence of raised inammatory markers. Diagnosis 
can be made by demonstrating absence of choroidal blood ow on u-
orescein angiography.
Photophobia/glare
Excessive sensitivity to light, rather than fear of light, usually indicates 
ciliary muscle spasm due to inammation in the iris. Common causes are 
corneal abrasion, acute anterior uveitis and contact lens-related keratitis.
Occasionally, photophobia can be a symptom of congenital retinal 
dystrophies, especially cone photoreceptor deciency. Photophobia may 
also be a feature of meningitis, usually with accompanying neck stiffness 
and headache (meningism).
Glare is a common early feature of cataract, particularly triggered by 
oncoming car headlights when driving at night. It is a relatively common 
indication for surgery. It may also be an issue where there is insuf-
cient melanin in the retinal pigment epithelium, e.g. in atrophic age-re-
lated macular degeneration, in ocular albinism or following extensive 
pan-retinal laser therapy. If surgery is not an option, or while surgery is 
awaited, the symptom of glare may be reduced by wearing a broad-
brimmed hat.
Photopsia
A ickering light sensation is indicative of photoreceptor activity, either 
through traction, as in the setting of posterior vitreous detachment, or 
inammation, as in the setting of autoimmune or paraneoplastic retinop-
athy. Rarely, photopsia is a symptom of occipital lobe epilepsy, in which 
case there is usually an accompanying homonymous hemianopia.
Blurred vision
Blurred vision describes the situation in which patients are able to see 
what they are looking at, but what they are looking at is out of focus. The 
most common cause of intermittent blurred vision is dry eye; the most 
common cause of permanent blurred vision is cataract. If blurred vision 
is worse in the morning and eases as the day progresses, this suggests 
macular oedema.
Loss of vision
In visual loss, patients are no longer able to see all or part of what they 
are looking at. This may be manifested as either negative visual phe-
nomena, in which part or all of what is being looked at is missing, or 
positive visual phenomena, in which the object of regard appears to be 
hidden by something in the way. In positive phenomena the obstruc-
tion is often white or coloured, and may either expand across the visual 
eld or remain in a constant position, sometimes shimmering. The most 
common cause of transient visual loss is the aura of migraine, which is 
described in Chapter 28
Negative visual phenomena are a cardinal feature of ocular, usually ret-
inal, ischaemia, with complete absence of vision (blackness) occupying 
part or all the visual eld. Transient ocular ischaemia is usually embolic 
in nature but is occasionally seen in giant cell arteritis, where it suggests 
critical optic nerve ischaemia. Permanent monocular negative visual phe-
nomena usually indicate previous optic nerve or retinal infarction. Tiny 
negative visual phenomena may also be seen in capillary disorders such 
as diabetic retinopathy, where patchy macular capillary occlusion may, 
for instance, cause letters to be missing from words on reading.
Limbus
Pupil
Bulbar conjunctiva
Palpebral conjunctiva
Blepharitis
 Red eyelid margin, symptoms
   of dry eye, irritation, feeling of
   something in the eye
 Common in all age groups
   and may be associated with
   rosacea or seborrhoeic
   dermatitis
Normal eye anatomy
Conjunctivitis
 Maximal redness in palpebral
   conjunctiva, rest of eye may
   or may not be red
 The discharge of viral
   conjunctivitis may be hard to
   differentiate from reflex
   lacrimation due to photophobia
   of any cause
Ciliary flush
 Redness first appears at limbus
   and then spreads outwards
 Early sign of intraocular
   inflammation, e.g. anterior
   uveitis, keratitis or acute angle
   closure glaucoma
Subconjunctival haemorrhage
 Bright red in colour, note
   sparing of limbus
 Patient often unconcerned,
   unless part of severe head
   injury. Usually spontaneous,
   triggered by Valsalva
   manoeuvre
Scleritis
 Usually extensive, often
   bilateral, true extent often
   hidden by lids
 Unlike episcleritis, this is
   always painful, often waking
   the patient at night
Fig. 30.5 Common causes of red eye.

[[p1289]]
Presenting problems in ophthalmic disease    1225
30
The clinical features and causes of visual loss (including neurological 
causes) are summarised in Box 30.8. Some symptoms associated with 
visual loss require urgent ophthalmological assessment (Box 30.9).
Distortion of vision
Distortion is a cardinal symptom of disruption of foveal photoreceptor 
alignment. The most common cause is choroidal neovascularisation. 
Less commonly, it can be caused by epiretinal membrane formation, 
where posterior hyaloid surface scarring causes foveal traction.
Usually with distortion, objects are not only misshapen but also smaller 
(micropsia), due to the photoreceptors being pulled apart. Macropsia, 
where objects look bigger than normal, is uncommon. It is sometimes 
seen in the ‘Alice in Wonderland’ syndrome, a paedi atric variant of 
migraine, where there is altered visual perception of body images.
Eyelid retraction
Eyelid retraction is usually caused by inammatory thyroid eye disease or 
thyrotoxicosis (see Ch. 20 and Fig. 20.9).
The rst muscle to be affected in thyroid eye disease is the inferior 
rectus. The enlarged muscle tethers the eye and restricts upgaze. 
Compensatory increased innervation to the superior rectus and the leva-
tor palpebrae superioris, as well as direct inammation, leads to eyelid 
retraction.
In thyrotoxicosis, increased sympathetic nervous activity leads to bilat-
eral eyelid retraction. This, however, resolves with beta-blockade and 
treatment of thyrotoxicosis.
30.9 Red ag symptoms in visual loss*
Symptom
Possible causes
Sudden onset
Retinal artery occlusion
Ischaemic optic neuropathy
Headache
Giant cell arteritis if age  
>55 years
Eye pain
Angle closure glaucoma
Keratitis
Scleritis
Anterior uveitis
Pain on eye movement
Optic neuritis
Scleritis
Distortion
Choroidal neovascular  
membrane:
Age-related macular  
degeneration
Pathological myopia
Posterior uveitis
Idiopathic
Macular hole
Worse in the morning
Macular oedema:
Diabetic macular oedema
Retinal vein occlusion
Uveitis
*The presence of any of these symptoms in a patient with visual loss requires emergency 
referral to an ophthalmologist.
30.8 Clinical manifestations of visual eld loss
Site of lesion
Common causes
Complaint
Visual eld loss
Associated physical signs
Retina/optic 
disc
Vascular disease 
(including 
vasculitis)
Glaucoma
Inammation
Partial/complete visual loss  
depending on site, involving one 
orboth eyes
Altitudinal eld defect
Arcuate scotoma
Reduced acuity
Visual distortion (macula)
Abnormal retinal appearance
Reduced colour vision
Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD, Fig. 30.6)
Optic nerve
Optic neuritis
Sarcoidosis
Tumour
Leber’s hereditary 
optic neuropathy
Partial/complete loss of vision in one 
eye
Often painful
Central vision particularly affected
Central or paracentral 
scotoma
Monocular blindness
Reduced acuity
Reduced colour vision
RAPD
Optic atrophy (late)
Optic chiasm
Pituitary tumour
Craniopharyngioma
Sarcoidosis
May be none
Rarely, diplopia (‘hemield slide’)
Bitemporal hemianopia
Pituitary function abnormalities
Reduced acuity
Reduced colour vision
RAPD
Optic atrophy (late)
Optic tract
Tumour
Inammatory 
disease
Disturbed vision to one side of midline
Incongruous 
contralateral 
homonymous 
hemianopia
Temporal lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inammatory 
disease
Disturbed vision to one side of midline
Contralateral 
homonymous upper 
quadrantanopia
Memory/language disorders
Parietal lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inammatory 
disease
Disturbed vision to one side of midline
Bumping into things
Contralateral 
homonymous lower 
quadrantanopia
Contralateral sensory disturbance
Asymmetry of optokinetic nystagmus
Occipital lobe
Stroke
Tumour
Inammatory 
disease
Disturbed vision to one side of midline
Difculty reading
Bumping into things
Homonymous 
hemianopia (may be 
macula-sparing)
Damage to other structures supplied by posterior 
cerebral circulation

[[p1290]]
1226    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Rarely, bilateral eyelid retraction is a sign of dorsal mid-brain pathology 
(Collier’s sign), where it is accompanied by a supranuclear upgaze palsy 
and convergence–retraction nystagmus.
Optic disc swelling and papilloedema 
Optic disc swelling (Box 30.10) can be a developmental variant of normal 
(pseudopapilloedema), a manifestation of optic nerve pathology, or a reec-
tion of more widespread nerve-bre oedema, as with retinal vein occlusion.
Papilloedema is optic disc swelling occurring as a result of raised 
intracranial pressure. In this situation obstructed axoplasmic ow from 
retinal ganglion cells results in swollen nerve bres, which in turn cause 
capillary and venous congestion, producing papilloedema. The earliest 
sign is the cessation of venous pulsation seen at the disc, progression 
causing the disc margins to become red (hyperaemic). Disc margins 
become indistinct and haemorrhages may occur in the retina (Fig. 30.7). 
The absence of papilloedema does not exclude the possibility of raised 
intracranial pressure.
Normal variations of disc appearance (e.g. optic nerve drusen) may 
mimic disc swelling.
Proptosis
Proptosis, particularly if bilateral and symmetrical, is often rst recog-
nised when it is quite advanced. Accompanying eyelid retraction is a 
typical feature of thyroid eye disease. By far the most common cause is 
thyroid eye disease, when proptosis is termed exophthalmos.
Proptosis is a sign of retro-orbital expansion and may be intraconal or 
extraconal. When expansion is within the cone of extraocular muscles, 
then movement forwards will be in line with the visual axis. When outside, 
the eye is additionally displaced to the side.
The primary clinical concern is whether vision is at risk due to optic 
nerve compression or corneal exposure. In addition, there may be dou-
ble vision. In thyroid eye disease, diplopia may be absent if the disease is 
symmetrical. Instead, restricted ocular movements make patients move 
their head en bloc when looking at objects deviating from the primary 
position of gaze. To the patient, however, the overarching concern is 
often the change in appearance.
Optic atrophy
Loss of nerve bres causes the optic disc to appear pale, as the sclera 
becomes visible (Fig. 30.8). A pale disc (optic atrophy) follows optic nerve 
damage; causes include previous optic neuritis or ischaemic damage, 
long-standing papilloedema, optic nerve compression, trauma and 
degenerative conditions (e.g. Friedreich’s ataxia, see Box 28.55).
Specialist ophthalmological conditions
Ocular inammation
Inammation can affect any part of the eye. In structures in direct contact 
with the environment, particularly the cornea and the conjunctiva, inam-
mation is most likely to be caused by infection. In other structures, such 
as the uveal tract and sclera, inammation is more likely to be caused 
by autoimmune conditions, although it may also be a manifestation of 
infection or malignancy. Although the latter conditions may present with 
indicative ocular signs, their presence is often appreciated only retro-
spectively, after failure to respond to immunosuppression.
Most non-infective forms of ocular inammation are idiopathic; all are 
more common in the presence of other autoimmune conditions. Some 
may be directly associated but asynchronous in disease activity, such 
as the anterior uveitis of ankylosing spondylitis. Others are direct mani-
festations of an overarching, underlying, inammatory condition such as 
the keratoscleritis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as 
Wegener’s granulomatosis).
Sjögren syndrome
Sjögren syndrome is the archetypal autoimmune disease and its sec-
ondary form is associated with a large number of other autoimmune 
conditions (see Box 26.64). The cardinal features are inammation of the 
lacrimal gland, its conjunctival accessory glands and the parotid gland, 
leading to hyposecretion of tears and saliva. Involvement of the lacrimal 
gland alone causes keratoconjunctivitis sicca, a syndrome of dry eyes 
and corneal and conjunctival irritation. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, how-
ever, can also be caused by reduced function of the lacrimal glands and/
or lacrimal ducts from other causes.
A
B
F
C
G
D
H
E
I
Fig. 30.6 Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD). The eyes are examined in 
effect of shining the light into the left eye is reduced on both sides, so the pupils 
dilate each time the light swings to the left eye.
30.10 Common causes of optic disc swelling
Raised intracranial pressure (papilloedema)
 Cerebral mass lesion (tumour, abscess)
 Obstructive hydrocephalus
 Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension
Obstruction of ocular venous drainage
 Central retinal vein occlusion
 Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Systemic disorders affecting retinal vessels
 Hypertension
 Vasculitis
 Hypercapnia
Optic nerve damage
 Demyelination (optic neuritis/papillitis)
 Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy
 Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy
 Toxins (e.g. methanol)
 Inltration of optic disc
 Sarcoidosis
 Glioma
 Lymphoma

[[p1291]]
Specialist ophthalmological conditions    1227
30
Treatment of the ophthalmological manifestations of Sjögren syndrome 
is symptomatic, and consists of supplementing tear production with arti-
cial tears (e.g. hypromellose) and reducing tear loss by humidication 
and avoidance of dry environments. If these measures are insufcient, 
tear drainage may be reduced with surgical options such as punctal 
plugs and punctal occlusion.
Peripheral ulcerative keratitis
Peripheral ulcerative keratitis (‘corneal melting’) is an autoimmune disor-
der affecting the corneal limbus, where it may be accompanied by adja-
cent scleritis. It may be directly associated with inammatory disorders 
in which immune complexes are formed, particularly rheumatoid arthri-
tis, systemic lupus erythematosus and granulomatosis with polyangiitis. 
Pain and redness are helpful indicators but may not always be present. 
Systemic immunosuppression is always required but topical glucocorti-
coids should be used cautiously due to the risk of aggravating keratolysis 
(corneal thinning). Secondary infection should be prevented with topical 
antibiotics and attention should be paid to corneal hydration, through the 
use of articial tears and lubricants.
More common causes of peripheral corneal ulceration are blepharitis 
and acne rosacea, which cause ocular irritation rather than frank pain. 
Hypersensitivity to staphylococcal exotoxin leads to stromal inltrate 
adjacent to, but sparing, the limbus (marginal keratitis). Resolution of 
this self-limiting condition can be assisted by the use of topical chloram-
phenicol, with or without topical glucocorticoids. Prevention is through 
management of the underlying condition, usually with ocular lid hygiene 
for simple blepharitis and metronidazole gel for rosacea.
Scleritis
Scleritis is usually accompanied by severe pain, worse on eye movement 
and often waking the patient through the night. Diagnosis of anterior 
scleritis is usually straightforward, with the eye showing diffuse or nodular 
erythema (although it may have to be searched for under the eyelids). 
Posterior uveitis is often accompanied by reduced vision and oedema of 
the retina, choroid and extraocular muscles.
White patches of necrosis (pallor) within the erythema are an omin-
ous sign, indicative of systemic vasculitis. Non-necrotising scleritis is 
commonly idiopathic but may be associated with other autoimmune 
conditions, particularly rheumatoid arthritis and inammatory bowel dis-
ease. It is also common with herpes zoster ophthalmicus, intraocular 
involvement being indicated by the involvement of the lateral external 
nose (Hutchison’s sign).
Necrotising scleritis requires aggressive immunosuppression; non- 
necrotising scleritis can occasionally be managed by topical glucocor-
ticoids or non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) but usually 
requires oral glucocorticoids.
Some patients with recurrent episodes of scleritis, or in whom inam-
mation is gradual and prolonged, may develop scleral thinning (sclero-
malacia), revealing the underlying blue choroid.
Episcleritis
Episcleritis is a benign self-limiting condition of uncertain aetiology, occa-
sionally associated with other inammatory disorders. Sectoral redness 
of the episclera is usual, although nodules can form. Often confused 
with scleritis, although usually less symptomatic, the diagnostic topi-
cal application of phenylephrine turns the inamed episclera white but 
has no effect on the redness of scleritis. Treatment is with cold articial 
tears, although occasionally topical NSAIDs or topical glucocorticoids 
are required.
Uveitis
Uveitis is an overarching term for inammation anywhere in the uveal 
tract, retina or vitreous. It may be classied according to speed of onset, 
location, specic features, or aetiology (Box 30.11). Syphilis can cause 
all forms of uveitis. Active tuberculosis may present with an occlusive 
vasculitis or serpiginous (snake-like) choroiditis emanating from the optic 
disc. Latent tuberculosis is a particular concern because treatment of the 
uveitis with biologics may induce active systemic infection. Furthermore, 
the type of biologic most commonly used for uveitis, anti-tumour necrosis 
factor therapy (e.g. adalimumab, iniximab), may trigger demyelination.
The most common form of uveitis is anterior uveitis, which is usually 
idiopathic and may be associated with other autoimmune conditions, 
particularly HLA-B27-related spondyloarthropathies (Ch. 26); it is rarely 
caused directly by infection. Acutely, dilating drops are used to pre-
vent the inamed iris from sticking to the lens (posterior synechiae) and 
obstructing the outow of aqueous uid, while a tapering dose of topical 
Choroid
Optic disc
CSF
Optic
nerve
Central retinal vein
Meningeal sheath
Retinal
veins
Choroid
Increased
CSF pressure
Optic
nerve
Venous
dilatation
Swollen
optic disc
Axonal transport
block
Swollen axons
A
B
C
Fig. 30.7 Mechanism of optic disc oedema (papilloedema). 
optic disc oedema with a small haemorrhage on the nasal side of the disc. (CSF = cerebrospinal uid) (C) Courtesy of Dr B. Cullen
Fig. 30.8 Fundus photograph of the left eye of a patient with familial optic 
atrophy. Note the marked pallor of the optic disc.

[[p1292]]
1228    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
glucocorticoids, usually over 4–6 weeks, mitigates the local signs and 
symptoms of the self-resolving inammation. Inadequate treatment can 
lead to pupil block glaucoma and cataract. Posterior complications can 
also develop, predominantly macular oedema, the main cause of visual 
impairment in all forms of uveitis.
With intermediate uveitis, inammation occurs at the pars plana, with 
most symptoms, predominantly oaters, being a result of inammation of 
the vitreous base. Unlike anterior uveitis, pure intermediate uveitis is not 
associated with iris inammation; instead, white blood cells are seen pre-
dominantly in the anterior vitreous, with a lesser amount overspilling into 
the anterior chamber. Treatment is challenging. Topical therapy is ineffec-
tive, as it does not penetrate beyond the anterior chamber, but symptoms 
of oaters are not often sufcient to justify systemic immunosuppression. 
In some cases, vitritis (vitreous inammation), or more commonly macular 
oedema, may cause visual impairment. Occasionally, retinal neovascular 
proliferation may occur, either as an inammatory response or as a direct 
result of capillary occlusion. Intermediate uveitis may be associated with 
demyelination, sarcoidosis and inammatory bowel disease.
Posterior uveitis tends to present with visual impairment secondary to 
macular oedema, vitritis or choroiditis. More chronic forms also exist and 
these tend to present with photopsia, visual eld defects or distortion 
inducing choroidal neovascular membranes.
Infectious conditions
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is predominantly caused by bacteria or viruses and is usu-
ally self-limiting in 7–10 days. Bacterial conjunctivitis is associated with 
a purulent discharge and viral conjunctivitis with a watery discharge, the 
latter often being confused with the photophobia and reex lacrimation of 
anterior uveitis. Underlying chlamydial infection should always be consid-
ered if there is a persistent thick, mucopurulent discharge.
Allergic conjunctivitis is also common, either as a component of hay 
fever (allergic rhinitis) or as an allergy to chloramphenicol, which is com-
monly used to treat conjunctivitis.
Rarely, conjunctivitis may be associated with inammatory systemic 
mucus membrane disorders, such as ocular mucus membrane (cicatri-
cial) pemphigoid or Stevens–Johnson syndrome. The secondary effects 
of loss of conjunctival function can be devastating to the cornea. Other 
causes of conjunctival scarring include trachoma, chemical burns and 
orbital radiotherapy.
Infectious keratitis/corneal ulceration
Inammation of the cornea should always raise concern about underly-
ing infection (Box 30.12). Central ulceration is always more serious than 
peripheral, through involvement of the visual axis. Cultures from corneal 
scraping or biopsy may be required, although much infectious keratitis 
is treated empirically on the basis of site, morphology and response to 
treatment.
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (occasionally type 2) is a common cause 
of infectious keratitis (Fig. 30.9). All layers of the cornea may be involved: 
the epithelium in the form of dendritic ulceration; the stroma in the form 
of white inltrate and occasionally necrosis; and the endothelium in the 
form of localised oedema and keratitic precipitates. Loss of corneal sen-
sation is common following herpes simplex keratitis, and occasionally 
30.11 Aetiology of uveitis
Idiopathic
 Anterior uveitis often associated with the HLA-B27 haplotype, even in the 
absence of other manifestations
Primary ophthalmic conditions
 Trauma, including penetrating injury and ophthalmic surgery
 Fuchs heterochromic cyclitis
 Posner–Schlossman syndrome
Rheumatological
 HLA-B27-associated (seronegative) spondyloarthropathies: ankylosing 
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis
 Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic vasculitides
 Behçet’s disease
 Polyarteritis nodosa
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s)
Systemic infections (only the more common causes are listed)
 Brucellosis
 Herpes virus infections 
(cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex 
virus, varicella zoster virus)
 Leptospirosis
 Lyme borreliosis
 Syphilis
 Toxoplasmosis
 Tuberculosis
 Whipple’s disease
Gastrointestinal conditions
 Inammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)
Malignancy
 Primary central nervous system lymphoma (rare)
Systemic conditions of unknown cause
 Multiple sclerosis
 Sarcoidosis
30.12 Common causes of infectious keratitis
Organism
Features/comments
Treatment
Viruses
Herpes simplex
Characteristic ‘dendritic’ 
ulcer is the most common 
form, often recurrent
Topical/systemic 
acyclovir (with topical 
glucocorticoid for 
stromal keratitis once 
the epithelium is healed)
Varicella zoster
Herpes zoster 
ophthalmicus
Systemic aciclovir
Bacteria
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Staphylococcus 
aureus
Coagulase-
negative 
staphylococci
Cutibacterium
(formerly 
Propionibacterium) 
spp. 
Coagulase-negative 
staphylococci and 
Cutibacterium spp. 
are members of the 
skin ora, and must 
not be dismissed as 
contaminants
Topical uoroquinolone 
with Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative cover 
(e.g. ooxacin)
Subsequent treatment 
depends on sensitivity 
testing results
Fungi
Fusarium sp.
Aspergillus sp.
Candida sp.
Fusarium and Aspergillus
keratitis are often 
associated with soil and/
or corneal trauma; may 
also be contact lens-
related
Candida causes post-
keratoplasty keratitis
Options include topical 
natamycin (if available), 
amphotericin B, 
voriconazole and other 
azoles (e.g. econazole), 
and systemic uconazole 
or voriconazole
Parasites
Acanthamoeba 
castellanii (free-
living amoeba)
Associated with poor 
contact lens hygiene
Topical 
polyhexamethylene 
biguanide
Onchocerca 
volvulus
(nematode)
See Chapter 13

[[p1293]]
Specialist ophthalmological conditions    1229
30
neurotrophic keratopathy may result. Epithelial disease is self-limiting but 
treatment with topical or oral antivirals reduces the risk of stromal involve-
ment and scarring. Stromal and endothelial disease requires additional 
topical glucocorticoids, but only once any epithelial defect has healed. 
Herpes simplex keratitis is analogous to herpes labialis; recurrences are 
therefore common and, if frequent, may warrant long-term oral antivirals. 
Corneal grafting may be required but the risk of recurrence remains.
Bacteria also cause infectious keratitis, especially following corneal 
trauma or contact lens misuse. Other risk factors for microbial keratitis 
include topical glucocorticoids and pre-existing ocular surface disease. 
Bacterial keratitis has many causes, some of which do not respond to 
chloramphenicol, so topical quinolones are used as rst-line agents. 
Rarely, the free-living amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii may be a cause 
of contact lens-associated keratitis, presenting subacutely and leading 
to corneal nerve inltration, keratitis and accompanying scleritis.
Fungal keratitis is the most common cause of infectious keratitis in 
low income countries, particularly if there has been corneal trauma and 
contact with soil or plant matter. It is usually caused by Fusarium. Fungal 
keratitis has no particular distinguishing features and delayed diagno-
sis is common. If it is suspected, cultures should be undertaken and 
antifungal treatment, which is hampered by poor corneal penetration of 
antifungals, started promptly. Corneal transplantation is often required.
Endophthalmitis
Endophthalmitis is infection of the anterior and posterior chambers of 
the eye. It may be exogenous (e.g. from penetrating trauma or following 
surgery) or, less commonly, endogenous, caused by haematogenous 
spread of microorganisms within the blood, which gain entry to the eye 
via the choroid and ciliary body. The causes of endogenous endoph-
thalmitis are therefore the causes of blood-stream infection (Chapter 13) 
Gram-positive bacteria are most common, followed by Gram-negative 
bacteria and then fungi, mainly Candida
Clinical presentation is with visual blurring and/or visual loss, which 
are usually unilateral. Ocular ndings range from a few deposits in the 
retina/choroid (chorioretinitis) to panendophthalmitis, in which there is a 
severe inammatory reaction in both the anterior and posterior chambers. 
A specic appearance of the retina is described for Candida endophthal-
mitis, which characteristically causes creamy-white retinal or chorioretinal 
lesions (Fig. 30.10). It is vitally important to sample the vitreous, as this may 
provide the only opportunity to determine the most appropriate therapy.
Treatment is with systemic and/or intravitreal antibiotics or antifungal 
agents, depending on the cause and severity. Vitrectomy may also be 
required.
Cataract
Cataract is permanent opacity of the lens (Fig. 30.11). Globally, untreated 
cataract is the most common cause of visual impairment.
A
B
Fig. 30.9 Infective keratitis. 
not pathognomonic. (A) Courtesy of McPherson Optometry, Aberdeen. (B) From Macsai MS, Fontes BM. Rapid diagnosis in ophthalmology: anterior segment. Elsevier Inc.; 2008 
(courtesy of the External Eye Disease and Cornea Section, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil)
Fig. 30.10 Focal chorioretinitis in clinically suspected endogenous Candida
endophthalmitis. This patient was an injection drug user and improved with 
empirical oral uconazole. From Ryan SJ (ed). Retina, 5th edn. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2013 (case courtesy of Jeffrey K. Moore, MD)
Fig. 30.11 Kayser–Fleischer ring (arrow A) and sunower cataract (arrow B) 
in Wilson’s disease. Modied from Kaiser PK, Friedman NJ (eds). Massachusetts Eye 
and Ear Inrmary Illustrated manual of ophthalmology, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
Elsevier Inc.; 2014.

[[p1294]]
1230    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
The normal lens thickens and opacies with age, and cataract can 
be detected in more than half the population over the age of 65 (senile 
cataract). Many ocular and systemic diseases can predispose to cata-
ract formation, the most common being uveitis and diabetes mellitus. 
Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) causes a characteristic 
‘sunower’ cataract. Excessive exposure to ultraviolet light, ionising radi-
ation and glucocorticoid therapy are also predisposing factors.
The characteristic symptoms of cataract are progressive loss of vision 
and glare. If these become serious enough to require treatment, surgical 
intervention will be required, usually in the form of ultrasonic phacoemul-
sication with intraocular lens (IOL) implant.
Common ophthalmological ndings in older people are shown in 
Box 30.13. Findings and management issues in adolescence and preg-
nancy are shown in Boxes 30.14 and 30.15, respectively.
Diabetic eye disease
Diabetic retinopathy
Diabetic retinopathy is one of the most common causes of visual impair-
ment in people of working age in high-income countries. The prevalence 
of diabetic retinopathy increases with the duration of diabetes. Almost all 
individuals with type 1 diabetes, and most of those with type 2 diabetes, 
will have some degree of retinopathy after 20 years. Fortunately, most 
patients develop only mild forms of retinopathy.
Pathogenesis
The underlying pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy is local vascular 
endothelial growth factor production initiated by hyperglycaemia-in-
duced capillary occlusion. This occlusion stimulates increased produc-
tion of retinal vascular endothelial growth factor, which not only increases 
capillary permeability, leading to retinal oedema, but also stimulates angi-
ogenesis, leading to new vessel formation.
Clinical features
The initial clinical feature of diabetic retinopathy, capillary occlusion, is 
visible only on retinal angiography. Capillaries adjacent to the occluded 
capillary form discrete swellings (microaneurysms), which leak uid and 
blood, causing oedema and retinal haemorrhages (Fig. 30.12).
30.13 Common ophthalmological ndings in older people
 Small pupils that dilate poorly with mydriatics: common neurodegenerative 
nding, particularly with diabetes.
 Spurious ndings on automated perimetry: decreasing manual dexterity and 
cognitive function often render automated perimetry ndings unreliable.
 Lens opacities: cataract is ubiquitous but requires treatment only if 
symptomatic.
 Drusen: common from mid-life onwards. Larger (soft) drusen are more likely to 
herald age-related macular degeneration than smaller (hard) drusen.
 Glaucoma: angle closure glaucoma is more common as the increasing size 
of the lens shallows the anterior chamber. Once it is identied, both eyes 
are always treated to prevent development/recurrence. Chronic open angle 
glaucoma is more common in those with a family history or ocular hypertension 
(isolated raised intraocular pressure).
 Impaired upgaze: common. It is differentiated from progressive supranuclear 
palsy by the doll’s head manoeuvre, the full range of vertical movement being 
retained in progressive supranuclear palsy PSP.
 Ptosis: mechanical ptosis is common due to degenerative disinsertion of the 
levator palpebrae superioris aponeurosis. A high skin crease and preserved 
ability to elevate help differentiate it from other causes.
 Late-onset presentation of congenital conditions: adult pseudovitelliform 
macular ‘degeneration’ is an autosomal dominant retinal dystrophy, which 
causes mild visual impairment. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy is an 
autosomal dominant condition characterised by later-onset chronic progressive 
external ophthalmoparesis and swallowing difculties.
30.14 Medical ophthalmology in adolescence
Inherited conditions
 Stargardt disease: autosomal recessive macular dystrophy that commonly 
presents in adolescence/early adulthood, causing signicant bilateral 
impairment of central vision.
Developmental anomalies
 Pathological myopia: due to elongated ocular axial length rather than 
refractive index of cornea and lens. Increased risk of retinal detachment and 
choroidal neovascular membrane formation.
 Optic disc drusen: come to prominence during adolescence and usually 
rst detected during routine examination. Often mistaken for papilloedema, 
particularly in the setting of coincidental daily headache.
 Amblyopia: occasionally detected after the age of 7 years, particularly in the 
absence of pre-school screening, when it is unlikely to respond to patching of 
the other eye.
 Keratoconus: presents with increasing astigmatism (distortion of vision due to 
abnormal corneal topography). Hard contact lenses are the mainstay of therapy. 
Further progression may be prevented through ‘cross-linking’ surgery.
Deterioration of existing conditions
 Diabetic retinopathy: in type 1 diabetes, retinopathy usually rst presents at 
least 5 years after diagnosis, which often coincides with adolescence. Puberty 
may accelerate progression. Greatest risk is disengagement with diabetes 
care, including retinal screening, signicantly increasing later presentation with 
advanced symptomatic retinopathy.
 Adult manifestations of retinopathy of prematurity: clinical features 
depend on the type of treatment used in the neonatal period and include retinal 
detachment, angle closure glaucoma, severe myopia and cataract.
Sexual activity
 Chlamydia conjunctivitis: onset of sexual activity may lead to this ocular 
condition, which may be associated with reactive arthritis (SARA). Untreated 
coexistent genital tract infection may cause infertility.
Transition to adult services
 Neurobromatosis type 1.
 Optic nerve astrocytoma/glioma: often develops in late childhood or early 
adolescence.
Sports medicine
 Contact sports: eye protection is important for all, especially if there is only one 
functional eye, e.g. with amblyopia.
30.15 Visual disorders and pregnancy
 Ocular inammation: pregnancy appears to have a protective effect on many 
inammatory disorders, although not systemic lupus erythematosus. Most 
patients can taper treatment during pregnancy. Mycophenolate mofetil is 
teratogenic. Glucocorticoids and tacrolimus appear safe. The use of biologics 
during pregnancy should be based on a balance of risks, and professional 
guidelines should be consulted.
 Diabetic retinopathy: may be accelerated during pregnancy because the 
placenta is a potent source of angiogenic growth factors. Retinal screening each 
trimester is recommended.
 HELLP/pre-eclampsia/eclampsia: retinal features of accelerated hypertension 
may be seen, including optic disc oedema, ame haemorrhages and cotton 
wool spots. Occasionally, exudative retinal detachments occur. Vasogenic 
oedema (posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome), affecting the posterior 
occipital and parietal lobes, may cause cortical visual impairment. All features 
tend to resolve with delivery or control of blood pressure.
Clinically, microaneurysms appear as isolated red dots, the capillaries 
being too small to visualise. At the edge of any leaking uid, lipids precip-
itate out to form exudate, like the tidemark of the sea.
In turn, capillaries with microaneurysms also occlude, their microa-
neurysms turning white before disappearing entirely from clinical view. 

[[p1295]]
30
Specialist ophthalmological conditions    1231
As more and more capillaries occlude, larger patches of retinal ischaemia 
form, leading to sufcient vascular endothelial growth factor production 
to induce the growth of new vessels at the border of diseased and undis-
eased retina.
Within patches of retinal ischaemia, diseased remnants of partially per-
fused capillaries form intra-retinal microvascular abnormalities (IRMAs) 
and retinal veins develop multiple diffuse swellings (venous beading). 
These signs are best seen on uorescein angiography.
New vessels and their glial tissue (like a cabbage leaf) grow from reti-
nal veins, through the overlying internal limiting membrane into the vitre-
ous, triggering local inammation and contracting scars. The vitreous is 
strongly adherent to the pars plana. It pulls back on the new vessel, trig-
gering further bleeding, growth, inammation and scarring. If the scarring 
is sufcient, then tractional retinal detachment and complete blindness 
may occur.
Other retinal lesions, not unique to capillary occlusion, are also seen in 
diabetic retinopathy. These include ame haemorrhages and cotton wool 
spots (soft exudates). Flame haemorrhages are horizontal streaky haem-
orrhages in the retinal nerve-bre layer. They are also seen in any severe 
anaemia, e.g. bacterial endocarditis and leukaemia. Cotton wool spots 
are also situated in the nerve-bre layer and are usually most numerous 
nasal to the optic disc, where the nerve bres crowd together. They are 
also seen in accelerated hypertension, after severe hypoglycaemia and 
occasionally in giant cell arteritis. A cotton wool spot combined with an 
enclosing ame haemorrhage is termed a Roth spot. Roth spots have 
traditionally been associated with endocarditis, although they may be 
seen with any cause of a ame haemorrhage.
Management of proliferative diabetic retinopathy
If untreated, proliferative retinopathy eventually causes severe visual 
impairment through recurrent vitreous haemorrhage and retinal detach-
ment. Pan-retinal laser photocoagulation therapy is extremely effective at 
preserving vision, if applied before complications set in.
Historically, laser therapy was used empirically to ablate the retina 
extensively outside the macula. However, this caused secondary optic 
atrophy and night blindness (nyctalopia), which interfered with the ability 
to drive. Modern application of laser is lighter, more tailored to the sites 
of underlying capillary ischaemia and relatively free of side-effects, only 
occasionally resulting in loss of the ability to drive. In the UK there is a 
requirement to inform the driver licensing authority if retinopathy is (or has 
been) present in both eyes, irrespective of treatment history.
Intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (e.g. 
ranibizumab, aibercept, bevacizumab) also cause temporary regression 
of proliferative retinopathy, whereas, after pan-retinal laser therapy, back-
ground and proliferative types of retinopathy regress permanently. If both 
eyes have been treated with laser, patients can be safely discharged to a 
retinal screening programme.
Management of diabetic macular oedema
Traditionally, oedema seen on slit-lamp biomicroscopy was categorised 
according to three patterns of leakage elucidated from uorescein angio-
gram studies:
 focal leakage from microaneurysms
 diffuse leakage from diseased capillaries
 ischaemia (no leakage) from thrombosis of the perifoveal capillaries.
Laser was applied, either directly on leaking microaneurysms or empir-
ically by placing a grid of burns on the affected macula, to reduce leak-
age. The main aim was to treat oedema before the fovea was affected, 
as laser therapy for oedema affecting the fovea was never particularly 
effective.
However, retinal screening programmes have demonstrated that ext-
rafoveal macular oedema often resolves spontaneously, and the intro-
duction of intravitreal injection therapy, which rescues vision in 50% 
of those treated regardless of the mechanism of oedema, has led to 
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 30.12 Diabetic retinopathy.
anomalies occurring within an area of capillary occlusion (top arrow); venous reduplication (rare nding), with venous beading, extending from the reduplication towards the 
optic disc, occurring where capillaries are occluded either side of the vein (middle arrow); and new vessel formation occurring at the border between the diseased and health 
hand side of the image, which is indicative of widespread capillary occlusion. Absolute pallor never occurs, as it is ‘masked’ by the highly vascularised choroid lying underneath. 
(A–E) Courtesy of Aberdeen Royal Inrmary

[[p1296]]
1232    MEDICAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
a paradigm shift in management. Now, rather than laser treatment of 
asymptomatic oedema that does not involve the centre of the fovea, 
the emphasis has shifted to treating those who are symptomatic from 
centre-involving foveal oedema (conrmed on optical coherence tomog-
raphy) with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections. Although 
this method of treatment is more effective, monthly injections may be 
required indenitely.
Prevention
There is a clear relationship between glycaemic control and the incidence 
of diabetic retinopathy. A combination of good glycaemic and blood 
pressure control also slows the progression of retinopathy.
When blood glucose is rapidly lowered in patients with type 1 diabe-
tes, however, there can be a transient deterioration of retinopathy, pre-
dominantly in the form of cotton wool spot formation, but occasionally 
triggering new vessel formation. The trigger is believed to be increased 
systemic insulin growth factor release, which is most likely to occur with 
sudden correction of eating disorders or reinstitution of insulin therapy 
in those who miss out injections, often to induce weight loss. This often 
occurs during hospitalisation for other reasons.
Although, ideally, any improvement in glycaemic control should be 
gradual, in many circumstances this is hard to achieve, particularly if the 
patient suddenly decides to comply with treatment, leading to dramatic 
improvement in glycaemic control.
Screening
Systematic screening for asymptomatic proliferative retinopathy has 
been shown to be cost-effective. It has led to the introduction of popula-
tion-based screening programmes in the UK and other countries, where 
health care is funded centrally. There is little evidence that screening 
asymptomatic patients for macular oedema is cost-effective, although 
a by-product of screening is that suspected macular oedema has 
become the most common reason for referral from retinal screening to 
ophthalmology.
Although hand-held ophthalmoscopy has been shown to have poor 
sensitivity compared to examination by slit-lamp biomicroscopy or retinal 
photography, any form of screening is better than none where resources 
are scarce. Currently, optical coherence tomography is being added to 
the screening pathway to reduce false-negative referrals for macular 
oedema.
Historically, annual screening has been advocated. However, evidence 
now indicates that patients with repeated normal screens, particularly 
those with type 2 diabetes, can be safely screened every 2 years.
In pregnancy, the placenta is a source of angiogenic growth factors. 
For this reason, although the risk of developing signicant retinopathy 
during pregnancy remains low, pregnant women should be screened 
every trimester until the placenta is delivered.
Other causes of visual loss in people with diabetes
Around 50% of visual loss in people with type 2 diabetes results 
from causes other than diabetic retinopathy. These include cataract, 
age-related macular degeneration, retinal vein occlusion, retinal arter-
ial occlusion, non-arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy and glaucoma. 
Some of these conditions are to be expected in this group, as they 
relate to cardiovascular risk factors (e.g. hypertension, hyperlipidae-
mia and smoking), all of which are prevalent in people with type 2 
diabetes.
In diabetes, metabolic changes in the lens (which are not yet fully 
elaborated) cause premature and/or accelerated cataract formation. A 
rare type of ‘snowake’ cataract occurs in young patients with poorly 
controlled diabetes. This does not usually affect vision but tends to make 
fundal examination difcult. The indications for cataract surgery in diabe-
tes are similar to those in the non-diabetic population, but an additional 
indication in diabetes is when adequate assessment of the fundus and/
or retinal laser therapy becomes impossible.
Retinal vascular occlusion
Retinal vein occlusion (thrombosis)
Retinal vein occlusion is an important vascular cause of visual impair-
ment, visual loss resulting from macular oedema or occasionally from 
neovascularisation, both of which are managed in a similar way to dia-
betic macular oedema or proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Although pathogenesis of retinal vein occlusion is not fully understood, 
the most common mechanism is believed to be compression of a vein 
by an adjacent arteriosclerotic artery. Retinal vessels are unusual in that, 
where the arteries and veins cross over each other, they share a common 
outer layer (tunica adventitia). This means that arteriosclerotic thickening 
of an artery leads directly to compression of the adjacent vein (arterio-
venous nipping).
A less common cause of retinal vein occlusion is inammation of the 
retinal vein (periphlebitis), also called retinal vasculitis (unlike systemic 
vasculitis, the arterial system is not involved). Periphlebitis should be sus-
pected in younger patients and in patients with no obvious risk factors 
for arteriosclerosis. Diagnosis is made by uorescein angiography and 
treatment is with systemic immunosuppression, with or without adjunc-
tive intravitreal therapy.
Retinal vein occlusion is associated with systemic hypertension and 
may rarely result from hyperviscosity due to a myeloproliferative disor-
der, multiple myeloma, Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia or leukaemia. 
Glaucoma is associated with retinal vein occlusion but whether this is a 
direct cause or merely a comorbidity in older people is not known.
Clinical presentation is with unilateral painless loss of central vision 
(central retinal vein thrombosis) or an area of peripheral vision (branch 
retinal vein thrombosis). Fundoscopic features include ame haemor-
rhages, cotton wool spots, macular oedema and a swollen optic disc 
(Fig. 30.13).
The management of retinal vein occlusion is twofold: management of 
the underlying aetiology and management of the consequences of reti-
nal vein occlusion. Where an underlying risk factor for arteriosclerosis is 
clearly present secondary prevention measures should be commenced. 
However, the role of secondary prevention of arteriosclerosis in isolated 
retinal vein occlusion, although common practice by some, remains 
controversial.
Retinal artery occlusion
Retinal artery occlusion is usually an embolic phenomenon. Common 
predisposing factors are therefore (predominantly carotid) atherosclero-
sis, valvular heart disease, arrhythmias and infective endocarditis. The 
next most common cause is vasculitis, mainly giant cell arteritis.
Fig. 30.13 Central retinal vein occlusion (thrombosis), showing ame 
haemorrhages, cotton wool spots, macular oedema and a swollen optic disc.
Courtesy of Aberdeen Royal Inrmary.

[[p1297]]
Further information    1233
30
B
A
Fig. 30.14 Retinal artery occlusion.
(A) From Duker JS, 
Waheed NK, Goldman DR. Handbook of retinal OCT. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2014. (B) From Bowling B. Kanski’s Clinical ophthalmology, 8th edn. Oxford: Elsevier 
Ltd; 2016
Retinal artery occlusion presents with painless unilateral visual 
loss, the extent and location of which depend on whether there is 
a central occlusion or a branch occlusion (peripheral occlusions may 
be asymptomatic). Transient occlusion of the internal carotid or oph-
thalmic artery causes transient visual loss, or amaurosis fugax. The 
typical fundoscopic nding in a central occlusion is a transiently 
pale retina with a ‘cherry-red’ spot at the macula, the appearance 
developing over an hour or so after the occlusion (Fig. 30.14). In 
branch occlusions there is no cherry-red spot and the retinal pallor is 
regional.
Age-related macular degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration is the most common cause of visual 
impairment in high income countries. There are two basic forms: atrophic 
(dry) and neovascular (wet). The underlying mechanism is dysfunction 
of the retinal pigment epithelium, leading to overlying photoreceptor 
death. Choroidal neovascularisation, growing under and into the overly-
ing  retina, may occur, distorting the anatomy of the photoreceptors and 
ending in scar formation. Both forms are preceded by deposits under 
the retinal pigment epithelium (‘drusen’), often followed by the devel-
opment of focal areas of macular hypo- and hyperpigmentation, where 
diseased retinal pigment epithelial cells have precipitated their pigment 
(age- related maculopathy).
The atrophic form presents with gradual onset of central visual blur-
ring, accompanied, to a lesser degree, by visual distortion. Large (geo-
graphic), central patches of atrophy are seen with areas of adjacent 
hyperpigmentation. In the neovascular form, sudden onset of central 
distortion, progressing within weeks, is the predominant symptom. Apart 
from age, the main risk factor appears to be smoking.
The advent of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injectors has 
led to effective therapy for the neovascular form, in many but not all. 
Unfortunately, treatment is expensive and requires considerable nancial 
and staff resources to treat in timely fashion; delayed treatment can lead 
to irreversible visual loss. For whichever type, whether treatable or not, 
visual rehabilitation, through the use of appropriate magniers, alteration 
in lighting and specialised adaptation of everyday living objects, remains 
important adjunctive therapy.
Further information
Websites
jrcptb.org.uk/specialties/medical-ophthalmology How to train in medical 
ophthalmology in the UK.
ndrs.scot.nhs.uk Scottish Diabetic Retinopathy Screening Collaborative: aspects 
of screening for diabetic retinopathy, including rationale, organisation, delivery 
and an on-line training handbook.
rcophth.ac.uk Royal College of Ophthalmologists, London: as part of its role in 
championing excellence, produces a range of pragmatic surgical and medical 
guidelines.
sun.scot.nhs.uk Scottish Uveitis Network: standards of care, treatment guidelines 
and information leaets.

[[p1298]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p1299]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 30.1 Intraocular pressure is determined by the balance between the 
rate of production of aqueous humour and the rate of outow 
through the trabecular and uveoscleral outow. Which part of the 
ciliary body is responsible for producing aqueous humour?
 
A. Zonular bres
 
B. Pars plana
 
C. Anterior non-pigmented ciliary epithelium
 
D. Posterior pigmented ciliary epithelium
 
E. Ciliary muscle
Answer: C.
The ciliary body is part of the uvea, which comprises the iris, ciliary 
body and choroid. The ciliary body lies between the iris and the more 
posterior choroid. It is located in the eye circumferentially beneath the 
corneal limbus. Anteriorly, its non-pigmented ciliary processes actively 
secrete the majority of aqueous uid mainly through Na+/K+-ATPase 
pump activity. This uid passes forward through the pupil into the ant-
erior chamber. A small amount of aqueous humour is secreted passively. 
This is a process of ultraltration and diffusion, dependent on capillary 
hydrostatic pressure, oncotic pressure and IOP.
 30.2 All of the following extraocular muscles arise from the orbital apex 
except
 
A. Medial rectus
 
B. Inferior oblique
 
C. Lateral rectus
 
D. Inferior rectus
 
E. Superior oblique
Answer: B.
Inferior oblique originates in the anterior orbit from the orbital surface 
of the maxillary bone in the anterior orbital oor. The rectus muscles orig-
inate from a tendinous ring, the ‘annulus of Zinn’, at the orbital apex and 
course forwards to attach to the anterior aspect of the globe. The sup-
erior oblique originates just superiorly and nasal to the origin of superior 
rectus at the orbital apex. It courses forwards passing through a pulley 
system, the trochlear, and inserts onto the posterior globe.
 30.3 A 23-year-old man presents with a 2-day history of a red, painful, 
photophobic left eye. He describes a burning sensation. He 
has no past ocular history, does not wear contact lenses and is 
usually t and well. A drop of uorescein is instilled into his eye 
and on examination with blue light a branching dendritic lesion is 
seen. What is the most appropriate treatment for this condition?
 
A. Topical aciclovir
 
B. Oral aciclovir
 
C. Topical steroid
 
D. Topical antibiotics
 
E. Topical lubricants
Answer: A.
A dendritic lesion in the absence of a history of contact lens wear is 
typical of herpes simplex keratitis. Débridement of the area with a viral 
swab has a two-fold benet: rstly it reduces the viral load and secondly, 
if it is a rst presentation of herpetic eye disease it is important to estab-
lish a formal diagnosis. This is followed by treatment with topical aciclovir 
until the lesion is resolved. Some types of herpetic eye disease including 
recurrent presentations benet from treatment with oral aciclovir. Topical 
steroid is absolutely contraindicated in the absence of antiviral cover. 
Topical antibiotics or lubricants will not help because the aetiology is viral.
 30.4 A 28-year-old man has been referred to eye casualty complaining 
of a red, watering, painful and photophobic eye for the last 
6 days. He is not a contact lens wearer and has been using 
chloramphenicol ointment from the chemist which is not 
improving the symptoms. He has no signicant medical history. 
Examination is challenging due to the degree of photophobia. 
His eye is very injected with ciliary ush and the pupil reacts 
sluggishly. What is the most common cause of this condition?
 
A. Herpesviridae infection
 
B. Sarcoidosis
 
C. Angle closure glaucoma
 
D. HLA-B27 seropositivity
 
E. Idiopathic
Answer: E.
This is a typical presentation of anterior uveitis. Idiopathic anterior uve-
itis is the most common form. The aetiology is unknown but could be 
related to cross-reactivity with particular microbial antigens. Systemic 
associations of anterior uveitis include HLA-B27 spondyloarthropa-
thies, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis and reactive arthritis as 
well as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Infective causes include 
Herpesviridae herpes simplex and varicella zoster, syphilis, TB and Lyme 
disease. Other associated systemic conditions include sarcoidosis, juve-
nile idiopathic arthritis, Behçet’s disease and SLE. Less common causes 
include drug-induced, especially anti-cancer drugs, haematological 
malignancy and even recent tattoos. It is therefore important to take a full 
systemic history, social and drug history to look for these associations. 
It would be almost unheard of to diagnose angle closure glaucoma in a 
man of this age and a feature against this is the presence of a reactive 
pupil, albeit sluggish.
 30.5 A 35-year-old woman has noticed a change in the appearance 
of her right eye for the past 5–6 weeks. She describes a slight 
deterioration in vision and the eye has been aching, which is 
exacerbated with eye movement. Past medical history includes 
one spontaneous vaginal delivery and diet-controlled gestational 
diabetes. She takes the oral contraceptive pill. On examination 
visual acuity is 6/12 in the right eye, 6/6 in the left. She has a full 
range of eye movements but complains of a tugging sensation 
on upgaze. Her colour vision, visual eld testing and pupillary 
responses are normal. Externally her eyelids are not swollen or red, 
the eyes are both white. She has 2 mm of proptosis on the right 
side and you can see 1 mm of sclera above the cornea. Her basic 
observations are all within range. What is the most likely diagnosis?
 
A. Orbital cellulitis
 
B. Thyroid eye disease
 
C. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
 
D. Idiopathic orbital inammatory syndrome
 
E. Optic neuritis
Answer: B.
Thyroid eye disease is the most common cause of both unilateral and 
bilateral proptosis in adults. Typical features include ocular pain at rest, 
which is exacerbated with eye movements (gaze-evoked pain), swelling 
and redness of the lids, conjunctiva, plica and caruncle, double vision and 
proptosis. Sight-threatening complications of thyroid eye disease occur 
secondary to the increased orbital pressure. If this damages the optic 
nerve it is termed dysthyroid optic neuropathy or if orbital swelling causes 
proptosis so severe that the eyelids cannot close this may result in corneal 
exposure keratopathy, a potentially sight- and eye-threatening condition. 

[[p1300]]
It is always important to consider orbital cellulitis in cases of proptosis but 
this would present more acutely with severe lid swelling, oedema, pain 
and usually with systemic manifestations including pyrexia. The differen-
tial diagnosis of proptosis is extensive, including trauma, vascular lesions 
such as carotid-cavernous stulas or cavernous sinus thrombosis, neo-
plastic lesions and inammatory conditions. Optic neuritis can present with 
reduced visual acuity and retrobulbar pain classically exacerbated with eye 
movement. However optic neuritis is not associated with proptosis, addi-
tionally optic nerve function, which includes colour vision, visual eld test-
ing and pupillary responses, would be abnormal.
 30.6 A 73-year-old man attends his optician. He was hospitalised 
following a stroke a few months ago causing weakness in 
his left face, arm and leg. Although his mobility has improved 
he reports his vision on the left is not any better. He wears 
spectacles for both near and distance and wanted these 
updating to improve his vision. His past medical history 
includes atrial brillation, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, COPD, 
hypercholesterolaemia and benign prostatic hyperplasia. The 
optician performs visual eld testing. What is the most likely 
pattern of visual eld loss?
 
A. Left monocular loss
 
B. Right homonymous hemianopia
 
C. Left homonymous hemianopia
 
D. Bitemporal hemianopia
 
E. Left superior altitudinal visual eld defect
Answer: C.
The left-sided hemiparesis described would be caused by a stroke 
in the right cerebral hemisphere. The same pathology would affect the 
right optic radiation. Fibres representing the left temporal hemield and 
the right nasal hemield travel in the right optic radiation. Damage in this 
area would therefore cause a left homonymous hemianopia. This can 
be preferentially superior or inferior depending on the particular location 
of the stroke. Patients may interpret these symptoms and describe it 
as visual loss from one eye, which is why confrontational visual elds 
are an important part of a cranial nerve exam. Bitemporal hemianopia is 
classically caused by pituitary or other chiasmal pathology. Monocular 
altitudinal visual eld defects are caused by pathology affecting the optic 
nerve or retina.

[[p1301]]
Medical psychiatry
31
RM Steel
SM Lawrie
Clinical examination 1236
The psychiatric interview 1237
The mental state examination 1237
Investigations in medical psychiatry 1237
Functional anatomy and physiology 1238
Biological factors 1238
Psychological and behavioural factors 1239
Social and environmental factors 1240
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness 1240
Delirium 1240
Alcohol misuse 1240
Substance misuse 1240
Delusions and hallucinations 1240
Low mood 1241
Elevated mood 1242
Anxiety 1242
Psychological factors affecting medical conditions 1242
Medically unexplained somatic symptoms 1242
Self-harm 1243
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour 1243
Principles of management 1245
Pharmacological treatments 1245
Electroconvulsive therapy 1245
Other forms of electromagnetic stimulation 1245
Surgery 1245
Psychological therapies 1246
Social interventions 1246
Psychiatric disorders 1246
Dementia 1246
Alcohol misuse and dependence 1249
Substance misuse disorder 1250
Schizophrenia 1251
Mood disorders 1253
Anxiety disorders 1254
Obsessive–compulsive disorder 1255
Stress-related disorders 1255
Somatoform disorders 1256
Eating disorders 1257
Personality disorders 1258
Factitious disorder and malingering 1259
Puerperal psychiatric disorders 1260
Psychiatry and the law 1260

[[p1302]]
1236    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
Psychiatric disorders have traditionally been considered as ‘mental’ 
rather than as ‘physical’ illnesses. This is because they manifest with 
disordered functioning in the areas of emotion, perception, thinking 
and memory, and formerly had no clearly biological basis. However, 
as biochemical and structural abnormalities of the brain are identi-
ed in an increasing number of psychiatric disorders, and psycholog-
ical and behavioural factors are identied in many medical illnesses, 
the distinction between mental and physical illness has become 
questionable.
The World Health Organization (WHO) periodically publishes its 
International Classication of Disease (ICD), which provides denitions 
for every recognised clinical condition. The 10th Revision (ICD-10) com-
prises 22 chapters. The diagnoses listed in Chapter V, ‘Mental and 
behavioural disorders’ (Box 31.1), are used by psychiatrists around the 
world in everyday clinical practice and it is these conditions that provide 
the focus for this chapter.
Psychiatric disorders are among the most common of all human 
illnesses. The WHO's Global Burden of Disease study found ‘Mental, 
neurological and substance misuse disorders’ to be the leading cause 
of ‘Years Lost to Disability’ (YLDs), accounting for almost 20% of 
global YLDs, with anxiety and mood disorders alone accounting for 
over 10%. As with most clinical conditions, the prevalence of mental 
disorders varies with the setting. In the general population, depres-
sion, anxiety disorders and adjustment disorders are most common 
(>10%) and psychosis is rare (<2%); in acute medical wards of gen-
eral hospitals, organic disorders such as delirium are very common, 
with prevalence highest among sick, older patients; in specialist gen-
eral psychiatric services, psychoses are the most common disorders 
(Box 31.2).
Clinical examination
As in other areas of medicine, the psychiatric assessment comprises a 
structured clinical history and examination followed by appropriate inves-
tigations. However, psychiatric assessment differs from a standard med-
ical assessment in the following ways:
 There is greater emphasis on the history and relatively less reliance 
on investigations.
 A large part of the clinical examination component is conducted as 
the history is being taken rather than as a discrete set of procedures 
afterwards.
 It commonly includes the interviewing of an informant, usually a 
relative or friend who knows the patient, especially when the illness 
affects the patient's ability to give an accurate history.
31.1 World Health Organization classication of psychiatric 
disorders (ICD-10)
Chapter V (F00–F99)
Mental and behavioural disorders
Examples
F00–F09
Organic mental disorders
Dementias
Delirium
Other mental disorders due to brain 
damage or disease
F10–F19
Disorders due to psychoactive 
substances: alcohol, opioids, 
cannabinoids etc.
Intoxication
Harmful use
Dependence
Withdrawal
F20–F29
Schizophrenia and delusional 
disorders
Schizophrenia
F30–F39
Mood [affective] disorders
Depression
Bipolar disorder
F40–F48
Neurotic, stress-related and 
somatoform disorders
Phobias
Generalised anxiety disorder
Obsessive–compulsive disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Adjustment disorders
Somatoform disorders
F50–F59
Behavioural syndromes associated 
with physiological disturbances
Eating disorders: anorexia and bulimia 
nervosa
Sexual dysfunction
F60–F69
Disorders of adult personality and 
behaviour
Specic personality disorders
Trichotillomania
Gender identity disorders
F70–F79
Mental retardation
Mild, moderate, severe or profound
F80–F89
Disorders of psychological 
development
Autism
Asperger syndrome
F90–F98
Behavioural and emotional disorders 
of childhood
Hyperkinetic disorders
Tic disorders
From WHO. International Classication of Diseases and Related Health Problems. 10th Revision 
(ICD-10). Geneva: World Health Organization.
31.2 Prevalence of psychiatric disorders by medical setting
Medical/surgical
General psychiatric services
General practice
Outpatients
Inpatients
Delirium
–
–
+++
Alcohol/substance abuse
++
++
+++
+++
Schizophrenia
–
–
–
+++
Bipolar disorder
–
–
–
+++
Depression
++
++
+++
+++
Anxiety disorders
++
++
++
+++
Adjustment disorders
++
++
+++
+
Somatoform disorders
+
+++
++
Personality disorders
+
+
+
+++
 ‘rare’ (<2%); + ‘uncommon’ (2%–5%); ++ ‘common’ (5%–10%); +++ ‘very common’ (>10%)

[[p1303]]
Clinical examination    1237
31
A full psychiatric history (Box 31.3) incorporating a detailed mental 
state examination may take an hour or more because of its complexity. 
A brief mental state examination, usually taking no more than a few min-
utes (see below), should be part of the assessment of all patients, not 
merely those deemed to have psychiatric illnesses.
The psychiatric interview
The aims of the interview are to:
 establish a therapeutic relationship with the patient
 elicit the symptoms, history and background information (Box 31.3)
 examine the mental state
 provide information, reassurance and advice.
Mood
This can be judged by facial expression, posture and movements. 
Patients should also be asked if they feel sad or depressed and if they 
lack ability to experience pleasure (anhedonia). Are they anxious, worried 
or tense? Is mood elevated with excess energy and a reduced need for 
sleep, as in (hypo)mania?
Thoughts
The content of thought can be elicited by asking ‘What are your main 
concerns?’ Is thinking negative, guilty or hopeless, suggesting depres-
sion? Are there thoughts of self-harm? If so, enquiry should be made 
about plans. Are patients excessively worried about many things, sug-
gesting anxiety? Do they think that they are especially powerful, impor-
tant or gifted (grandiose thoughts), suggesting mania?
The form of thinking may also be abnormal. In schizophrenia, 
patients may display loosened associations between ideas, making it 
difcult to follow their train of thought. There may also be abnormalities 
of thought possession, when patients experience the intrusion of alien 
thoughts into their mind or the broadcasting of their own thoughts to 
other people.
Abnormal beliefs
A delusion is a false belief, out of keeping with a patient's cultural back-
ground, which is held with conviction despite evidence to the contrary.
Abnormal perceptions
Illusions are misperceptions of real stimuli. Hallucinations are sensory 
perceptions that occur in the absence of external stimuli, such as hearing 
voices when no one is present.
Cognitive function
Cognitive function has many components: memory, concentration, visuo-
spatial abilities, executive function and so on. In most cases, a brief 
assessment of orientation (person, place and time – the patient is asked 
their name, age, date of birth, what building they are in, the current date 
and day of the week) and attention (‘serial 7 s’ – the patient is asked to 
subtract 7 from 100 and then 7 from the answer, and so on) is suf-
cient to exclude clinically signicant cognitive impairment. Where there is 
reason to suspect cognitive impairment, a standardised screening tool 
should be used. In delirium, cognitive impairment typically uctuates over 
time so may be missed by a single assessment.
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a useful screening 
questionnaire that covers all the main domains of cognitive function 
(Fig. 31.1). It is designed to be easy to use and is freely available online in 
many different languages. Another widely used screening test is the Mini-
Mental State Examination (MMSE), although this is subject to copyright, 
unlike the MoCA. The Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination – 3rd edi-
tion (ACE-III) offers a more comprehensive assessment and brief training 
courses for clinicians wishing to use it. These resources are available 
online (see ‘Further information’).
Patients' own understanding of their symptoms
Patients should be asked what they think their symptoms are due to and 
whether they warrant treatment. The failure of a patient to understand 
their own symptoms is referred to as ‘lack of insight’. Psychotic patients 
characteristically have lack of insight and fail to accept that they are in 
need of treatment.
Investigations in medical psychiatry
In many areas of medicine, laboratory or radiological tests play a cen-
tral role in diagnosis. Such tests are often performed in psychiatry but 
are typically used to exclude non-psychiatric illness rather than to con-
rm a psychiatric diagnosis. For example, in a patient presenting with 
symptoms of anxiety it may be appropriate to check thyroid function to 
exclude thyrotoxicosis as a cause of their symptoms. Specic inves-
tigations are recommended in certain psychiatric conditions such as 
31.3  How to structure a psychiatric interview
Presenting problem
Reason for referral
 Why the patient has been referred and by whom
Presenting complaints
 The patient should be asked to describe the main problems for which help is 
requested and what they want the doctor to do
History of present illness
 The patient should be asked to describe the course of the illness from when 
symptoms were rst noticed
 The interviewer asks direct questions to determine the nature, duration and 
severity of symptoms, and any associated factors
Background
Family history
 Description of parents and siblings, and a record of any mental illness in relatives
Personal history
 Birth and early developmental history, major events in childhood, education, 
occupational history, relationship(s), marriage, children, current social circumstances
Previous medical and psychiatric history
 Previous health, accidents and operations
 Use of alcohol, tobacco and other drugs
 Direct questions may be needed concerning previous psychiatric history since 
this may not be volunteered: ‘Have you ever been treated for depression or 
nerves?’ or ‘Have you ever suffered a nervous breakdown?’
Previous personality
 The patterns of behaviour and thinking that characterise a person, including 
their relationships with other people and reactions to stress (useful 
information may be obtained from an informant who has known the patient 
well for many years)
The mental state examination
The mental state examination (MSE) is a systematic examination of the 
patient's thinking, emotion and behaviour. As with the clinical examina-
tion in other areas of medicine, the aim is to elicit objective clinical signs. 
While many aspects of the patient's mental state may be observed as 
the history is being taken, specic enquiries about important features 
should always be made.
General appearance and behaviour
Any abnormalities of alertness or motor behaviour, such as restlessness 
or retardation, should be noted. The level of consciousness should be 
determined, especially in the assessment of possible delirium.
Speech
Speed and uency should be observed, including slow (retarded) speech 
and word-nding difculty. ‘Pressure of speech’ describes rapid speech 
that is difcult to interrupt.

[[p1304]]
1238    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
dementia, delirium, substance misuse and eating disorders, as shown 
in Box 31.4. Further details of each of these disorders are discussed 
later in the chapter,
Functional anatomy and physiology
Most psychiatric disorders result from a complex interplay between 
psychological, social, environmental and genetic factors. Each of these 
VISUOSPATIAL/EXECUTIVE
N A MI NG
M EM O RY
ATTENTION
LANGUAGE
ABSTRACTION
ORIENTATION
Optional
© Z.Nasreddine MD
www.mocatest.org
DELAYED RECALL
Copy
cube
Contour
FACE
1st trial
93
2nd trial
FBACMNAAJKLBAFAKDEAAAJAMOFAAB
VELVET
CHURCH
DAISY
RED
No
points
                                        Read list of words, subject must
repeat them. Do 2 trials, even if 1st trial is successful.
Do a recall after 5 minutes.
Read list of digits (1 digit/ sec.)
Repeat:  I only know that John is the one to help today.
                 The cat always hid under the couch when dogs were in the room.
Serial 7 subtraction starting at 100
Fluency / Name maximum number of words in one minute that begin with the letter F
Similarity between e.g. banana – orange = fruit
Has to recall words
WITH NO CUE
Category cue
Points for
UNCUED
recall only
Multiple choice cue
Administered by:
4 or 5 correct subtractions: 3 pts, 2 or 3 correct: 2 pts, 1 correct: 1 pt, 0 correct: 0 pt
Read list of letters. The subject must tap with his hand at each letter A.   No points if ≥ 2 errors
                                        Subject has to repeat them in the forward order
                                        Subject has to repeat them in the backward order
Numbers
Hands
POINTS
/5
Draw CLOCK (Ten past eleven)
(3 points)
End
Begin
E
A
2
B
4
3
1
5
D
C
Date
Month
Year
Day
Place
TOTAL
City
Add 1 point if  ≤ 12 yr edu
Normal  ≥ 26 / 30
86
FACE
VELVET
CHURCH
DAISY
RED
train – bicycle
watch – ruler
79
72
65
(N ≥ 11 words)
/3
/2
2 1 8 5 4
7 4 2
/1
/3
/2
/1
/2
/5
/6
/30
Fig. 31.1 Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). A widely used screening tool for cognitive impairment. © Z. Nasreddine MD, www.mocatest.org
factors may play a role in predisposing to, precipitating or perpetuating 
a disorder (Box 31.5).
Biological factors
Genetic
Genetic factors play a predisposing role in many psychiatric disorders, 
including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. However, while some 

[[p1305]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1239
31
Brain structure and function
Brain structure is grossly normal in most psychiatric disorders, although 
abnormalities may be observed in some conditions, such as generalised 
cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer's disease and enlarged ventricles with a 
slightly decreased brain size in schizophrenia. Functioning of the brain, 
however, is commonly altered due to changes in neurotransmitters such 
as dopamine, noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT, serotonin). Functional differences in specic areas of the brain 
are increasingly being recognised using advanced imaging techniques. 
For example, positron emission tomography (PET) studies of dopa-
mine ligand binding in schizophrenia have consistently demonstrated 
increased dopamine synthesis in the striatum, even in untreated patients, 
while a smaller body of PET evidence points towards reductions in 5-HT 
transporter binding in the mid-brain and amygdala in depression.
Pattern classication approaches to structural magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) data can accurately predict the development of schiz-
ophrenia in at-risk populations, and generalised grey matter loss over 
time is a poor prognostic guide. Increased anterior cingulate activity in 
depression is a consistent predictor of good response to both antide-
pressants and cognitive behaviour therapy. While these and other imag-
ing techniques show potential as diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic 
aids, they remain research tools at the present time.
It is also increasingly clear that psychiatric disorders are associated 
with disruptions in neuronal systems rather than single sites. These can 
be characterised using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) of white-matter pro-
jection bres and resting-state/task-based functional MRI (fMRI) stud-
ies of inter-regional connectivity. For example, DTI has shown reduced 
white-matter density in limbic (‘emotional’) system tracts, such as the 
fornix and cingulum, in many disorders. Resting-state fMRI studies con-
sistently identify ‘default mode’, salience and executive control networks 
of interconnected neuronal populations for certain mental activities. 
These pathways are implicated in several psychiatric disorders but, as 
yet, in non-specic ways.
Psychological and behavioural factors
Early environment
Early childhood adversity, such as emotional deprivation or abuse, pre-
disposes to most psychiatric disorders, such as depression, eating dis-
orders and personality disorders in adulthood.
Personality
The relationship between personality and psychiatric disorder can be 
difcult to assess because the development of psychiatric disorder can 
impact on a patient's personality. Some personality types predispose the 
31.4 Investigations in psychiatry
Presentation
Investigation
Dementia
FBC, ESR
U&Es, TFTs, LFTs, calcium, cholesterol, CRP
Glucose (fasting)
Vitamin B12, folate
CT brain
HIV*, VDRL*
MRI*
EEG*
Lumbar puncture*
Substance misuse
Alcohol
Breath alcohol
FBC
U&Es, LFTs, albumin, γGT
CT brain*
FibroScan*
Other psychoactive substances
Urine drug screen
HIV, Hep B, Hep C serology
ECG*
Psychosis
Urine drug screen
FBC
U&Es, TFTs
HIV*, VDRL*
CT brain*
Mood disorders
Depression
FBC
U&Es, TFTs, LFTs
Vitamin B12*, folate*, vitamin D*
EBV serology*
Mania
Urine drug screen
FBC
U&Es, TFTs
CT brain*
Anxiety disorders
FBC
U&Es, TFTs, calcium
Urine drug screen*
γGT*
Serum/urine metanephrine
Eating disorders
Anorexia nervosa
FBC
U&Es, TFTs, LFTs, albumin, cholesterol, 
amylase
Calcium, magnesium, phosphate
Glucose (fasting)
ECG
Bone mineral density scan
Bulimia nervosa
FBC
U&Es
Calcium, magnesium, phosphate
Vitamin B12, folate, ferritin
ECG
*When indicated in specic cases
(CRP = C-reactive protein; CT = computed tomography; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus; ECG = echocardiogram; EEG = electroencephalogram; 
FBC = full blood count; γGT = gamma-glutamyltransferase; Hep = hepatitis; HIV = human 
immunodeciency virus; LFTs = liver function tests; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging;  
TFTs = thyroid function tests; U&Es = urea and electrolytes; VDRL = Venereal Diseases 
Research Laboratory)
31.5 Classication of risk factors for psychiatric disorders
Classication
Examples
Predisposing
Established in utero or in childhood
Genetic and epigenetic factors
Congenital defects
Increase susceptibility to psychiatric 
disorder
Disturbed family background
Operate throughout patient's 
lifetime
Chronic physical illness
Precipitating
Trigger an episode of illness
Determine its time of onset
Stressful life events
Acute physical illness
Misuse of alcohol or drugs
Perpetuating
Delay recovery from illness
Lack of social support
Chronic physical illness
disorders, such as Huntington's disease, are due to mutations in a single 
gene, the genetic contribution to most psychiatric disorders is polygenic 
in nature and mediated by the combined effects of several genetic vari-
ants, each with modest effects and modulated by environmental factors.

[[p1306]]
1240    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
individual to develop a psychiatric disorder, however; for example, an 
obsessional (‘anankastic’) personality increases the risk of obsessive–
compulsive disorder. A disordered personality may also perpetuate a 
psychiatric disorder once it is established, leading to a poorer prognosis.
Behaviour
A person's behaviour may predispose to the development or perpetu-
ation of a disorder. Examples include excess alcohol intake leading to 
dependence, dieting in anorexia or persistent avoidance of the feared 
situation in phobia.
Social and environmental factors
Social isolation
The lack of a close, conding relationship predisposes to some psychi-
atric disorders, such as depression, and this may be particularly rele-
vant in older adults where social isolation is common (see Box 31.6). 
As well as predisposing to psychiatric disorders the reduced social 
support that results from having a psychiatric disorder may also act to 
perpetuate it.
Stressors
Social and environmental stressors often play an important role in pre-
cipitating psychiatric disorder in those who are predisposed, such as 
trauma in post-traumatic stress disorder, losses (such as bereavement) 
in depression, and events perceived as threatening (such as potential 
loss of employment) in anxiety.
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness
Delirium
Delirium is a medical disorder that is common in older adults and in 
patients in high-dependency and intensive care units. The causes, 
assessment and management of delirium are described in Chapter 14
Alcohol misuse
Misuse of alcohol is a major problem worldwide. It presents in a multitude 
of ways, which are discussed later on in this chapter and summarised 
in Box 31.23. In many cases, the link to alcohol is obvious; in others, it 
may not be, since denial and concealment of alcohol intake are common.
Clinical assessment
The patient should be asked to describe a typical week's drinking, 
quantied in terms of units of alcohol (1 unit contains approximately 8 g 
alcohol and is the equivalent of half a pint of beer, a single measure of 
spirits or a small glass of wine). The history from the patient may need 
corroboration by the general practitioner (GP), earlier medical records 
and family members.
Investigations
Abnormalities in routine biochemistry and haematology can support the 
diagnosis of alcohol excess (such as the nding of a raised mean cell volume 
(MCV) and/or raised γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT)), but such tests are abnor-
mal in only half of problem drinkers; consequently, normal results on these 
tests do not exclude an alcohol problem. When abnormal, these measures 
may be helpful in challenging denial and monitoring treatment response. 
Transient elastography (also known as FibroScan) is an ultrasound-based 
technique that measures brosis and steatosis. It is used in specialist ser-
vices to complement information derived from tests of MCV and GGT.
Management
The prevention and management of alcohol-related problems are dis-
cussed later in this chapter.
Substance misuse
The misuse of drugs of all kinds is also widespread. As well as the gen-
eral headings listed for alcohol problems in Box 31.23, additional prob-
lems may occur in association with substance misuse (Box 31.7). These 
can be broken down into two broad categories:
 problems linked with the route of administration, such as intra-
venous injection
 problems arising from pressure applied to doctors to prescribe the 
misused substances.
Assessment and management are described later in this chapter in 
the section on substance misuse.
Delusions and hallucinations
Delusions and hallucinations are abnormal beliefs and perceptions that 
have no rational basis. They are often due to psychiatric illness but can 
be secondary to substance misuse, physical illness or neurological 
disorders, such as epilepsy.
Delusions
A delusion is a false belief, out of keeping with a patient's cultural back-
ground, which is held with conviction despite evidence to the contrary. It is 
common to classify delusions on the basis of their content. They may be:
 persecutory – such as a conviction that others are out to harm one
 hypochondriacal – such as an unfounded conviction that one has 
cancer
 grandiose – such as a belief that one has special powers or status
 nihilistic – such as ‘My head is missing’, ‘I have no body’ or ‘I am dead’.
31.6 Medical psychiatry in old age
 Organic psychiatric disorders: especially common, so cognitive function 
should always be assessed; if impaired, an associated medical condition or 
adverse drug effect should be suspected.
 Disturbed behaviour: delirium is the most common cause.
 Depression: common. Just because a person is old and frail does not mean 
that depression is ‘to be expected’ and that it should not be treated.
 Self-harm: associated with an increased risk of completed suicide.
 Medically unexplained symptoms: common and often associated with 
depressive disorder.
 Loneliness, poverty and lack of social support: must be taken into 
consideration in management decisions.
31.7 Substance misuse
Complications arising from the route of use
Intravenous
 Local: abscesses, cellulitis, thrombosis
 Systemic: bacterial (endocarditis), viral (hepatitis, human immunodeciency 
virus (HIV))
Nasal ingestion
 Erosion of nasal septum, epistaxis
Smoking
 Oral, laryngeal and lung cancer
Inhalation
 Burns, chemical pneumonitis, rashes
Pressure to prescribe misused substance
 Manipulation, deceit and threats
 Factitious description of illness
 Malingering

[[p1307]]
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness    1241
31
Hallucinations
Hallucinations are dened as sensory perceptions occurring without 
external stimuli. They can occur in any sensory modality but most com-
monly are visual or auditory. Typical examples are hearing voices when 
no one else is present, or seeing ‘visions’. Hallucinations have the quality 
of ordinary perceptions and are perceived as originating in the external 
world, not in the patient's own mind (when they are termed ‘pseudo-hal-
lucinations’). Those occurring when falling asleep (‘hypnagogic’) and on 
waking (‘hypnopompic’) are a normal phenomenon and not pathological. 
Hallucinations should be distinguished from illusions, which are misper-
ceptions of real external stimuli (such as mistaking a shrub for a person 
in poor light).
Clinical assessment
Careful and tactful enquiry is required because agitation, terror or the 
fear of being thought ‘mad’ may make patients unable or unwilling to 
volunteer or describe their abnormal beliefs or perceptions. The nature 
of hallucinations can be important diagnostically; for example, ‘running 
commentary’ voices that discuss the patient are strongly associated with 
schizophrenia. In general, auditory hallucinations suggest schizophrenia, 
while hallucinations in other sensory modalities, especially vision but also 
taste and smell, suggest an organic cause, such as substance misuse, 
delirium or temporal lobe epilepsy.
Hallucinations and delusions often co-occur. If their content is con-
sistent with coexisting emotional symptoms, they are described as 
‘mood-congruent’. Thus, patients with severely depressed mood may 
believe themselves responsible for all the evils in the world, and hear 
voices saying, ‘You are worthless. Go and kill yourself.’ In this case, 
the diagnosis of depressive psychosis is made on the basis of the con-
gruence of different phenomena (mood, delusion and hallucination). 
Incongruence between hallucinations, delusions and mood suggests 
schizophrenia.
Investigations
The presence of hallucinations and/or delusions should not automatically 
trigger a round of expensive investigations; rather, careful clinical assess-
ment of the nature, extent and time course of the patient's symptoms 
will generate a list of likely diagnoses, and investigations can then be 
intelligently deployed to differentiate between these. When hallucina-
tions and/or delusions arise in the context of disturbed consciousness 
and impaired cognition, the diagnosis is usually an organic disorder, 
most commonly delirium and/or dementia, and should be investigated 
accordingly.
Management
The management of hallucinations and/or delusions is primarily the man-
agement of the underlying condition (such as delirium, schizophrenia, 
mania or psychotic depression). Certain principles apply, however, what-
ever the underlying cause.
Hallucinations and delusions can be very real to, and often frighten-
ing for, the person who is experiencing them. Patients will often seek 
reassurance from the doctor. The doctor should acknowledge that these 
experiences are real for the patient while avoiding being drawn into col-
luding with the patient's false beliefs or perceptions. Statements such as 
‘Sometimes when we are unwell our brain plays tricks on us’ can help 
to reassure a patient. Where the patient lacks insight, however, a more 
neutral ‘We will have to agree to disagree’ may be necessary to avoid 
conict.
Antipsychotic medication can reduce psychotic symptoms, such as 
hallucinations and delusion, and is often used in combination with other 
sedating medication (such as a benzodiazepine) to alleviate acute dis-
tress and reduce behavioural disturbance.
Low mood
It is not uncommon for general hospital patients to report low mood. It 
is important to differentiate an understandable, self-limiting reaction to 
adversity (such as physical illness or bad news), which is normal and 
requires support rather than ‘treatment’, from a depressive disorder. 
which is characterised by a more severe and persistent disturbance of 
mood and requires specic treatment.
Clinical assessment
Depression is a relatively common illness, with a prevalence of approxi-
mately 5% in the general population and 10%–20% in medical patients. 
It is important to note that depression has physical as well as mental 
symptoms (Box 31.8). The diagnosis of depression in the medically 
ill, who may have physical symptoms of disease such as weight loss, 
fatigue, disturbed sleep, reduced appetite and so on that overlap with 
the physical symptoms of depression, relies on detection of the core 
psychological symptoms of ‘anhedonia’ (inability to experience pleasure) 
and the negative cognitive triad (see Box 31.18).
In some cases, depression may occur as a result of a direct effect of 
a medical condition or its treatment on the brain, when it is referred to as 
an ‘organic mood disorder’ (Box 31.9).
Investigations
When a patient appears to be low in mood, it is good practice to ask 
them specically about their mood. Do they feel low (nausea, over-sed-
ation, parkinsonism and so on can all cause a patient to appear low in 
mood). If so, how long have they been feeling low? Are they still able to 
enjoy things? To what do they attribute their low mood? If the low mood 
is persistent, not adequately explained by circumstances and/or associ-
ated with anhedonia, the patient should be investigated for depression. 
Where a patient's mood is extremely low, the clinician should ask about 
suicide. Asking about suicide does not increase the risk of it occurring, 
whereas failure to enquire denies the opportunity to prevent it. The 
assessment of suicide risk is described in the self-harm section later in 
this chapter.
31.8 Symptoms of depressive disorders
Psychological
 Depressed mood
 Reduced self-esteem
 Pessimism
 Guilt
 Loss of interest
 Loss of enjoyment (anhedonia)
 Suicidal thinking
Somatic
 Reduced appetite
 Weight change
 Disturbed sleep
 Fatigue
 Loss of libido
 Bowel disturbance
 Motor retardation (slowing of activity)
31.9 Organic mood disorders*
Neurological
Infections
 Cerebrovascular disease
 Cerebral tumour
 Multiple sclerosis
 Parkinson’s disease
 Huntington’s disease
 Alzheimer's disease
 Epilepsy
 Infectious mononucleosis
 Herpes simplex
 Brucellosis
 Typhoid
 Toxoplasmosis
Connective tissue disease
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Endocrine
Drugs
 Hypothyroidism
 Hyperthyroidism
 Cushing’s syndrome
 Addison’s disease
 Hyperparathyroidism
Malignant disease
 Phenothiazines
 Phenylbutazone
 Glucocorticoids, oral contraceptives
 Interferon
*Diseases that may cause organic affective disorders by direct action on the brain.

[[p1308]]
1242    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
Management
Where a patient s low mood is an understandable reaction to adver-
sity, the clinical team can support the patient by minimising uncertainty 
through open and effective clinical communication and by addressing 
isolation (allowing access to visitors, telephone and so on). More details 
of the strategies available for management of depression are provided 
later in this chapter.
Elevated mood
Elevated mood is much less common than depressed mood, and in 
medical settings is often secondary to drug or alcohol misuse, an organic 
disorder or medical treatment. Where none of these applies, the patient 
may be experiencing a manic (or, if less severe, ‘hypomanic’) episode as 
part of a bipolar affective disorder. Mania is the converse of depression. It 
may manifest as infectious joviality, over-activity, lack of sleep and appe-
tite, undue optimism, over-talkativeness, irritability, and recklessness in 
spending and sexual behaviour. When elated mood is severe, psychotic 
symptoms are often evident, like delusions of grandeur such as believing 
erroneously that one is royalty.
Investigations
The rst investigation for any medical patient presenting with persistent 
and inexplicable elevated mood in the absence of a history of bipolar 
affective disorder is a medication review. Mania is a relatively common 
side-effect of certain classes of drug, such as glucocorticoids, and is 
a rare side-effect of many other drugs. Recreational, herbal and over-
the-counter preparations should also be considered. Second-line inves-
tigations include tests for Cushing's disease, thyrotoxicosis, syphilis and 
encephalitis.
Management
The management of bipolar disorder and disturbed or aggressive behav-
iour are discussed in the relevant sections later in this chapter. The 
management of organic mania involves identifying and addressing the 
underlying cause.
Anxiety
Anxiety may be transient, persistent, episodic or limited to specic situa-
tions. The symptoms of anxiety are both psychological and physical (Box 
31.10). The differential diagnosis of anxiety is shown in Box 31.11. Most 
anxiety is part of a transient adjustment to stressful events: adjustment 
disorders. Other more persistent forms of anxiety are described in detail 
on page 1254.
Investigations
Anxiety may occasionally be a manifestation of a medical condition such 
as thyrotoxicosis (see Box 31.11). Tests to exclude or conrm these con-
ditions should be considered, particularly if anxiety is a new symptom 
that has arisen in the absence of an obvious stressor.
Management
The management of specic anxiety disorders is discussed later in this 
chapter. Benzodiazepines and related drugs, while extremely effective 
in the short term, cause tolerance and unpleasant or even dangerous 
withdrawal syndromes if used for more than a few weeks.
Psychological factors affecting  
medical conditions
Psychological factors may inuence the presentation, management 
and outcome of medical conditions. Specic factors are shown in Box 
31.12. The most common psychiatric diagnoses in the medically ill are 
anxiety and depressive disorders. Often these appear understandable 
as adjustments to illness and its treatment; however, if the anxiety and 
depression are severe and persistent, they may complicate the man-
agement of the medical condition and active management is required. 
Anxiety may present as an increase in somatic symptoms, such as 
breathlessness, tremor or palpitations, or as the avoidance of medical 
treatment. It is most common in those facing difcult or painful treat-
ments, deterioration of their illness or death. Depression may manifest 
as increased physical symptoms, such as pain, fatigue and disability, 
as well as with depressed mood and loss of interest and pleasure. It 
is most common in patients who have suffered actual or anticipated 
losses, such as receiving a terminal diagnosis or undergoing disguring 
surgery.
Treatment is by psychological and/or pharmacological therapies, 
as described later in this chapter in the section on depression. Care is 
required when prescribing psychotropic drugs to the medically ill in order 
to avoid exacerbation of the medical condition and harmful interactions 
with other prescribed drugs.
Medically unexplained somatic symptoms
Medically unexplained somatic symptoms (MUS) is the term used to 
describe the situation where patients have symptoms that cannot be 
explained on the basis of a physical disorder (see Fig. 31.6). They fall into 
characteristics patterns (Box 31.13), and  are very common in patients 
31.10 Symptoms of anxiety disorder
Psychological
 Apprehension
 Irritability
 Worry
 Poor concentration
 Fear of impending disaster
 Depersonalisation
Somatic
 Palpitations
 Fatigue
 Tremor
 Dizziness
 Sweating
 Diarrhoea
 Frequent desire to pass urine
 Chest pain
 Initial insomnia
 Breathlessness
 Headache
31.11  Differential diagnosis of anxiety
 Normal response to threat
 Adjustment disorder
 Generalised anxiety disorder
 Panic disorder
 Phobic disorder
 Organic (medical) cause:
Hyperthyroidism
Paroxysmal arrhythmias
Phaeochromocytoma
Alcohol and benzodiazepine withdrawal
Hypoglycaemia
Temporal lobe epilepsy
31.12  Risk factors for psychological problems associated with 
medical conditions
 Previous history of depression or anxiety
 Lack of social support
 New diagnosis of a serious medical condition
 Deterioration of, or failure of treatment for, a medical condition
 Unpleasant, disabling or disguring treatment
 Change in medical care, such as discharge from hospital
 Impending death

[[p1309]]
Presenting problems in psychiatric illness    1243
31
attending general medical outpatient clinics. Almost any symptom can 
be medically unexplained, including:
 pain (including back, chest, abdominal, pelvic and headache)
 fatigue
 ts, ‘funny turns’, dizziness and feelings of weakness.
Patients with MUS may receive a medical diagnosis of a so-called 
‘functional somatic syndrome’, such as irritable bowel syndrome 
(Box 31.13), and may also merit a psychiatric diagnosis on the basis 
of the same symptoms. The most frequent psychiatric diagnoses 
associated with MUS are anxiety or depressive disorders. When these 
are absent, a diagnosis of somatoform disorder may be appropriate. 
Somatoform disorders are discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Self-harm
Self-harm (SH) is a common reason for presentation to medical services. 
The term ‘attempted suicide’ is potentially misleading, as most of these 
patients are not trying to kill themselves. Most cases of SH involve over-
dose, of either prescribed or non-prescribed drugs (Ch. 10). Less com-
mon methods include asphyxiation, drowning, hanging, jumping from a 
height or in front of a moving vehicle, and the use of rearms. Methods 
that carry a high chance of being fatal are more likely to be associated 
with serious psychiatric disorder. Self-cutting is common and often 
repetitive, but rarely leads to contact with medical services.
The incidence of SH varies over time and between countries. In the 
UK, the lifetime prevalence of suicidal ideation is 15% and that of acts 
of SH is 4%–5%. SH is more common in women than men, and in 
young rather than older adults. (In contrast, completed suicide is more 
common in men and older people; Box 31.14.) There is a higher inci-
dence of SH among lower socioeconomic groups, particularly those 
living in crowded, socially deprived urban areas. There is also an asso-
ciation with alcohol misuse, child abuse, unemployment and recent 
relationship problems.
Clinical assessment
The main differential diagnosis is from accidental poisoning and 
so-called ‘recreational’ overdose in drug users. It must be remembered 
that SH is not a diagnosis but a presentation, and may be associated 
with any psychiatric diagnosis, the most common being adjustment 
disorder, substance and alcohol misuse, depressive disorder and per-
sonality disorder. In many cases, however, no psychiatric diagnosis can 
be made.
Management
A thorough psychiatric and social assessment should be attempted in 
all cases (Fig. 31.2), although some patients will discharge themselves 
before this can take place. The need for psychiatric assessment should 
not delay urgent medical or surgical treatment, though, and may need to 
be deferred until the patient is well enough for interview. The purpose of 
the psychiatric assessment is to:
 establish the short-term risk of suicide
 identify potentially treatable problems, whether medical, psychiatric 
or social.
Topics to be covered when assessing a patient are listed in Box 31.15. 
The history should include events occurring immediately before and after 
the act, and especially any evidence of planning. The nature and severity 
of any current psychiatric symptoms must be assessed, along with the 
personal and social supports available to the patient outside hospital.
Most SH patients have depressive and anxiety symptoms on a back-
ground of chronic social and personal difculties (often complicated by 
use of alcohol or other substances), but no psychiatric disorder. They 
do not usually require psychotropic medication or specialised psychiatric 
treatment but may benet from personal support and practical advice 
from a GP, social worker or community psychiatric nurse. Admission to a 
psychiatric ward is necessary only for persons who display one or more 
of the following:
 an acute psychiatric disorder
 high short-term risk of suicide
 need for temporary respite from intolerable circumstances
 requirement for further assessment of their mental state.
Approximately 20% of SH patients make a repeat act during the fol-
lowing year and 1%–2% kill themselves. Factors associated with suicide 
after an episode of SH are listed in Box 31.14
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour
Disturbed and aggressive behaviour is common in general hospitals, 
especially in emergency departments. Most behavioural disturbance 
arises not from medical or psychiatric illness, but from alcohol intoxica-
tion, reaction to the situation and personality characteristics.
Clinical assessment
The key principles of management are, rstly, to establish control of the 
situation rapidly and thereby ensure the safety of the patient and others; 
and secondly, to try to determine the cause of the disturbance in order 
to remedy it. Establishing control requires the presence of an adequate 
number of trained staff, an appropriate physical environment and some-
times sedation (Fig. 31.3). The assistance of hospital security staff and 
sometimes the police may be required. In all cases, the staff approach 
is important; a calm, non-threatening manner expressing understanding 
of the patient's concerns is often all that is required to defuse potential 
aggression (Box 31.16).
31.13 Functional somatic syndromes
Medical specialty
Somatic syndromes
Gastroenterology
Irritable bowel syndrome, functional 
dyspepsia
Gynaecology
Pre-menstrual syndrome, chronic 
pelvic pain
Rheumatology
Fibromyalgia
Cardiology
Atypical or non-cardiac chest pain
Respiratory medicine
Hyperventilation syndrome
Infectious diseases
Chronic (post-viral) fatigue syndrome
Neurology
Tension headache, non-epileptic 
attacks, functional gait disorder
Dentistry
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction, 
atypical facial pain
Ear, nose and throat
Globus syndrome
Allergy medicine
Multiple chemical sensitivity
31.14 Risk factors for suicide
 Psychiatric illness (depressive illness, schizophrenia)
 Older age
 Male sex
 Living alone
 Unemployment
 Recent bereavement, divorce or separation
 Chronic physical ill health
 Drug or alcohol misuse
 Suicide note written
 History of previous attempts (especially if a violent method was used)

[[p1310]]
1244    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
No
Yes
Patient admitted following
deliberate self-harm
Urgent medical treatment
needed?
Medical assessment to determine
need for urgent medical treatment
Medical treatment
Psychiatric assessment
Immediate and significant suicide risk
No
Yes
Plan to minimise risk:
   remove methods of self-harm
   arrange for special support
   consider use of mental health
    legislation
Assess for significant psychiatric illness
Suspected?
No
Yes
Assess and arrange
management
for other problems
Consider:
 psychiatric admission (using mental health
  legislation if necessary)
 referral to psychiatric service for outpatient
  treatment
Fig. 31.2 Assessment of patients admitted following self-harm.
31.15  Assessment of patients after self-harm
Current attempt
 Patient's account
 Degree of intent at the time: preparations, plans, precautions against discovery, 
note
 Method used, particularly whether violent
 Degree of intent now
 Symptoms of psychiatric illness
Background
 Previous attempts and their outcome
 Family and personal history
 Social support
 Previous response to stress
 Extent of drug and alcohol misuse
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Disturbed behaviour
Does it seem likely to be caused
by mental disorder?
Consider calling
security/police
Is the behaviour putting the patient
or others at risk?
Monitor
and review
Monitor
and review
1. Ensure availability of adequate personnel
    to provide ‘overwhelming force’
2. Try to attain a safe and quiet environment
3. Consider emergency sedation with
    haloperidol (0.5– 5 mg IM/orally)
           and/or 
    benzodiazepine (diazepam 5–10 mg IV slowly
    in view of risk of respiratory depression
              or
    lorazepam 1–2 mg IM/orally)
Consult with senior staff
Consider repeating drug, increasing dose
or using other agents such as midazolam
or paraldehyde
Are measures effective?
Fig. 31.3 Acute management of disturbed behaviour. (IM = intramuscular; IV = 
intravenous)
31.16  Psychiatric emergencies
 Intervene as necessary to reduce the risk of harm to the patient and to others
 Adopt a calm, non-threatening approach
 Arrange availability of other staff and parenteral medication
 Consider diagnostic possibilities of drug intoxication, acute psychosis and 
delirium
 Involve friends and relatives as appropriate
An attempt should be made to try to identify the factors that are con-
tributing to the disturbed behaviour. When the patient is cooperative, 
these factors are best determined at interview. Other sources of infor-
mation about the patient include medical and psychiatric records, and 
discussion with nursing staff, family members and other informants, 
including the patient's GP. The following information should be sought:
 psychiatric, medical (especially neurological) and criminal history
 current psychiatric and medical treatment

[[p1311]]
Principles of management    1245
31
 alcohol and drug misuse
 recent stressors
 the time course and accompaniments of the current episode in 
terms of mood, belief and behaviour.
Observation of the patient's behaviour may also yield useful clues. Do 
they appear to be responding to hallucinations? Are they alert or variably 
drowsy and confused? Are there physical features suggestive of drug or 
alcohol misuse or withdrawal? Are there new injuries or old scars, espe-
cially on the head? Do they smell of alcohol or solvents? Do they bear the 
marks of drug injection? Are they unwashed and unkempt, suggesting a 
gradual development of their condition?
Investigations
Depending on the results of clinical assessment, routine biochemistry, 
haematology and analysis of blood or urine for illicit drugs or alcohol may 
be required.
Management
Measures such as restraint and sedation may be required in patients with 
acute behavioural disturbance in order to identify the cause and to protect 
the patient and other people from harm. While this potentially raises legal 
issues, in most countries, including the UK, common law confers on doc-
tors the right, and indeed the duty, to intervene against a patient's wishes 
if this is necessary. Sedation may be required and can be achieved with 
antipsychotic drugs (such as haloperidol) and/or benzodiazepines (such 
as lorazepam or diazepam). The choice of drug, dose, route and rate of 
administration depends on the patient's age, gender and physical health, 
as well as the likely cause of the disturbed behaviour. The benets of seda-
tion must always be balanced against the potential risks. When prescribing 
benzodiazepines, consider the risk of respiratory depression (particularly in 
patients with lung disease) and encephalopathy (in those with liver disease). 
When prescribing antipsychotic drugs for acute sedation, consider the risk 
of acute dystonias (such as ‘oculogyric crisis’) and acute arrhythmias (in 
patients with heart disease). Thus for a frail older woman with emphysema 
and delirium, sedation may be achieved with a low dose (0.5 mg) of oral 
haloperidol, while for a strong young man with an acute psychotic episode, 
10 mg or more of intravenous diazepam and a similar dose of haloperidol 
may be required. A parenterally administered anticholinergic agent, such as 
procyclidine, should be available to treat extrapyramidal effects from halop-
eridol if they arise. Flumazenil can be used to reverse respiratory depression 
caused by benzodiazepines.
If the initial assessment suggests that the patient has an acute psychi-
atric disorder, then admission to a psychiatric facility may be indicated. If 
a medical cause is more likely, psychiatric transfer is usually inappropriate 
and the patient should be managed in a medical setting, with whatever 
nursing and security support is required. Where it is clear that there is no 
medical or psychiatric illness, the person should be removed from the 
hospital, to police custody if necessary.
Many countries, such as the UK, also have specic mental health 
legislation that may be used to detain patients if necessary.
Principles of management
The multifactorial origin of most psychiatric disorders means that there 
are multiple potential targets for treatment. It is useful to consider man-
agement strategies within a bio-psycho-social framework. This can help 
to address the biological factors that contribute to the illness with medi-
cation and other physical treatments such as electroconvulsive therapy, 
while also considering the potential role for psychological therapies and 
changes to the patient's social environment.
Pharmacological treatments
These aim to relieve psychiatric disorder by modifying brain function. 
The main biological treatments are psychotropic drugs. These are 
widely used for various purposes; a pragmatic classication is set out in 
Box 31.17. It should be noted that some drugs have applications to 
more than one condition; for example, antidepressants are also widely 
used in the treatment of anxiety and chronic pain. The specic subgroups 
of psychotropic drugs are discussed in the sections on the appropriate 
disorders below.
Electroconvulsive therapy
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) entails producing a convulsion by the 
brief administration of a high-voltage direct-current impulse to the head 
while the patient is anaesthetised and paralysed by muscle relaxant. If 
properly administered, it is remarkably safe, has few side-effects and is 
of proven efcacy for severe depressive illness. There may be headaches 
and amnesia for events occurring a few hours before ECT (retrograde) 
and after it (anterograde). Pronounced amnesia can occur but is infre-
quent and difcult to distinguish from the effects of severe depression.
Other forms of electromagnetic stimulation
Clinical trials of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and vagal nerve 
stimulation (VNS) suggest they may have a limited role in patients with 
depression refractory to conventional treatments.
Surgery
Surgery to the brain (psychosurgery) has a very limited place and then 
only in the treatment of severe chronic psychiatric illness resistant to 
other measures. Frontal lobotomies are never done now, and pre-frontal 
leucotomies are very rare. Operations these days usually target specic 
sub-regions and tracts of the brain.
31.17 Classication of commonly used psychotropic drugs
Action
Main groups
Clinical use
Antipsychotic
Phenothiazines
Butyrophenones
Second-generation antipsychotics
Schizophrenia
Bipolar mania
Delirium
Antidepressant
Tricyclics and related drugs
Serotonin and noradrenergic re-uptake inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Esketamine
Depression/anxiety
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Depression/anxiety
Adjunctive therapy in treatment of resistant depression
Mood-stabilising
Lithium
Sodium valproate
Lamotrigine
Treatment and prophylaxis of bipolar disorder
Adjunctive therapy in bipolar disorder
Anti-anxiety
Benzodiazepines
β-adrenoceptor antagonists
Anxiety/insomnia (short term)
Alcohol withdrawal (short term)
Anxiety (somatic symptoms)

[[p1312]]
1246    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
Psychological therapies
These treatments are useful in many psychiatric disorders and also in 
non-psychiatric conditions. They are based on talking with patients, either 
individually or in groups. Sometimes discussion is supplemented by ‘home-
work’ or tasks to complete between treatment sessions. Psychological 
treatments take a number of forms based on the duration and frequency of 
contact, the specic techniques applied and their underlying theory.
General supportive psychotherapy
General psychotherapy should be part of all medical treatment. It 
involves empathic listening to the patient's account of their symptoms 
and associated fears and concerns, followed by the sympathetic provi-
sion of accurate information that addresses these.
Cognitive therapy
This therapy is based on the observation that some psychiatric disorders 
are associated with systematic errors in the patient's conscious thinking, 
such as a tendency to interpret events in a negative way or see them as 
unduly threatening. A triad of ‘cognitive errors’ has been described in 
depression (Box 31.18). Cognitive therapy aims to help patients to iden-
tify such cognitive errors and to learn how to challenge them. It is widely 
used for depression, anxiety, and eating and somatoform disorders, and 
also increasingly in psychoses.
Behaviour therapy
This is a practically orientated form of treatment, in which patients are 
assisted in changing unhelpful behaviour, such as helping patients to 
implement carefully graded exposure to the feared stimulus in phobias.
Cognitive behaviour therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) combines the methods of behaviour 
therapy and cognitive therapy. It is the most widely available and exten-
sively researched psychological treatment.
Problem-solving therapy
This is a simplied brief form of CBT, which helps patients actively tackle 
problems in a structured way (Box 31.19). It can be delivered by non-psy-
chiatric doctors and nurses after appropriate training and is commonly 
used to help patients who self-harm in response to a situational crisis.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
This treatment, also known as ‘interpretive psychotherapy’, was 
pioneered by Freud, Jung and Klein, among others. It is based on the 
theory that early life experience generates powerful but unconscious 
motivations. Psychotherapy aims to help the patient to become aware 
of these unconscious factors on the assumption that, once identied, 
their negative effects are reduced. The relationship between therapist 
and patient is used as a therapeutic tool to identify issues in patients' 
relationships with others, particularly parents, which may be replicated or 
transferred to their relationship with the therapist. Explicit discussion of 
this relationship is the basis for the treatment, which traditionally requires 
frequent sessions over a period of months or even years.
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a specic form of brief psychother-
apy that focuses on patients' current interpersonal relationships and is an 
effective treatment for mild to moderate depression.
Social interventions
Some adverse social factors, such as unemployment, may not be read-
ily amenable to intervention but others, such as access to benets and 
poor housing, may be. Patients can be helped to address these prob-
lems themselves by being taught problem-solving. Befrienders and day 
centres can reduce social isolation, benets advisers can ensure appro-
priate nancial assistance, and medical recommendations can be made 
to local housing departments to help patients obtain more appropriate 
accommodation.
Psychiatric disorders
Dementia
Dementia is a clinical syndrome characterised by a loss of previously 
acquired intellectual function in the absence of impaired arousal. It affects 
5% of those over 65 and 20% of those over 85. It is dened as a global 
impairment of cognitive function and is typically progressive and non-re-
versible. There are many subtypes (Box 31.20) but Alzheimer's disease 
and diffuse vascular dementia are the most common. Rarer causes of 
dementia should be actively sought in younger patients and those with 
short histories.
Pathogenesis
Dementia may be divided into ‘cortical’ and ‘subcortical’ types, depend-
ing on the clinical features.
Clinical features
The usual presentation is with a disturbance of personality or memory 
dysfunction. A careful history is essential and it is important to interview 
both the patient and a close family member. Simple bedside tests, such 
as the MoCA, are useful in assessing the nature and severity of the cog-
nitive decit, although a more intensive neuropsychological assessment 
may sometimes be required, especially if there is diagnostic uncertainty. 
It is important to exclude a focal brain lesion. This is done by determin-
ing that there is cognitive disturbance in more than one area. Mental 
state assessment is important to seek evidence of depression, which 
may coexist with or occasionally cause apparent cognitive impairment. 
Many of the primary degenerative diseases that cause dementia have 
characteristic features that may allow a specic diagnosis during life. 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, for example, is usually quickly progres-
sive (over months) and is associated with myoclonus. The more slowly 
progressive dementias are more difcult to distinguish during life, but 
31.18  The negative cognitive triad associated with depression
Cognitive error
Example
Negative view of self
‘I am no good’
Negative view of current life experiences
'The world is an awful place’
Negative view of the future
'The future is hopeless’
31.19  Stages of problem-solving therapy
 Dene and list problems
 Choose one to work on
 List possible solutions
 Evaluate these and choose the best
 Try it out
 Evaluate the result
 Repeat until problems are resolved

[[p1313]]
Psychiatric disorders    1247
31
fronto-temporal dementia typically presents with signs of temporal or 
frontal lobe dysfunction, whereas Lewy body dementia may present with 
visual hallucinations. The course may also help to distinguish types of 
dementia. Gradual worsening suggests Alzheimer's disease, whereas 
stepwise deterioration is typical of vascular dementia.
Investigations
The aim is to seek treatable causes and to estimate prognosis. This is 
done using a standard set of investigations (Box 31.21). Imaging of the 
brain can exclude potentially treatable structural lesions, such as hydro-
cephalus, cerebral tumour or chronic subdural haematoma, though the 
only abnormality usually seen is that of generalised atrophy. An elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) may be helpful if Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease is 
suspected, as characteristic abnormalities of generalised periodic sharp 
wave pattern are usually observed. If the initial tests are negative, more 
invasive investigations, such as lumbar puncture or, very rarely, brain 
biopsy, may be indicated.
Management
This is mainly directed at addressing treatable causes and providing 
support for patients and carers. Tackling risk factors may slow deterior-
ation, such as by management of hypertension in vascular dementia, 
or abstinence and vitamin replacement in toxic/nutritional dementias. 
Psychotropic drugs may have a role in alleviating symptoms, such as 
disturbance of sleep, perception or mood, but should be used with care 
because of an increased mortality in patients who have been treated long-
term with these agents. Sedation is not a substitute for good care of 
patients and carers or, in the later stages, attentive residential nursing 
care. In the UK, incapacity and mental health legislation may be required 
to manage patients' nancial and domestic affairs, as well as to deter-
mine their safe placement. If the diagnosis is Alzheimer-type dementia, 
cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine may slow progression for a time.
Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia. It increases 
in prevalence with age and is rare in people under 45 years.
31.20  Subtypes and causes of dementia
Type
Common
Less common
Rare
Vascular
Diffuse small-vessel disease
Amyloid angiopathy
Multiple emboli
Cerebral vasculitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Inherited
Alzheimer's disease
Fronto-temporal dementia
Leukodystrophies
Huntington's disease
Wilson's disease
Dystrophia myotonica
Lewy body dementia
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Mitochondrial encephalopathies
Cortico-basal degeneration
Neoplastic
Secondary deposits
Primary cerebral tumour
Paraneoplastic syndrome (limbic encephalitis)
Inammatory
–
Multiple sclerosis
Sarcoidosis
Traumatic
Chronic subdural haematoma
Post-head injury
Punch-drunk syndrome
–
Hydrocephalus
Communicating/non-communicating ‘normal pressure’ 
hydrocephalus
Toxic/nutritional
Alcohol
Thiamin deciency
Vitamin B12 deciency
Anoxia/carbon monoxide poisoning
Heavy metal poisoning
Infective
–
Syphilis
Human immunodeciency virus (HIV)
Post-encephalitis
Whipple's disease
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
Prion diseases
–
Sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD)
Variant CJD
Kuru
Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker disease
31.21  Initial investigation of dementia
In most patients
 Imaging of head (CT and/or MRI)
 Blood tests:
Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Urea and electrolytes, glucose
Calcium, liver function tests
Thyroid function tests
Vitamin B12
Syphilis serology
ANA, anti-dsDNA
 Chest X-ray
 Electroencephalography
In selected patients
 Lumbar puncture
 HIV serology
 Brain biopsy
(ANA = antinuclear antibody; anti-dsDNA = anti-double-stranded DNA; CT = computed 
tomography; HIV = human immunodeciency virus; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging)
Pathogenesis
Genetic factors play an important role and about 15% of cases are 
familial. These cases fall into two main groups: early-onset disease with 
autosomal dominant inheritance and a later-onset group where the inher-
itance is polygenic. Mutations in several genes have been described but 
most are rare and/or of small effect. The inheritance of one of the alleles 
of apolipoprotein ε (apo ε4) is associated with an increased risk of devel-
oping the disease (2–4 times higher in heterozygotes and 6–8 times 
higher in homozygotes). Its presence is, however, neither necessary nor 
sufcient for the development of the disease and so genetic testing for 
ApoE4 is not clinically useful. The brain in Alzheimer's disease is macro-
scopically atrophic, particularly the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. 
Histologically, the disease is characterised by the presence of senile 
plaques and neurobrillary tangles in the cerebral cortex. Histochemical 

[[p1314]]
1248    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
staining demonstrates signicant quantities of amyloid in the plaques 
(Fig. 31.4); these typically stain positive for the protein ubiquitin, which 
normally is involved in targeting unwanted or damaged proteins for deg-
radation. This has led to the suggestion that the disease may be due 
to defects in the ability of neuronal cells to degrade unwanted proteins. 
Many different neurotransmitter abnormalities have also been described. 
In particular, there is impairment of cholinergic transmission, although 
abnormalities of noradrenaline (norepinephrine), 5-HT, glutamate and 
substance P have also been described.
Clinical features
The key clinical feature is impairment of the ability to remember new 
information. Hence, patients present with gradual impairment of memory, 
usually in association with disorders of other cortical functions. Short- 
and long-term memory are both affected but defects in the former are 
usually more obvious. Later in the course of the disease, typical fea-
tures include apraxia, visuospatial impairment and aphasia. In the early 
stages of the disease patients may notice these problems, but as the 
disease progresses it is common for patients to deny that there is any-
thing wrong (anosognosia). In this situation, patients are often brought 
to medical attention by their carers. Depression is commonly present. 
Occasionally, patients become aggressive, and the clinical features can 
be made acutely worse by intercurrent physical disease.
Patients typically present with subjective memory loss, sometimes 
getting lost in familiar locations. A history of progressive memory loss 
and associated functional impairment, corroborated by an informant, is 
the key to making the diagnosis. Cognitive testing and neuroimaging can 
be helpful but in themselves are not diagnostic.
Investigations
Investigation is aimed at excluding treatable causes of dementia (see 
Box 31.20), as histological conrmation of the diagnosis usually occurs 
only after death.
Management
Treatment with anticholinesterases, such as donepezil, rivastigmine and 
galantamine, has been shown to be of some benet at slowing pro-
gression of cognitive impairment in the early stages of the disease while 
post-synaptic cholinergic receptors are still available. The N-methyl-D
aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist memantine slightly enhances 
learning and memory in early disease and can also be useful in selected 
patients with more advanced disease. Novel treatments are under 
development to block amyloid plaque formation directly, by inhibiting 
the enzyme γ-secretase. Non-pharmacological approaches include the 
provision of a familiar environment for the patient and support for the 
carers. Many patients are anxious or depressed, and if this is conrmed, 
treatment with antidepressant medication may be helpful.
Fronto-temporal dementia
Fronto-temporal dementia encompasses a number of different syndromes 
characterised by behaviour abnormalities and impairment of language. 
Symptoms usually occur before the age of 60 and the prevalence has 
been estimated at 15 per 100 000 in the population aged between 45 
and 65 years. The three major clinical subtypes are behavioural-variant 
fronto-temporal dementia, primary progressive aphasia and semantic 
dementia. Pick's disease is a common cause of the rst two in particu-
lar. Genetic factors play an important role and familial cases have been 
described caused by mutations in several genes, including MAPT, which 
encodes microtubule-associated protein tau, GRN, TPD43, FUS, VCP
and C9orf72. The causal mutations trigger abnormal accumulation of tau 
and other proteins in brain tissue, which are seen as cytoplasmic inclusion 
bodies on histological examination (Fig. 31.5). It is of interest that some 
gene mutations that cause fronto-temporal dementia, such as VCP, are 
also associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, inclusion body myo-
pathy and Paget’s disease of bone, suggesting that these disorders 
A
B
Fig. 31.4 Alzheimer's disease. Section of neocortex stained with polyclonal 
antibody against βA4 peptide showing amyloid deposits in plaques in brain substance 
(arrow A) and in blood-vessel walls (arrow B). Courtesy of Dr J. Xuereb
B
Fig. 31.5 Fronto-temporal dementia.
from a patient who died of Pick's disease, showing gyral atrophy of frontal and 
parietal lobes and a more severe degree of atrophy affecting the anterior half of 
×200) view of hippocampal pyramidal 
layer, prepared with monoclonal anti-tau antibody. Many neuronal cell bodies contain 
sharply circumscribed, spherical cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Pick bodies, arrows). 
(A and B) Courtesy of Dr J. Xuereb
A

[[p1315]]
Psychiatric disorders    1249
31
share a similar pathogenic basis in which cellular degeneration is caused 
by accumulation of abnormal proteins. The clinical presentation may be 
with personality change due to frontal lobe involvement or with language 
disturbance due to temporal lobe involvement. In contrast to Alzheimer's 
disease, memory is relatively preserved in the early stages. There is no spe-
cic treatment. Disinhibition and compulsive behaviours can be helped by 
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Although fronto-temporal 
dementia shares certain symptoms with Alzheimer's, it cannot be treated 
with anticholinesterases because cholinergic systems are not affected.
Lewy body dementia
This neurodegenerative disorder is clinically characterised by dementia 
and signs of Parkinson's disease. It is often inherited and mutations in 
the α-synuclein and β-synuclein genes have been identied in affected 
patients. These mutations result in accumulation of abnormal protein 
aggregates in neurons that contain the protein α-synuclein in association 
with other proteins, including ubiquitin (see Fig. 28.30). The cognitive 
state often uctuates and there is a high incidence of visual hallucina-
tions. Affected individuals are particularly sensitive to the side-effects 
of anti-Parkinsonian medication and also to antipsychotic drugs. There 
is no curative treatment but anticholinesterase drugs can be helpful in 
slowing progression of cognitive impairment.
Alcohol misuse and dependence
Alcohol consumption associated with social, psychological and physi-
cal problems constitutes misuse. The criteria for alcohol dependence, a 
more restricted term, are shown in Box 31.22. Approximately one-quar-
ter of male patients in general hospital medical wards in the UK have a 
current or previous alcohol problem.
Pathogenesis
Availability of alcohol and social patterns of use appear to be the most 
important factors. Genetic factors predispose to dependence. The majority 
of people who misuse alcohol do not have an associated psychiatric dis-
order, but a few drink heavily in an attempt to relieve anxiety or depression.
Clinical features
The modes of presentation of alcohol misuse and complications are 
summarised below.
Social problems
Common features include absenteeism from work, unemployment, mari-
tal tensions, child abuse, nancial difculties and problems with the law, 
such as violence and trafc offences.
Low mood
Low mood is common since alcohol has a direct depressant effect and 
heavy drinking creates numerous social problems. Attempted and com-
pleted suicide are associated with alcohol misuse.
Anxiety
People who are anxious may use alcohol as a means of relieving anxiety 
in the short term and this can develop into dependence. Conversely, 
alcohol withdrawal increases anxiety.
Alcohol withdrawal syndrome
The features are described in Box 31.23. Symptoms usually become 
maximal about 2–3 days after the last drink and can include seizures. 
The term ‘delirium tremens’ is used to describe severe alcohol with-
drawal syndrome characterised by both delirium (characteristically, agi-
tation and visual hallucinations) and physiological hyper-arousal (tremor, 
sweating and tachycardia). It has a signicant mortality and morbidity 
(see Box 31.23).
Hallucinations
Hallucinations (characteristically visual but sometimes in other modali-
ties) are common in delirium tremens. Less common is the phenomenon 
called ‘alcoholic hallucinosis’, where a patient with alcohol dependence 
experiences auditory hallucination in clear consciousness at a time when 
they are not withdrawing from alcohol.
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome
This is a rare but important indirect complication of chronic alcohol mis-
use. It is an organic brain disorder resulting from damage to the mamil-
lary bodies, dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus and adjacent areas of 
periventricular grey matter caused by a deciency of thiamin (vitamin B1). 
The syndrome most commonly results from long-standing heavy drinking 
and an inadequate diet but can also arise from malabsorption or even 
protracted vomiting. Wernicke's encephalopathy (nystagmus or ophthal-
moplegia with ataxia and delirium) often presents acutely and, without 
prompt treatment (see below), can progress and become irreversible. 
Korsakoff syndrome (severe short-term memory decits and confabula-
tion) can develop chronically or acutely (with Wernicke's).
Alcohol-related brain damage
The term alcohol-related brain damage (ARBD) is often used as a collective 
description of the many brain pathologies associated with alcohol excess, 
31.22  Criteria for alcohol dependence
 Narrowing of the drinking repertoire
 Priority of drinking over other activities (salience)
 Tolerance of effects of alcohol
 Repeated withdrawal symptoms
 Relief of withdrawal symptoms by further drinking
 Subjective compulsion to drink
 Reinstatement of drinking behaviour after abstinence
31.23  Presentation and consequences of chronic alcohol 
misuse
Acute intoxication
 Emotional and behavioural disturbance
 Medical problems: hypoglycaemia, ketoacidosis, aspiration of vomit, respiratory 
depression
 Accidents, injuries sustained in ghts
Withdrawal phenomena
 Psychological symptoms: restlessness, anxiety, panic attacks
 Autonomic symptoms: tachycardia, sweating, pupil dilatation, nausea, vomiting
 Delirium: agitation, hallucinations (classically ‘Lilliputian’), illusions, delusions
 Seizures
Consequences of harmful use
Medical
 Neurological: peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar degeneration, cerebral 
haemorrhage, dementia
 Hepatic: fatty change and cirrhosis, liver cancer
 Gastrointestinal: oesophagitis, gastritis, pancreatitis, oesophageal cancer, 
Mallory–Weiss syndrome, malabsorption, oesophageal varices
 Respiratory: pulmonary tuberculosis, pneumonia
 Skin: spider naevi, palmar erythema, Dupuytren's contractures, telangiectasias
 Cardiac: cardiomyopathy, hypertension
 Musculoskeletal: myopathy, fractures
 Endocrine and metabolic: pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, hypoglycaemia, gout
 Reproductive: hypogonadism, fetal alcohol syndrome, infertility
Psychiatric and cerebral
 Depression
 Alcoholic hallucinosis
 Alcoholic ‘blackouts’
 Wernicke's encephalopathy: nystagmus or ophthalmoplegia with ataxia and delirium
 Korsakoff syndrome: short-term memory decits leading to confabulation

[[p1316]]
1250    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
which often coexist in the same patient. Acute alcohol intoxication causes 
ataxia, slurred speech, emotional incontinence and aggression. Very heavy 
drinkers may experience periods of amnesia for events that occurred dur-
ing bouts of intoxication, termed ‘alcoholic blackouts’. Established alcohol 
dependence may lead to ‘alcoholic dementia’, a global cognitive impairment 
resembling Alzheimer's disease, but which does not progress and may even 
improve if the patient becomes abstinent. Heavy alcohol use can damage 
the brain indirectly through Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome (see above), head 
injury, hypoglycaemia and encephalopathy.
Effects on other organs
These are protean and virtually any organ can be involved (see 
Box 31.23). These effects are discussed in detail in other chapters in 
this book.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of alcohol excess may emerge while taking the patient's 
history, but many patients do not tell the truth about their alcohol intake. 
Alcohol misuse may also present through its effects on one or more 
aspects of the patient's life, as listed above. Alcohol dependence com-
monly presents with withdrawal in those admitted to hospital, as they 
can no longer maintain their high alcohol intake in this setting.
Management
For the person misusing alcohol, provision of clear information from a 
doctor about the harmful effects of alcohol and safe levels of consump-
tion is often all that is needed. In more serious cases, patients may have 
to be advised to alter leisure activities or change jobs to help them to 
reduce their consumption. Psychological treatment is used for people 
who have recurrent relapses and is usually available at specialised cen-
tres. Support to stop drinking is also provided by voluntary organisations, 
such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) in the UK.
Alcohol withdrawal syndromes can be prevented, or treated once 
established, with long-acting benzodiazepines. Large doses may be 
required (such as diazepam 20 mg 4 times daily), tailed off over a period 
of 5–7 days as symptoms subside. Prevention of the Wernicke–Korsakoff 
syndrome requires the immediate use of high doses of thiamin, which is 
initially given parenterally in the form of Pabrinex (two vials 3 times daily 
for 48 hrs, longer if symptoms persist) and then orally (100 mg 3 times 
daily). There is no treatment for Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome once it 
has arisen. The risk of side-effects, such as respiratory depression with 
benzodiazepines and anaphylaxis with Pabrinex, is small when weighed 
against the potential benets of treatment.
Acamprosate (666 mg 3 times daily) may help to maintain abstinence 
by reducing the craving for alcohol. Disulram (200–400 mg daily) can be 
given as a deterrent to patients who have difculty resisting the impulse 
to drink after becoming abstinent. It blocks the metabolism of alco-
hol, causing acetaldehyde to accumulate. When alcohol is consumed, 
an unpleasant reaction follows, with headache, ushing and nausea. 
Disulram is always an adjunct to other treatments, especially support-
ive psychotherapy. Treatment with antidepressants may be required if 
depression is severe or does not resolve with abstinence. Antipsychotics, 
such as chlorpromazine (100 mg 3 times daily), are needed for alcoholic 
hallucinosis. Although such treatment may be successful, there is a high 
relapse rate.
Prognosis
Between 80% and 90% of patients with established alcohol dependence 
syndrome who embark on medically supervised detoxication will suc-
cessfully complete detoxication without encountering signicant com-
plications. Sustaining abstinence is more challenging than achieving it, 
however. Studies indicate that 1 year after successful detoxication, only 
20% of patients will remain abstinent. This gure rises to approximately 
30% for patients who are engaged with alcohol services, and to over 
40% if such specialist support is combined with supervised disulram 
treatment.
Substance misuse disorder
Dependence on and misuse of both illegal and prescribed drugs is a 
major problem worldwide. Drugs of misuse are described in detail in 
Chapter 7. They can be grouped as follows.
Sedatives
These commonly give rise to physical dependence, the manifestations 
of which are tolerance and a withdrawal syndrome. Drugs include ben-
zodiazepines, opiates (including morphine, heroin, methadone and dihy-
drocodeine) and barbiturates (now rarely prescribed). Overdosage with 
sedatives can be fatal, primarily as a result of respiratory depression 
(Ch. 10). Withdrawal from opiates is notoriously unpleasant, and with-
drawal from benzodiazepines and barbiturates can cause prolonged 
anxiety and even hallucinations and/or seizures.
Intravenous opiate users are prone to bacterial infections, hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C and HIV infection through needle contamination. Accidental 
overdose is common, mainly because of the varied and uncertain 
potency of illicit supplies of the drug. The withdrawal syndrome, which 
can start within 12 hours of last use, presents with intense craving, rhin-
orrhoea, lacrimation, yawning, perspiration, shivering, piloerection, vom-
iting, diarrhoea and abdominal cramps. Examination reveals tachycardia, 
hypertension, mydriasis and facial ushing.
Stimulants
Stimulant drugs include amphetamines and cocaine. They are less dan-
gerous than the sedatives in overdose, although they can cause cardiac 
and cerebrovascular problems through their pressor effects. Physical 
dependence syndromes do not arise, but withdrawal causes a rebound 
lowering in mood and can give rise to an intense craving for further use, 
especially in any form of drug with a rapid onset and offset of effect, such 
as crack cocaine. Chronic ingestion can cause a paranoid psychosis 
similar to schizophrenia. A ‘toxic psychosis’ (delirium) can occur with 
high levels of consumption. Unpleasant tactile hallucinations described 
as ‘like ants crawling under the skin’ (formication) may be prominent in 
either acute intoxication or withdrawal.
Hallucinogens
The hallucinogens are a disparate group of drugs that cause prominent 
sensory disturbances. They include cannabis, ecstasy, lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD), Psilocybin (magic mushrooms) and a variety of syn-
thetic cannabinoids (as one of the so-called ‘legal highs’ or ‘novel psy-
choactive substances’). A toxic confusional state can occur after heavy 
cannabis consumption. Acute psychotic episodes are well recognised, 
especially in those with a family or personal history of psychosis, and 
there is evidence that prolonged heavy use increases the risk of devel-
oping schizophrenia. Paranoid psychoses have been reported in associ-
ation with ecstasy. A chronic psychosis has also been documented after 
regular LSD use.
Organic solvents
Solvent inhalation (glue snifng) is popular in some adolescent groups. 
Solvents produce acute intoxication characterised by euphoria, excite-
ment, dizziness and a oating sensation. Further inhalation leads to loss 
of consciousness; death can occur from the direct toxic effect of the sol-
vent, or from asphyxiation if the substance is inhaled from a plastic bag.
Pathogenesis
Many of the causal factors for alcohol misuse also apply to substance 
misuse. The main factors are the psychological and behavioural vul-
nerabilities described above, cultural pressures, particularly within 
a peer group, and availability of a drug. In the case of some drugs 
such as opiates, medical over-prescribing has increased their avail-
ability, but there has also been a relative decline in the price of illegal 
drugs. Most drug users take a range of drugs; this is termed ‘poly-
drug misuse’.

[[p1317]]
Psychiatric disorders    1251
31
Diagnosis
As with alcohol, the diagnosis either may be apparent from the history 
and examination, or may be made only once the patient presents with a 
complication. Drug screening of samples of urine or blood can be valua-
ble in conrming the diagnosis, especially if the patient persists in denial.
Management
The rst step is to determine whether patients wish to stop using the 
drug. If they do not, they can still benet from advice about how to 
minimise harm from their habit, such as how to obtain and use clean 
needles for those who inject. For those who are physically dependent 
on sedative drugs, substitute prescribing (using methadone, for exam-
ple, in opiate dependence) may help stabilise their lives sufciently to 
allow a gradual reduction in dosage until they reach abstinence. Some 
specialist units offer inpatient detoxication. The medical management 
of overdose is discussed in Chapter 10. The drug lofexidine, a centrally 
acting α-agonist, can be useful in treating the autonomic symptoms 
of opiate withdrawal, as can clonidine, although this carries a risk of 
hypotension and is best used by specialists. Long-acting opiate antag-
onists, such as naltrexone, may also have a place, again in specialist 
hands, in blocking the euphoriant effects of the opiate, thereby reduc-
ing addiction.
In some cases, complete opiate withdrawal is not successful and the 
patient functions better if maintained on regular doses of oral methadone 
as an outpatient. This decision to prescribe long-term methadone should 
be taken only by a specialist, and carried out under long-term supervi-
sion at a specialist drug treatment centre.
Substitute prescribing is neither necessary nor possible for the hallu-
cinogens and stimulants, but the principles of management are the same 
as those that should accompany prescribing for the sedatives. These 
include identifying problems associated with the drug misuse that may 
serve to maintain it, and intervening where possible. Intervention may be 
directed at physical illness, psychiatric comorbidity, social problems or 
family disharmony.
Relapsing patients and those with complications should be referred to 
specialist drug misuse services. Support can also be provided by self-
help groups and voluntary bodies, such as Narcotics Anonymous (NA) 
in the UK.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is characterised by delusions, hallucinations and lack of 
insight. Acute schizophrenia may also present with disturbed behav-
iour, disordered thinking, or with insidious social withdrawal and other 
so-called negative symptoms and less obvious delusions and hallucina-
tions. Schizophrenia occurs worldwide in all ethnic groups with a preva-
lence of about 0.5%. It is more common in men (1.4 to 1). Children of an 
affected parent have an approximate 10% risk of developing the illness, 
but this rises to 50% if an identical twin is affected. The usual age of 
onset is the mid-twenties but can be older, particularly in women.
Pathogenesis
There is a strong genetic contribution, usually involving many suscep-
tibility genes, each of small effect, but 2%–3% of cases can be attrib-
uted to increased or decreased copies of genes (so-called ‘copy number 
variations’). Environmental risk factors include a history of obstetric 
complications at the time of the patient's birth, childhood adversity and 
urban upbringing. Brain imaging techniques have identied subtle struc-
tural abnormalities in groups of people with schizophrenia, including an 
overall decrease in brain size (by about 3% on average), with a relatively 
greater reduction in temporal lobe volume (5%–10%). Episodes of acute 
schizophrenia may be precipitated by social stress and also by canna-
bis, which increases dopamine turnover. Consequently, schizophrenia is 
now viewed as a neurodevelopmental disorder, caused by abnormalities 
of brain development associated with genetic predisposition and early 
environmental inuences, but precipitated by later triggers.
Clinical features
Acute schizophrenia should be suspected in any individual with bizarre 
behaviour accompanied by delusions and hallucinations that are not due 
to organic brain disease or substance misuse. The characteristic clinical 
features are listed in Box 31.24. Hallucinations are typically auditory but 
can occur in any sensory modality. They commonly involve voices from 
outside the head that talk to or about the person. Sometimes the voices 
repeat the person's thoughts. Patients may also describe ‘passivity of 
thought’, experienced as disturbances in the normal privacy of thinking, 
such as the delusional belief that their thoughts are being ‘withdrawn’ 
from them and perhaps ‘broadcast’ to others, and/or that alien thoughts 
are being ‘inserted’ into their mind. Other characteristic symptoms are 
delusions of control: believing that one's emotions, impulses or acts are 
controlled by others. Another phenomenon is delusional perception, a 
delusion that arises suddenly alongside a normal perception, such as ‘I 
saw the moon and I immediately knew he was evil.’ Other, less common, 
symptoms may occur, including thought disorder, as manifest by incom-
prehensible speech, and abnormalities of movement, such as those in 
which the patient can become immobile or adopt awkward postures for 
prolonged periods (catatonia).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made primarily on clinical grounds but investigations 
may be required to rule out organic brain disease. The main differential 
diagnosis of schizophrenia (Box 31.25) includes:
31.24  Symptoms of schizophrenia
First-rank symptoms of acute schizophrenia
 A = Auditory hallucinations – second- or third-person/écho de la pensée
 B = Broadcasting, insertion/withdrawal of thoughts
 C = Controlled feelings, impulses or acts (‘passivity’ experiences/phenomena)
 D = Delusional perception (a particular experience is bizarrely interpreted)
Symptoms of chronic schizophrenia (negative symptoms)
 Flattened (blunted) affect
 Apathy and loss of drive (avolition)
 Social isolation/withdrawal (autism)
 Poverty of speech (alogia)
 Poor self-care
31.25  Differential diagnosis of schizophrenia
Alternative diagnosis
Distinguishing features
Other functional psychoses
Delusional disorders
Absence of specic features of 
schizophrenia
Psychotic depression
Prominent depressive symptoms
Manic episode
Prominent manic symptoms
Schizoaffective disorder
Mood and schizophrenia symptoms 
both prominent
Puerperal psychosis
Acute onset after childbirth
Organic disorders
Drug-induced psychosis
Evidence of drug or alcohol misuse
Side-effects of prescribed drugs
Levodopa, methyldopa, glucocorticoids, 
antimalarial drugs
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Other evidence of seizures
Delirium
Visual hallucinations, impaired 
consciousness
Dementia
Age, established cognitive impairment
Huntington's disease
Family history, choreiform movements, 
dementia

[[p1318]]
1252    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
 Other functional psychoses, particularly psychotic depression and 
mania, in which delusions and hallucinations are congruent with a 
marked mood disturbance (negative in depression and grandiose 
in mania). Schizophrenia must also be differentiated from specic 
delusional disorders that are not associated with the other typical 
features of schizophrenia.
 Organic psychoses, including delirium, in which there is impairment 
of consciousness and loss of orientation (not found in schizophre-
nia), typically with visual hallucinations.
 Drug misuse, particularly in young people.
 Auto-immune or infectious encephalitis
 Temporal lobe epilepsy, with psychotic symptoms, in which olfactory 
and gustatory hallucinations may occur.
Many of those who experience acute schizophrenia go on to develop 
a chronic state in which the acute, so-called positive symptoms resolve, 
or at least do not dominate the clinical picture, leaving so-called negative 
symptoms that include blunt affect, apathy, social isolation, poverty of 
speech and poor self-care. Patients with chronic schizophrenia may also 
manifest positive symptoms, particularly when under stress, and it can 
be difcult for those who do not know the patient to judge whether or not 
these are signs of an acute relapse.
Investigations
As in dementia, investigations are focused on excluding a treatable 
cause, such as a slow-growing brain tumour, temporal lobe epilepsy, 
neurosyphilis or various autoimmune conditions. These are required only 
in patients with neurological or other organic symptoms or signs.
Management
First-episode schizophrenia often requires admission to hospital because 
patients lack the insight that they are ill and are unwilling to accept treat-
ment. In some cases, they may be at risk of harming themselves or 
others. Subsequent acute relapses and chronic schizophrenia are now 
usually managed in the community.
Drug treatment
Antipsychotic agents are effective against the positive symptoms of 
schizophrenia in the majority of cases. They take 2 weeks or so to be 
maximally effective but have some benecial effects shortly after admin-
istration. Treatment is then ideally continued to prevent relapse. In a 
patient with a rst episode of schizophrenia this will usually be for 1 or 2 
years, but in patients with multiple episodes treatment may be required 
for many years. The benets of prolonged treatment must be weighed 
against the adverse effects, which include extrapyramidal side-effects 
(EPSE) like acute dystonic reactions (which may require treatment with 
parenteral anticholinergics), akathisia and parkinsonism. For long-term 
use, antipsychotic agents are often given by slow-release (depot) injec-
tions to improve adherence.
A number of antipsychotic agents are available (Box 31.26). These may 
be divided into rst-generation drugs such as chlorpromazine and halop-
eridol, and second-generation drugs such as olanzapine and clozapine. 
In general, the newer drugs are less likely to produce unwanted EPSE but 
tend to cause greater weight gain and metabolic disturbances, such as 
dyslipidaemia. All work by blocking D2 dopamine receptors in the brain, with 
the possible exception of clozapine. Clozapine can be remarkably effective 
in those who do not respond to other antipsychotics but can cause agran-
ulocytosis in about 1% of patients in the rst few months. Prescription 
therefore requires regular monitoring of white blood cell count, initially on 
a weekly basis, then fortnightly and monthly thereafter. Clozapine, like all 
antipsychotics, should not be stopped suddenly because of the likelihood 
of relapse. Adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs are listed in Box 31.27. 
Two serious adverse effects deserve special mention.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
This is a rare but serious condition characterised by fever, tremor and 
rigidity, autonomic instability and delirium. Characteristic laboratory 
ndings are an elevated creatinine phosphokinase and leucocytosis. 
Antipsychotic medication must be stopped immediately and support-
ive therapy provided, often in an intensive care unit. Treatment includes 
ensuring hydration and reducing hyperthermia. Dantrolene sodium and 
bromocriptine may be helpful. Mortality is 20% untreated and 5% with 
treatment.
Cardiac arrhythmias 
Antipsychotic medications cause prolongation of the QTc interval, which 
may be associated with ventricular tachycardia, torsades de pointes and 
sudden death. If this occurs, treatment should be reviewed, with careful 
electrocardiographic monitoring and treatment of serious arrhythmias if 
necessary.
Psychological treatment
Psychological treatment, including general support for the patient and 
family, is now seen as an essential component of management. CBT 
may help patients to cope with symptoms. There is evidence that per-
sonal and/or family education, when given as part of an integrated treat-
ment package, reduces the rate of relapse.
Social treatment
After an acute episode of schizophrenia has been controlled by drug 
therapy, social rehabilitation may be required. Recurrent illness is likely 
31.26  Antipsychotic drugs
Group
Drug
Usual adult dose1
Phenothiazines
Chlorpromazine
400–600 mg daily
Butyrophenones
Haloperidol
8–12 mg daily
Thioxanthenes
Flupentixol decanoate
40 mg fortnightly 
(depot injection)
Diphenylbutylpiperidines
Pimozide
8–10 mg daily
Substituted benzamides
Sulpiride
800–1200 mg daily
Dibenzodiazepines2
Clozapine
300–600 mg daily
Benzisoxazole2
Risperidone
4–6 mg daily
Thienobenzodiazepines2
Olanzapine
10–15 mg daily
Dibenzothiazepines2
Quetiapine
300–600 mg daily
1Lower or higher doses may be required in some patients. 2Second-generation antipsychotics.
31.27  Adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs
Weight gain due to increased appetite
Effects due to dopamine blockade*
 Acute dystonia
 Akathisia (motor restlessness)
 Parkinsonism
 Tardive dyskinesia
 Gynaecomastia
 Galactorrhoea
Effects due to cholinergic blockade
 Dry mouth
 Blurred vision
 Impotence
 Constipation
 Urinary retention
Hypersensitivity reactions
 Blood dyscrasias (neutropenia with 
clozapine)
 Cholestatic jaundice
 Photosensitive dermatitis
Ocular complications
 Corneal and lens opacities (long-
term use)
*Less severe with clozapine, quetiapine and olanzapine, possibly because of strong 
5-hydroxytryptamine-blocking effect and relatively weak dopamine blockade.

[[p1319]]
Psychiatric disorders    1253
31
to cause disruption to patients' relationships and their ability to manage 
their accommodation and occupation; consequently, patients with schiz-
ophrenia often need help to obtain housing and employment. A graded 
return to employment and sometimes a period of supported accommo-
dation may be required.
Patients with chronic schizophrenia have particular difculties and may 
need long-term, supervised accommodation. This now tends to be in 
supported accommodation in the community. Patients may also ben-
et from sheltered employment if they are unable to participate effec-
tively in the labour market. Ongoing contact with a health worker allows 
monitoring for signs of relapse, sometimes as part of a multidisciplinary 
team working to agreed plans (the ‘care programme approach’). Partly 
because of a tendency to inactivity, smoking and a poor diet, patients 
with chronic schizophrenia are at increased risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease, diabetes and stroke, and require proactive medical as well as psy-
chiatric care.
Prognosis
About one-third of those who develop an acute schizophrenic episode 
have a good outcome. One-third develop chronic, incapacitating schiz-
ophrenia, and the remainder largely recover after each episode but suf-
fer relapses. Most affected patients cannot work or live independently. 
Schizophrenia is associated with suicide and up to 10% of patients take 
their own lives.
Mood disorders
Mood or affective disorders include:
 unipolar depression: one or more episodes of low mood and associ-
ated symptoms
 bipolar disorder: episodes of elevated mood interspersed with epi-
sodes of depression
 dysthymia: chronic low-grade depressed mood without suf-
cient other symptoms to count as ‘clinically signicant’ or ‘major’ 
depression.
Depression
Major depressive disorder has a prevalence of 5% in the general popu-
lation and approximately 10%–20% in chronically ill medical outpatients, 
including older adults (see Box 31.6). It is a major cause of disability and 
suicide. If comorbid with a medical condition, depression magnies dis-
ability, diminishes adherence to medical treatment and rehabilitation, and 
may even shorten life expectancy.
Pathogenesis
There is a genetic predisposition to depression, especially when of early 
onset. The genetic predisposition is mediated by variants in a large 
number of genes and loci of small effect rather than mutations in single 
genes. Adversity and abuse early in life also predispose to depression. 
Depressive episodes are often, but not always, triggered by stressful life 
events (especially those that involve loss or imposed change), including 
medical illnesses. Associated biological factors include hypofunction of 
monoamine neurotransmitter systems, including 5-HT and noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine), and abnormalities of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adre-
nal (HPA) axis, which results in elevated cortisol levels that do not sup-
press with dexamethasone.
Diagnosis
The symptoms are listed in Box 31.8. Depression may be mild, moderate 
or severe. It may also be recurrent or chronic. It can be both a complica-
tion of a medical condition and a cause of MUS (see below), so physical 
examination is essential; an associated medical condition should always 
be considered, particularly where there is no past history of depression 
and no apparent psychological precipitant.
Investigations
Investigations are not usually required unless there are clinical grounds 
for suspicion of an underlying medical disorder, such as Cushing’s syn-
drome or hypothyroidism.
Management
Pharmacological and psychological treatments both work in depression. 
In practice, the choice is determined by patient preference and local 
availability. Severe depression complicated by psychotic symptoms, 
dehydration or suicide risk may require ECT.
Drug treatment
Antidepressant drugs are effective in moderate and severe depression, 
whether it is primary or secondary to a medical illness. The most suitable 
drug for an individual patient will depend on their previous response, 
likely side-effects, their concurrent illnesses and potential drug interac-
tions. Commonly used antidepressants are shown in Box 31.28
The different classes of antidepressant have similar efcacy and about 
three-quarters of patients respond to treatment. Successful treatment 
requires the patient to take an appropriate dose of an effective drug for 
an adequate period. For those who do not respond, a proportion will do 
so if changed to another class of antidepressant. The patient's progress 
must be monitored and, after recovery, treatment should be continued 
for at least 6–12 months to reduce the high risk of relapse. The dose 
should then be tapered off over several weeks to avoid discontinuation 
symptoms. The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) and 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) have published 
treatment guidelines.
Tricyclic antidepressants 
Tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) agents inhibit re-uptake of the amines 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and 5-HT at synaptic clefts. The 
31.28  Antidepressant drugs
Group
Drug
Usual adult dose*
Tricyclic 
antidepressants
Amitriptyline
75–150 mg daily
Imipramine
75–150 mg daily
Dosulepin
75–150 mg daily
Clomipramine
75–150 mg daily
Selective serotonin 
re-uptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
Citalopram
20–40 mg daily
Escitalopram
10–20 mg daily
Fluoxetine
20–60 mg daily
Sertraline
50–200 mg daily
Paroxetine
20–50 mg daily
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
Phenelzine
45–90 mg daily
Tranylcypromine
20–40 mg daily
Moclobemide
300–600 mg daily
Noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine)  
re-uptake inhibitors 
and SSRIs
Venlafaxine
75–375 mg daily
Duloxetine
60–120 mg daily
Noradrenaline and 
specic serotonergic 
inhibitor
Mirtazapine
15–45 mg daily
N-methyl D-aspartate 
antagonists
Esketamine
28 mg initially, then 
28–84 mg twice 
weekly, then weekly, 
then every 1–2 weeks
*Higher doses may be required in some patients: see guidelines. With the exception of 
esketamine, which is given intranasally, other drugs are given orally.

[[p1320]]
1254    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
therapeutic effect is noticeable within a week or two. Adverse effects, 
such as sedation, anticholinergic effects, postural hypotension, lowering 
of the seizure threshold and cardiotoxicity, can be troublesome during 
this period. TCAs may be dangerous in overdose and should be used 
with caution in people who have coexisting heart disease, glaucoma and 
prostatism.
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are less cardiotoxic and 
less sedative than TCAs, and have fewer anticholinergic effects. They are 
safer in overdose but can still cause QTc prolongation, headache, nausea, 
anorexia and sexual dysfunction. They can also interact with other drugs 
increasing serotonin (5-HT), to produce ‘serotonin syndrome’. This is a 
rare syndrome of neuromuscular hyperactivity, autonomic hyperactivity 
and agitation, and potentially seizures, hyperthermia, delirium and even 
death.
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake inhibitors 
These agents primarily inhibit noradrenaline uptake at the synaptic cleft 
but have additional pharmacological effects. Venlafaxine and duloxetine 
also act as serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, whereas mirtazapine also acts 
as an antagonist at 5-HT2a, 5-HT2c and 5-HT3 receptors. These drugs 
have similar efcacy to the agents listed above but a different adverse- 
effect prole.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) increase the availability of neuro-
transmitters at synaptic clefts by inhibiting metabolism of noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) and 5-HT. They are now rarely prescribed in the UK, 
since they can cause potentially dangerous interactions with drugs such 
as amphetamines and certain anaesthetic agents, and with foods rich in 
tyramine (such as cheese and red wine). This is due to accumulation of 
amines in the systemic circulation, causing a potentially fatal hyperten-
sive crisis.
Esketamine 
Esketamine has recently been licensed for treatment-resistant major 
depressive disorder. It acts as an antagonist at NMDA receptors and is 
typically used in patients who have not responded to at least two differ-
ent treatments
ECT and related treatments 
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a highly effective and relatively safe 
treatment for severe depression but, whilst valuable in the acute setting, 
its use as a maintenance treatment presents challenges. Transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) and the related vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) 
have shown promise in clinical trials but are not in widespread clinical use.
Psychological treatment
Both CBT and interpersonal therapy are as effective as antidepressants 
for mild to moderate depression. Antidepressant drugs are, however, 
preferred for severe depression. Drug and psychological treatments are 
more effective in combination.
Prognosis
Over 50% of people who have had one depressive episode and over 
90% of people who have had three or more episodes will have another. 
The risk of suicide in an individual who has had a depressive disorder is 
10 times greater than in the general population.
Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is an episodic disturbance with interspersed periods of 
depressed and elevated mood; the latter is known as hypomania when 
mild or short-lived, or mania when severe or chronic. The lifetime risk of 
developing bipolar disorder is approximately 1%–2%. Onset is usually in 
the twenties, and men and women are equally affected.
Pathogenesis
Bipolar disorder is strongly heritable (approximately 70%). Relatives of 
patients have an increased incidence of both bipolar and unipolar affec-
tive disorder. More than a hundred genetic variants of small effect have 
been identied by genome-wide association studies. Life events, such 
as physical illness, sleep deprivation and some medications, such as 
steroids, may also play a role in triggering episodes.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on clear evidence of episodes of depression 
and mania. Isolated episodes of hypomania or mania do occur but 
they are usually preceded or followed by an episode of depression. 
Psychotic symptoms may occur in both the depressive and the manic 
phases, with delusions and hallucinations that are usually in keeping 
with the mood disturbance. This is described as an affective psycho-
sis. Patients who present with symptoms of both bipolar disorder and 
schizophrenia in equal measure may be given a diagnosis of schizoaf-
fective disorder.
Management
Depression should be treated as described above. If antidepressants 
are prescribed, however, they should be combined with a mood-stabi-
lising drug (see below) to avoid ‘switching’ the patients into (hypo)mania. 
Manic episodes and psychotic symptoms usually respond well to anti-
psychotic drugs (see Box 31.26).
Prophylaxis to prevent recurrent episodes of depression and mania 
with mood-stabilising agents is important. The main drugs used are lith-
ium and sodium valproate but lamotrigine, olanzapine, quetiapine and 
risperidone are increasingly employed. Caution must be exercised when 
stopping these drugs, as a relapse may follow.
Lithium carbonate is the drug of rst choice. It is also used for 
acute mania, and in combination with a tricyclic as an adjuvant treat-
ment for resistant depression. It has a narrow therapeutic range, 
so regular blood monitoring is required to maintain a serum level of 
0.5–1.0 mmol/L. Toxic effects include nausea, vomiting, a coarse 
tremor and convulsions. With long-term treatment, weight gain, hypo-
thyroidism, increased calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH), nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus and renal failure can occur. Thyroid and renal 
function should be checked before treatment is started and regularly 
thereafter. Lithium may be teratogenic and should not be prescribed 
during the rst trimester of pregnancy.
Anticonvulsants, such as sodium valproate and lamotrigine, and 
some antipsychotic drugs can all be used as prophylaxis in bipolar 
disorder, usually as a second-line alternative to lithium. Valproate 
conveys a high risk of birth defects and should not be used in 
women of child-bearing age. Olanzapine can cause significant 
weight gain. (For a list of the adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs 
see Box 31.27.)
Prognosis
The relapse rate of bipolar disorder is high, although patients may be 
perfectly well between episodes. After one episode, the annual aver-
age risk of relapse is about 10%–15%, which doubles after more than 
three episodes. There is a substantially increased lifetime risk of suicide 
of 5%–10%.
Anxiety disorders
These are characterised by the emotion of anxiety, worrisome 
thoughts, avoidance behaviours and the somatic symptoms of auto-
nomic arousal. Anxiety disorders are divided into three main subtypes: 
phobic, paroxysmal (panic) and generalised (Box 31.29). The nature 
and prominence of the somatic symptoms often lead the patient to 
present initially to medical services. Anxiety may be stress-related and 
phobic anxiety may follow an unpleasant incident. Many patients with 
anxiety also have depression.

[[p1321]]
Psychiatric disorders    1255
31
Clinical features
Phobic anxiety disorder
A phobia is an abnormal or excessive fear of a specic object or situa-
tion, which leads to avoidance of it (such as excessive fear of dying in 
an air crash, leading to avoidance of ying). A general phobia of going 
out alone or being in crowded places is called ‘agoraphobia’. Phobic 
responses can develop to medical procedures such as venepuncture.
Panic disorder
Panic disorder describes repeated attacks of severe anxiety, which 
are not restricted to any particular situation or circumstances. Somatic 
symptoms, such as chest pain, palpitations and paraesthesia in lips 
and ngers, are common. The symptoms are in part due to involun-
tary over-breathing (hyperventilation). Patients with panic attacks often 
fear that they are suffering from a serious illness, such as a heart attack 
or stroke, and seek emergency medical attention. Panic disorder may 
coexist with agoraphobia.
Generalised anxiety disorder
This is typically a recurrent or a chronic anxiety state associated with 
uncontrollable worry. The associated muscle tension often leads to a 
variety of medical presentations.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical history and typical symp-
toms, as described above. Where a diagnosis of panic disorder is 
suspected, it can be conrmed by asking the patient to hyperventilate 
deliberately for 1–2 minutes and observing whether the symptoms are 
reproduced. A nding of respiratory alkalosis on arterial blood gas meas-
urement is indicative of chronic hyperventilation.
Management
Psychological treatment
Explanation and reassurance are essential, especially when patients 
fear they have a serious medical condition. Specic treatment may be 
needed. Treatments include relaxation, graded exposure (desensitisa-
tion) to feared situations for phobic disorders, and CBT.
Drug treatment
Antidepressants are the drugs of rst choice. The therapeutic dose can 
be higher – and response delayed – for anxiety disorders than for depres-
sion and there is some evidence that, within their respective classes, 
escitalopram (SSRI), duloxetine (SNRI) and clomipramine (TCA) have 
greatest efcacy against anxiety disorders. Activating side-effects of 
some antidepressants can lead to a worsening of anxiety symptoms in 
the rst 2 weeks and patients should be warned of this.
Benzodiazepines are useful in the short term but regular long-term use 
carries a high risk of dependence. Regular prescriptions should therefore 
be limited to 3 weeks; beyond that, prescriptions should be restricted to 
occasional use as required, with periodic review to guard against dose 
escalation. Short-acting benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam, have a 
rapid onset and provide symptomatic relief for up to 2 hours but have 
the greatest potential for dependence. Longer-acting drugs, such as 
diazepam, can take an hour to take effect when given orally but provide 
symptomatic relief for up to 12 hours. The GABA analogue pregabalin is 
an effective alternative but can also lead to tolerance and dependence. 
A β-blocker, such as propranolol, can help when somatic symptoms are 
prominent.
Obsessive–compulsive disorder
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterised by ‘obsessions’ – 
thoughts, images or impulses that are recurrent, unwanted and usually 
anxiety-provoking, but recognised as one's own. In many cases, the 
obsessions give rise to ‘compulsions’, which are repeated acts per-
formed to relieve the anxiety. Unlike the anxiety disorders discussed 
above, which are more common in women, OCD is equally common in 
men and women.
Clinical features
Common examples include fears of contamination, giving rise to 
repeated and ritualised hand-washing, and concerns about having for-
gotten something, giving rise to time-consuming repeated checking. The 
differential diagnoses include normal checking behaviour and delusional 
beliefs about thought possession.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the typical history, as described 
above.
Management
Obsessive–compulsive disorder usually responds to some degree to 
antidepressant drugs (high-dose clomipramine or SSRI; see Box 31.28) 
and to ‘exposure response prevention’ – a form of CBT in which patients 
are encouraged to expose themselves to the feared thought or situation 
without performing the anxiety-relieving compulsions. Relapses are com-
mon, however, and the condition often becomes chronic.
Stress-related disorders
Acute stress reaction
Following a traumatic or life-threatening event, such as an assault or a 
major accident, some people develop a characteristic pattern of symp-
toms: an initial state of ‘daze’ or bewilderment is followed by altered 
activity (withdrawal or agitation), often with anxiety. The symptoms are 
transient and usually resolve completely within a few days. The lay media 
often describes this as ‘shock’.
Adjustment disorder
A more common psychological response to a major stressor such as a 
serious medical diagnosis is a less severe but more prolonged emotional 
reaction.
Clinical features
The predominant symptom is usually depression and/or anxiety, which 
is insufciently persistent or intense to merit a diagnosis of depressive 
or anxiety disorder. There may also be anger, aggressive behaviour and 
associated excessive alcohol use. Symptoms develop within a month of 
the onset of the stress, and their duration and severity reect the course 
of the underlying stressor.
‘Pathological grief’ describes a grief reaction that is abnormally intense 
or persistent, and such abnormalities are a particular type of adjustment 
disorder. They manifest as a brief period of emotional numbing, followed 
by a period of distress lasting several weeks, during which sorrow, tear-
fulness, sleep disturbance, a sense of futility, anger and ‘bargaining’ are 
common. Perceptual distortions may occur, including misinterpreting 
sounds as the dead person's voice or ‘seeing’ the dead person.
31.29  Classication of anxiety disorders
Phobic anxiety 
disorder
Panic disorder
Generalised 
anxiety disorder
Occurrence
Situational
Paroxysmal
Persistent
Behaviour
Avoidance
Escape
Agitation
Cognitions
Fear of 
situation
Fear of 
symptoms
Worry
Symptoms
On exposure
Episodic
Persistent

[[p1322]]
1256    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the typical history, with a strong 
presumed relationship between the stressful life event and the onset of 
symptoms described above.
Management
Ongoing contact with and support from a doctor or another person who 
can listen, reassure, explain and advise are often all that is needed. Most 
patients do not require psychotropic medication, although benzodiaze-
pines reduce arousal and they and antidepressants can aid sleep.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a delayed and/or protracted 
response to a stressful event of a life-threatening or catastrophic nature. 
Examples of such events include natural disasters, terrorist activity, seri-
ous accidents and witnessing violent deaths. It may also sometimes occur 
after distressing medical treatments or admissions to intensive care.
Clinical features
The development of PTSD is usually delayed from a few days to sev-
eral months between the traumatic event and the onset of symptoms. 
Typical symptoms are recurrent intrusive memories (ashbacks) of 
the trauma; sleep disturbance, especially nightmares (usually of the 
traumatic event) from which the patient awakes in a state of anxi-
ety; symptoms of autonomic arousal (anxiety, palpitations, enhanced 
startle); emotional numbing; and avoidance of situations that evoke 
memories of the trauma. Anxiety and depression are often associ-
ated and excessive use of alcohol or drugs frequently complicates 
the clinical picture.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the typical clinical features follow-
ing a traumatic life event.
Management
In the immediate aftermath of a signicant trauma, the main aim is to 
provide support, direct advice and the opportunity for emotional cathar-
sis (routine debrieng may actually be harmful). In established PTSD, 
structured psychological approaches (CBT, eye movement desensiti-
sation and reprocessing (EMDR) and stress management) are effective. 
Antidepressant drugs are moderately effective.
Prognosis
Most patients recover within 2–3 years. In a small proportion, the symp-
toms become chronic.
Somatoform disorders
The essential feature of these disorders is that the somatic symptoms 
are not explained by a medical condition (medically unexplained symp-
toms, MUS), nor better diagnosed as part of a depressive or anxiety 
disorder. The derivation of the term ‘somatoform’ is ‘body-like’. Several 
syndromes are described within this category; there is considerable 
overlap between them, both in the underlying causes and in the clinical 
presentation.
Pathogenesis
The cause of somatoform disorders is incompletely understood but 
contributory factors include depression and anxiety, the erroneous inter-
pretation of somatic symptoms as evidence of disease, excessive con-
cern with physical illness and a tendency to seek medical care. A family 
history or previous history of a particular condition may have shaped 
the patient's beliefs about illness. Doctors may exacerbate the problem, 
either by dismissing the complaints as non-existent or by over-empha-
sising and investigating the possibility of disease.
Clinical features
Somatoform disorders can present in several different ways, as described 
below.
Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
This describes somatic symptoms referable to bodily organs that are 
largely under the control of the autonomic nervous system. The most 
common examples involve the cardiovascular system (‘cardiac neuro-
sis’), respiratory system (‘psychogenic hyperventilation’) and gut (‘psy-
chogenic vomiting’ and ‘irritable bowel syndrome’). Antidepressant 
drugs and CBT may be helpful.
Somatoform pain disorder
This describes severe, persistent pain that cannot be adequately explained 
by a medical condition. Antidepressant drugs (especially tricyclics and dual 
action drugs such as duloxetine) are helpful, as are some of the anticonvul-
sant drugs, particularly carbamazepine, gabapentin and pregabalin. CBT 
and multidisciplinary pain management teams are also useful.
Chronic fatigue syndrome
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is characterised by excessive fatigue after 
minimal physical or mental exertion, poor concentration, dizziness, mus-
cular aches and sleep disturbance. This pattern of symptoms may follow 
a viral infection such as infectious mononucleosis, inuenza or hepatitis. 
Symptoms overlap with those of depression and anxiety. There is good 
evidence that many patients improve with carefully graded exercise and 
with CBT, as long as the benets of such treatment are carefully explained.
Dissociative conversion disorders
Dissociative conversion disorders are characterised by a loss or distortion 
of neurological functioning that is not fully explained by organic disease 
(‘functional neurological disorder’). These may be psychological func-
tions such as memory (‘dissociative amnesia’), sensory functions such 
as vision (‘dissociative blindness’), or motor functions (‘functional gait 
disorder’) (Box 31.30). The cause is unknown but there is an association 
with recent stress and with adverse childhood experiences, including 
physical and sexual abuse. Organic disease may precipitate dissociation 
and provide a model for symptoms. For example, non-epileptic seizures 
often occur in those with epilepsy. Treatment with CBT may be of benet.
Somatisation disorder
This is dened as the occurrence of multiple medically unexplained 
physical symptoms affecting several bodily systems. It is also known as 
Briquet syndrome after the physician who rst described the presenta-
tion. Symptoms often start in early adult life but somatisation disorder 
can arise later, usually following an episode of physical illness. The disor-
der is much more common in women. Patients may undergo a multitude 
of negative investigations and unhelpful operations, particularly hysterec-
tomy and cholecystectomy. There is no proven treatment except to try 
to ensure that unnecessary investigations and surgical procedures are 
avoided to minimise iatrogenic harm.
Hypochondriacal disorder
Patients with this condition have a strong fear or belief that they have 
a serious, often fatal, disease (such as cancer), and that fear persists 
despite appropriate medical reassurance. They are typically highly anx-
ious and seek many medical opinions and investigations in futile but 
repeated attempts to relieve their fears.
31.30  Common presentations of dissociative (conversion) 
disorder
 Gait disturbance
 Loss of function in limbs
 Aphonia
 Non-epileptic seizures
 Sensory loss
 Blindness

[[p1323]]
Psychiatric disorders    1257
31
Hypochondriacal disorder often resembles OCD, but in a small pro-
portion of cases the conviction that disease is present reaches delusional 
intensity. The best-known example is that of parasitic infestation (‘delusional 
parasitosis’), which leads patients to consult dermatologists. Treatment 
with CBT can be helpful. Patients who suffer delusions may benet from 
antipsychotic medication. The condition may become chronic.
Body dysmorphic disorder
This is dened as a preoccupation with bodily shape or appearance, 
with the belief that one is disgured in some way (previously known as 
‘dysmorphophobia’). People with this condition may make inappropriate 
requests for cosmetic surgery. Treatment with CBT or antidepressants 
may be helpful. The belief in disgurement may sometimes be delusional, 
in which case antipsychotic drugs can help.
Management
The management of the various syndromes of medically unexplained 
complaints described above is based on the general principles outlined 
in Box 31.31 and discussed in more detail below.
Reassurance
Patients should be asked what they are most worried about. Clearly, it 
may be unwise to state categorically that the patient does not have any 
disease, as that is difcult to establish with certainty. However, it can be 
emphasised that the probability of having a disease is low and that doc-
tors often see patients with physical symptoms but no physical disease. 
If patients repeatedly ask for reassurance about the same health concern 
despite reassurance, they may have hypochondriasis.
Explanation
Patients need a positive explanation for their symptoms. It is unhelpful to 
say that symptoms are psychological or ‘all in the mind’. Rather, a term 
such as ‘functional’ (meaning that the symptoms represent a reversible 
disturbance of bodily function) may be more acceptable. When possible, 
it is useful to describe a plausible physiological mechanism that is linked 
to psychological factors such as stress and implies that the symptoms 
are reversible. For example, in irritable bowel syndrome, psychological 
stress results in increased activation of the autonomic nervous system, 
which leads to constriction of smooth muscle in the gut wall, which in 
turn causes pain and bowel disturbance.
Advice
This should focus on how to overcome factors perpetuating the symp-
toms: for example, by resolving stressful social problems or by practis-
ing relaxation. The doctor can offer to review progress, to prescribe (for 
example) an antidepressant drug and, if appropriate, to refer for physio-
therapy or psychological treatments such as CBT. The attitudes of rela-
tives may need to be addressed if they have adopted an over-protective 
role, unwittingly reinforcing the patient's disability.
Drug treatment
Antidepressant drugs are often helpful, even if the patient is not 
depressed.
Psychological treatment
There is evidence for the effectiveness of CBT. Other psychological treat-
ments such as IPT may also have a role.
Rehabilitation
Where there is chronic disability, particularly in dissociative (conversion) 
disorder, conventional physical rehabilitation may be the best approach.
Shared care
Ongoing planned care is required for patients with chronic intractable 
symptoms, especially those of somatisation disorder. Review by the same 
specialist, interspersed with visits to the same GP, is probably the best 
way to avoid unnecessary multiple re-referral for investigation, to ensure 
that treatable aspects of the patient's problems, such as depression, are 
actively managed and to prevent the GP from becoming demoralised.
Eating disorders
There are two well-dened eating disorders, anorexia nervosa (AN) and 
bulimia nervosa (BN); they share some overlapping features. Ninety per 
cent of people affected are female. There is a much higher prevalence 
of abnormal eating behaviour in the population that does not meet diag-
nostic criteria for AN or BN but may attract a diagnostic label such as 
‘binge eating disorder’. In developed societies, obesity is arguably a 
much greater problem but is usually considered to be more a disorder of 
lifestyle or physiology than a psychiatric disorder.
Anorexia nervosa
The lifetime risk of anorexia nervosa for women living in Europe is approx-
imately 1%–2% (for men it is <0.5%) with a peak age of onset of 15–19 
years. Predisposing factors include familiality (both genetic and shared 
environmental factors appear to play a role) and ‘neurotic’ personality traits. 
The illness is often precipitated by weight loss, whether due to non-patho-
logical dieting/increased exercise or physical illness such as gastrointes-
tinal disorders or diabetes mellitus. Many sufferers do not engage with 
specialist services and it is not uncommon for the rst presentation to be 
with a medical problem (Box 31.32) rather than to psychiatric services.
Clinical features
There is marked weight loss, arising from food avoidance, often in com-
bination with bingeing, purging, excessive exercise and/or the use of 
31.31  General management principles for medically 
unexplained symptoms
 Take a full sympathetic history
 Exclude disease but avoid unnecessary investigation or referral
 Seek specic treatable psychiatric syndromes
 Demonstrate to patients that you believe their complaints
 Establish a collaborative relationship
 Give a positive explanation for the symptoms, including but not over-emphasising 
psychological factors
 Encourage a return to normal functioning
31.32  Medical consequences of eating disorders
Cardiac
 ECG abnormalities: T-wave inversion, ST depression and prolonged QTc interval
 Arrhythmias, including profound sinus bradycardia and ventricular tachycardia
Haematological
 Anaemia, thrombocytopenia and leucopenia
Endocrine
 Pubertal delay or arrest
 Growth retardation and short stature
 Amenorrhoea
 Sick euthyroid state
Metabolic
 Uraemia
 Renal calculi
 Osteoporosis
Gastrointestinal
 Constipation
 Abnormal liver function tests

[[p1324]]
1258    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
diuretics and laxatives. Body image is profoundly disturbed so that, 
despite emaciation, patients still feel overweight and are terried of weight 
gain. These preoccupations are intense and pervasive, and the false 
beliefs may be held with a conviction approaching the delusional. Anxiety 
and depressive symptoms are common accompaniments. Downy hair 
(lanugo) may develop on the back, forearms and cheeks. Extreme star-
vation is associated with a wide range of physiological and pathological 
bodily changes. All organ systems may be affected, although the most 
serious problems are cardiac and skeletal (see Box 31.32).
Pathogenesis
The underlying cause is unclear but probably includes personality (high 
neuroticism), genetic (twin studies indicate heritability of 0.3–0.5) and 
environmental factors, including, in many societies, the social pressure 
on women to be thin.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic criteria are shown in Box 31.33. Differential diagnosis is from 
other causes of weight loss, including psychiatric disorders such as 
depression, and medical conditions such as inammatory bowel dis-
ease, malabsorption, hypopituitarism and cancer, although it is impor-
tant to remember that AN can coexist with any of these. The diagnosis 
is based on a pronounced fear of fatness despite being thin, and on the 
absence of an adequate alternative explanation for weight loss.
Management
The aims of management are to ensure patients' physical well-being 
while helping them to gain weight by addressing the beliefs and behav-
iours that maintain the low weight. Treatment is usually given on an out-
patient basis. Inpatient treatment should be reserved for those at risk of 
death from medical complications or from suicide. There is a limited evi-
dence base for CBT-based psychological treatments. Family behaviour 
therapy has efcacy for adolescent but not adult patients. Psychotropic 
drugs are of no proven benet in AN but antidepressant medication may 
be indicated in those with clear-cut comorbid depressive disorder.
Weight gain is best achieved in a collaborative fashion. Compulsory 
admission and refeeding (including tube feeding) are very occasionally 
resorted to when patients are at risk of death and other measures have 
failed. While this may produce a short-term improvement in weight, it 
rarely changes long-term prognosis.
Prognosis
Two-thirds of patients with AN no longer meet diagnostic criteria at 5-year 
follow-up. However, long-term follow-up studies suggest that many suf-
ferers continue to have a relatively low body mass index (BMI), suggest-
ing that the symptoms do not completely resolve. Approximately 20% 
of patients develop a chronic, intractable disorder. Long-term follow-up 
studies demonstrate that minimum lifetime BMI is the strongest prognos-
tic indicator (BMI <11.5 is associated with a standardised mortality ratio 
of 4–5). Other indicators of poor prognosis are comorbid BN and atypical 
demographics (very early or relatively late onset, male gender). Forty per 
cent of additional deaths are due to suicide, the remainder being due to 
complications of starvation.
Bulimia nervosa
The prevalence of BN is difcult to determine with precision, as only a 
small proportion of sufferers come to medical attention. It is believed to 
be more common than AN, with a similar gender ratio. Peak age of onset 
is slightly later than for AN, typically late adolescence or early adult life.
Clinical features
Patients with BN are usually at or near normal weight (unlike in AN), 
but display a morbid fear of fatness associated with disordered eating 
behaviour. They recurrently embark on eating binges, often followed by 
corrective measures such as self-induced vomiting.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic criteria are shown in Box 31.33. Physical signs of 
repeated self-induced vomiting include pitted teeth (from gastric 
acid), calluses on knuckles (‘Russell's sign’) and parotid gland 
enlargement. There are many associated physical complications, 
including the dental and oesophageal consequences of repeated 
vomiting, as well as electrolyte abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmias 
and renal problems (see Box 31.32).
Investigations
Self-induced vomiting and/or abuse of laxatives and diuretics can lead 
to clinically signicant electrolyte disturbances, including hypokalaemia 
leading to cardiac arrhythmias. Hence it is good practice to measure 
urea and electrolytes and obtain an ECG whenever these behaviours 
are prominent in any patient and when BN is suspected in any medical 
inpatient. Repeated vomiting can also give rise to Mallory–Weiss tears 
and even oesophageal rupture; if symptoms are suggestive of these, an 
endoscopy should be performed.
Management
Treatment of bulimia with CBT achieves both short-term and long-term 
improvements. Guided self-help and IPT may also be of value. There is 
also evidence for benet from the SSRI uoxetine, but high doses of up 
to 60 mg daily may be required for a prolonged period of up to 1 year; this 
appears to be independent of the antidepressant effect.
Prognosis
Bulimia is not associated with increased mortality but a proportion of 
sufferers go on to develop anorexia. At 10-year follow-up, approximately 
10% are still unwell, 20% have a subclinical degree of bulimia, and the 
remainder have recovered.
Personality disorders
Personality refers to the set of characteristics and behavioural traits that 
best describes an individual's patterns of interaction with the world. The 
intensity of particular traits varies from person to person, although certain 
ones, such as shyness or irritability, are displayed to some degree by 
most people. A personality disorder (PD) is diagnosed when an individ-
ual's personality causes persistent and severe problems for the person 
or for others.
Pathogenesis
Some PDs appear to have an inherited aspect (especially schizotypal 
and paranoid subtypes) but most are more clearly related to adverse 
childhood experiences.
Clinical features
Personality disorders present in various ways. For example, anxiety 
may be so pronounced that the individual rarely ventures into any situ-
ation where they fear scrutiny. Dissocial traits, such as disregard for the 
31.33  Diagnostic criteria for eating disorders
Anorexia nervosa
 Weight loss of at least 15% of total body weight (or body mass index ≤17.5)
 Avoidance of high-calorie foods
 Distortion of body image so that patients regard themselves as fat even when 
grossly underweight
 Amenorrhoea for at least 3 months
Bulimia nervosa
 Recurrent bouts of binge eating
 Lack of self-control over eating during binges
 Self-induced vomiting, purgation or dieting after binges
 Weight maintained within normal limits

[[p1325]]
Psychiatric disorders    1259
31
well-being of others and a lack of guilt concerning the adverse effects 
of one's actions on others, may occur. If pronounced, they may lead to 
damage to others, to criminal acts or to successful careers, such as in 
politics. They usually persist throughout life and are not readily treated. 
While they typically become less extreme with age, they can re-emerge 
in the context of cognitive decline.
Diagnosis
It is possible to classify PD into several subtypes (such as emotion-
ally unstable, antisocial or dependent), depending on the particular 
behavioural traits in question. A patient who meets diagnostic criteria 
for one subtype may also meet criteria for others. As allocation to one 
particular subtype gives little guidance to management or prognosis, 
classication is of limited value. Diagnosis requires a longitudinal per-
spective, with clear evidence that the patient's behavioural traits and 
patterns of interaction with the world have been present throughout 
their adult life, have been evident across a range of settings and have 
caused repeated and persistent problems. It can be difcult to achieve 
this during a single interview, and most psychiatrists warn against 
making a diagnosis of personality disorder until the patient has been 
seen several times and corroborative accounts have been obtained. It 
is common for PD to accompany other psychiatric conditions, mak-
ing treatment of the latter more difcult and therefore affecting their 
prognosis.
Management
Treatment options are limited but there is some evidence that emotion-
ally unstable PD may respond to dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT). 
Anxious (avoidant) and obsessional (anankastic) PD may benet from 
prescription of anxiolytic drugs, while paranoid/schizotypal PD may be 
improved by treatment with low doses of antipsychotic agents.
The problematic and inexible patterns of interaction that characterise 
a PD are often apparent in the patient's interaction with health services 
and can present a challenge to both the service and the patient. Clear 
clinical communication supported by robust documentation can help to 
minimise any potential disruption.
Factitious disorder and malingering
Factitious disorder describes the repeated and deliberate production of 
the signs or symptoms of disease to obtain medical care.
Pathogenesis
It is difcult to understand what motivates a person to act in this way. 
Several theories have been proposed but the deception that lies at the 
heart of the condition makes it difcult to gather accurate data from 
which to draw reliable conclusions.
Clinical features
The disorder feigned is usually medical but can be a psychiatric illness 
(for example, false reports of hallucinations or symptoms of depression). 
An example of a medical factitious disorder is dipping of a thermometer 
into a hot drink to fake a fever. Factitious disorder is uncommon and is 
important to distinguish from somatoform disorders. A suggested diag-
nostic algorithm is shown in Figure 31.6
Münchausen syndrome
This refers to a severe chronic form of factitious disorder. Patients char-
acteristically travel widely, sometimes visiting several hospitals in one day. 
Although the condition is rare, such patients are memorable because 
they present so dramatically. The history can be convincing enough 
to persuade doctors to undertake investigations or initiate treatment, 
including exploratory surgery. It may be possible to trace the patient's 
history and show that they have presented similarly elsewhere, often 
changing name several times. Some emergency departments hold lists 
of such patients.
Are symptoms fully explained
by organic disease?
Organic disease
Yes
‘Medically unexplained’
Is patient consciously feigning?
No
‘Factitious disorder’
No
‘Malingering’
Yes
‘Functional somatic syndrome’
(see Box 31.11)
No
‘Somatisation disorder’
Yes
Is there a preoccupation with
symptoms or diagnosis?
Have there been multiple presentations
to different departments?
No
Is there an identifiable gain?
Yes
‘Hypochondriasis’
‘Somatisation’
Preoccupation
with diagnosis
Preoccupation
with symptoms
Fig. 31.6 Differential diagnosis of medically unexplained symptoms.

[[p1326]]
1260    MEDICAL PSYCHIATRY
Malingering
Malingering is a description of behaviour, not a psychiatric diagnosis. It 
refers to the deliberate and conscious simulation of signs of disease and 
disability for an identiable gain (patients have motives that are clear to 
them but which they initially conceal from doctors). Examples include the 
avoidance of burdensome responsibilities (such as work or court appear-
ances) or the pursuit of nancial gain (fraudulent claims for benets or 
compensation). Malingering can be hard to detect at clinical assessment 
but is suggested by evasion or inconsistency in the history.
Management
Management is by gentle but rm confrontation with clear evidence of 
the fabrication of illness, together with an offer of psychological support. 
Treatment is usually declined but recognition of the condition may help to 
avoid further iatrogenic harm.
Puerperal psychiatric disorders
There are three important psychiatric presentations following childbirth. 
When managing these conditions, it is important always to consider both 
the mother and the baby, and their relationship (Box 31.34).
Post-partum blues
This is characterised by irritability, labile mood and tearfulness. About 80% of 
women are affected to some degree. Symptoms begin soon after childbirth, 
typically peak on about the fourth day and then resolve spontaneously within 
a few weeks. While the aetiology of post-partum blues is not fully under-
stood, it is likely to be related to hormonal or physiological changes asso-
ciated with childbirth. No treatment is required, other than to reassure the 
mother and to remain vigilant for development of post-partum depression.
Post-partum depression
This occurs in 10%–15% of women, with onset typically within a month of 
delivery (although women often suffer for some time before presenting). 
It can usually be differentiated from post-partum blues by the duration 
and severity of the symptoms, in particular anhedonia (loss of capacity 
for pleasure) and negative thoughts. Risk factors include a previous his-
tory of depression, a previous history of post-partum depression, ante-
natal depression and antenatal anxiety. Unlike depression arising at other 
times, post-partum depression is not more common in lower socioeco-
nomic groups; the prevalence is similar across all social backgrounds. 
Diagnosis, explanation and reassurance are important. The usual psy-
chological and drug treatments for depression should be considered to 
minimise the impact on the mother and child at what is a very impor-
tant time for both. A number of helpful guidelines are available to inform 
prescribing decisions (see ‘Further information’). The potential risks to 
both mother and child should be considered and, if hospital admission is 
required, it should ideally be to a mother and baby unit.
Puerperal psychosis
This has its peak onset in the rst 2 weeks after childbirth but can arise 
several weeks later. It is a rare but serious complication affecting approx-
imately 1 in 500 women. There is a strong association with a personal or 
familial history of bipolar disorder. It usually takes the form of a manic or 
depressive psychosis but with sudden onset and uctuation in severity. 
Delirium is rare with modern obstetric management but should still be 
considered in the differential diagnosis. Suspiciousness, concealment 
and impulsivity are common features of puerperal psychosis; hence the 
risks to both mother and baby are considerable. The clinical priority is to 
ensure the safety of both mother and baby and so psychiatric admis-
sion, ideally to a psychiatric mother and baby unit, is usually necessary. 
Pharmacological treatment reects the clinical picture; antipsychotic 
medication is almost always indicated, augmented by antidepressants 
if the picture is of psychotic depression and/or by mood stabilisers if the 
picture is bipolar. Most women recover but the risk of recurrence follow-
ing subsequent deliveries is 50% and some women will progress to psy-
chotic episodes not associated with childbirth, usually bipolar disorder.
Psychiatric disorders during pregnancy
Pregnancy can affect the course of psychiatric illnesses and of bipolar 
affective disorder in particular. Mood-stabilising drugs such as lithium 
and sodium valproate, which are prescribed for prophylaxis in bipolar 
disorder, are teratogenic and should be avoided. Most guidelines rec-
ommend deferring conception until mood-stabilising medication is not 
required, or replacing the mood stabiliser with an antipsychotic such 
as chlorpromazine. Furthermore, the immediate post-partum period is 
associated with a dramatically increased risk of relapse in bipolar disor-
der: studies report relapse rates of up to 60% in the rst 3 months after 
delivery in the absence of prophylactic medication. When relapse occurs 
following childbirth, not only are the stakes higher than at other times but 
also the onset of illness is more rapid, the symptoms more severe and 
concealment more pronounced. Post-partum relapse of bipolar disor-
der requires urgent specialist treatment, usually comprising admission 
to a psychiatric mother and baby unit. Ideally, women with major mental 
disorders such as bipolar disorder should be offered expert pre-concep-
tion advice to help them make informed decisions about medication and 
other aspects of their psychiatric care. A comprehensive post-partum 
risk management plan should be agreed during pregnancy.
Psychiatry and the law
Medicine takes place in a legal framework, made up of legislation (statute 
law) drafted by parliament or other governing bodies, precedent built 
up from court judgments over time (case law) and established tradition 
(common law). Psychiatry is similar to other branches of medicine in the 
applicability of common and case law but differs in that patients with 
psychiatric disorders can also be subject to legislative requirements to 
remain in hospital or to undergo treatments they refuse, such as the 
administration of antipsychotic drugs to a patient with acute schizophre-
nia who lacks insight and whose symptoms and/or behaviour pose a risk 
to himself/herself or to others.
The UK has three different Mental Health Acts, covering England and 
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and all of these have recently been 
revised. Other countries may have very different provisions. It is important 
for practitioners to be familiar with the relevant provisions that apply in their 
jurisdictions and are likely to arise in the clinical settings in which they work.
All the countries that make up the UK have also introduced Incapacity 
Acts in recent years, with detailed provisions covering medical treatments 
for patients incapable of consenting, whether this incapacity arises from 
physical or mental illness. In general, the guiding principle in British law 
is that people should be free to make their own decision about any 
proposed medical treatment, except where their ability to make and/or 
31.34  Psychiatric illness and pregnancy
 Psychiatric disorder and pregnancy: always consider effects on mother, fetus 
and child.
 Bipolar disorder: women should have pre-conceptual advice because there 
is a very high risk of relapse following delivery and some mood stabilisers are 
teratogenic.
 Psychiatric treatments and pregnancy: always make an individual 
assessment of the risks and benets taking into consideration effects on 
mother, fetus and child.
 Post-partum low mood (‘blues’): weeks 1–3; most cases are transient.
 Persistent low mood and anhedonia: may indicate depressive illness.
 Puerperal psychosis: progresses rapidly and is an indication for psychiatric 
admission.

[[p1327]]
Further information    1261
31
communicate that decision is demonstrably impaired (by mental illness 
or physical incapacity). Any restrictions or compulsions applied should 
be the minimum necessary, they should be applied only for as long as 
is necessary, and there should be a benet to the patient that balances 
the restrictions imposed. There should also be provisions for appeals 
and oversight.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Hofer H, Pozzi A, Joray M, etal. Safe refeeding management of anorexia nervosa 
inpatients: an evidence-based protocol. Nutrition 2014;30:524–530.
Mitchell JE, Peterson CB. Anorexia nervosa. N Engl J Med 2020;382:1343–1351.
Steel RM. Factitious disorder (Münchausen's syndrome). J R Coll Phys Edinb 
2009;39:343–347.
Taylor D, Meader N, Bird V, etal. Pharmacological interventions for people with 
depression and chronic physical health problems: systematic review and meta-
analyses of safety and efcacy. Br J Psychiatry 2011;198:179–188.
Vos T, Limm SS, Abbafati C, etal. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 
204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2020;396:1204–1222.
Websites
neurovascularmedicine.com/ace.pdf Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination –  
ACE -III.
mind.org.uk Information on depression.
mocatest.org Montreal Cognitive Assessment.
neurosymptoms.org A guide to medically unexplained neurological symptoms.
niaaa.nih.gov/ Information on alcoholism.
nice.org.uk National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: treatment guidelines 
for depression.
ocdaction.org.uk Useful information about obsessive–compulsive disorder.
rcpsych.ac.uk/info/ Royal College of Psychiatrists: mental health information.
sign.ac.uk Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network: treatment guidelines 
for depression, including Guideline 127 – Management of perinatal mood 
disorders.
who.int/health-topics/mental-health World Health Organization: mental health and 
brain disorders.
www4.parinc.com/ Mini-Mental State Examination.

[[p1328]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p1329]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 31.1. When assessing cognitive function within the Mental State 
Examination, it is good clinical practice to perform which of the 
following in all patients?
 
A. A brief assessment of orientation
 
B. A brief assessment of orientation and attention
 
C. ACE-III
 
D. MMSE
 
E. MoCA
Answer: B.
It is good practice to perform a brief assessment of orientation (place, 
person and time – the patient is asked their name, age, date of birth, 
what building they are in, the current date and day of the week) and 
attention (‘serial 7 s’ – the patient is asked to subtract 7 from 100 and 
then 7 from the answer, and so on).
The MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment) and MMSE (Mini-
Mental State Examination) are screening questionnaires for cognitive 
impairment but these are not necessary in every patient, only those in 
whom cognitive impairment is suspected. The ACE-III (Addenbroke’s 
Cognitive Examination – 3rd edition) is a more comprehensive cognitive 
assessment.
 31.2. A 26-year-old beauty therapist presents to the Emergency 
Department with an episode of haematemesis. Upper GI 
endoscopy reveals a Malloy–Weiss tear. The patient reports that 
several times each week for the past 6 months she has been 
bingeing on crisps and chocolate then making herself sick. 
Her BMI is 26. What would be appropriate rst-line medical 
investigations?
 
A.  FBC, U&Es, LFTs, albumin, cholesterol, amylase, calcium, 
magnesium, phosphate, fasting glucose, ECG and bone 
mineral density scan
 
B.  FBC, U&Es, LFTs, albumin, cholesterol, amylase, calcium, 
magnesium, phosphate and fasting glucose
 
C.  FBC, U&Es, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, vitamin B12, 
folate, ferritin and ECG
 
D.  FBC, U&Es, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, B12, folate 
and ferritin
 
E.  FBC, U&Es, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, B12, folate, 
ferritin, ECG and bone mineral density scan
Answer: C.
The most likely diagnosis is bulimia nervosa. (C) is a list of the investi-
gations recommended in bulimia nervosa. (A) is a list of the investigations 
recommended in anorexia nervosa. ECG is important in patients with 
bulimia nervosa because acute electrolyte disturbance can be sufciently 
severe to cause potentially dangerous cardiac arrhythmias.
U&Es, calcium, magnesium and phosphate are the electrolytes most 
commonly disturbed in patients with bulimia nervosa and chronic nutri-
tional deciency can be present even where patient’s weight/BMI is nor-
mal (or raised), hence it is wise to check FBC, B12, folate and ferritin. 
Bone mineral density scan is not usually indicated in a patient with nor-
mal or slightly raised BMI unless dietary restriction is a prominent feature.
 31.3. In the management of psychiatric disorders it is good clinical 
practice to consider strategies with what framework?
 
A. Bio-psycho-holistic
 
B. Bio-psycho-social
 
C. Medico-psycho-holistic
 
D. Medico-psycho-social
Answer: B.
 31.4. An 85-year-old man is admitted to an orthopaedic ward with a 
fractured neck of femur. When attempting to consent the man 
for his operation, the surgeon soon realises that the man does 
not understand that he has fractured his hip, nor even that he is 
in hospital. What term is used to describe this patient’s inability 
to give informed consent?
 
A. Cognitive impairment
 
B. Delirium
 
C. Dementia
 
D. Incapacity
 
E. Mental deciency
Answer: D.
‘Cognitive impairment’ is a generic term used to describe any decit 
in cognitive function; this man undoubtedly has cognitive impairment. 
‘Delirium’ and ‘dementia’ are both diagnoses in which cognitive impair-
ment is a prominent feature. This man may be suffering from either or 
both. ‘Mental deciency’ is an outdated term for a failure of intellectual 
development (the term has been superseded by ‘learning disability’ and 
‘mental retardation’).

[[p1330]]
Maternal medicine
32
L Mackillop
FEM Neuberger
Clinical examination in pregnancy 1264
Clinical evaluation in maternal medicine 1265
Planning pregnancy in patients with medical conditions 1266
Functional anatomy and physiology 1266
Investigations 1267
Imaging 1268
Presenting problems in pregnancy 1268
Breathlessness 1268
Chest pain 1269
Circulatory collapse 1269
Headache 1269
Nausea and vomiting 1269
Oedema 1269
Seizures 1269
Medical disorders in pregnancy 1269
Hypertension 1270
Respiratory disease 1271
Gastrointestinal disease 1271
Diabetes 1272
Endocrine disease 1273
Human immunodeciency virus infection 1274
Inammatory rheumatic disease 1274
Bone disease 1275
Cardiac disease 1275
Renal disease 1276
Liver disease 1277
Neurological disease 1278
Psychiatric disorders 1278
Haematological disease 1278

[[p1331]]
1264    MATERNAL MEDICINE
Clinical examination in pregnancy
Increased risk of varicella
pneumonia
Striae gravidarum
Linea nigra
Striae albicans
Peripheral oedema
Jaundice in acute fatty liver
of pregnancy
Melasma
Palmar erythema
2
3
1
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
5
6
8
9
1
2
3
4
Observation
Plethoric
Mood/affect
Hands
Pulse
Pulse rate increased by
10–20 bpm
Bounding pulse
Blood pressure
Lower in 2nd and 3rd trimesters
Face
Conjunctival pallor (physiological
anaemia of pregnancy)
Heart
Ejection systolic murmur may be
part of normal pregnancy
Diastolic murmurs are always
pathological
Breasts
Increase in size and vascularity
7
Respiratory system
Mild breathlessness common
Respiratory rate unchanged
Abdomen
Scars
Excoriations
Umbilicus eversion
Obstetric examination
Legs
Varicose veins
10 Urine dipstick
Mild oedema in normal
pregnancy
Rapid-onset oedema suggests
pre-eclampsia
Insets: (Palmar erythema) From Fitzpatrick JE, Morelli JG. Dermatology secrets plus, 5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2016; 
(Melasma) From Lawrence CM, Cox NH. Color atlas and text of physical signs in dermatology. London: Wolfe; 1993; (Jaundice) From Morse SA, 
Ballard RC, Holmes KK, et al. Atlas of sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2010; (Varicella 
pneumonia) From Voore N, Lai R. Varicella pneumonia in an immunocompetent adult. Can Med Assoc J 2012; 184(17):1924; (Linea nigra) From 
Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Duncan KO, et al. Dermatology essentials. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2014, Courtesy of Jean L. Bolognia; 

[[p1332]]
Clinical evaluation in maternal medicine    1265
32
Clinical evaluation in maternal medicine
Take a careful history
Perform general examination
Consider cardiovascular adaptations during pregnancy
-40%
Blood volume
Cardiac output
Heart rate
Systolic blood pressure
Diastolic blood
pressure
1st trimester
-20%
0
+20%
+40%
+60%
Perform X-ray imaging if
indicated
 Anaemia
 Altered thyroid function 
tests
 Low creatinine/urea
 Low CO2
 Raised alkaline
   phosphatase
 Glycosuria
Consider mother and fetus
when prescribing
Remember changes of pregnancy when interpreting
laboratory results
Perform urinalysis
Perform further
investigations if appropriate
Palmar erythema
Check for oedema
and deep venous
thrombosis
Check blood
pressure
Check for
anaemia and
jaundice
Take a careful drug history
Stop fetotoxic drugs
before conception
 Methotrexate
 Leflunomide
 Mycophenolate
 Valproate
Ask specifically about:
 Cardiac disease
 Renal disease
 Diabetes
 Rheumatic disease
 Inflammatory bowel
   disease
 Epilepsy
2nd trimester
3rd trimester
(Striae gravidarum) From Buchanan K, Fletcher HM, Reid M. Prevention of striae gravidarum with cocoa butter cream. Int J Gynecol Obstet 
2009; 108(2010):65–68; (Striae albicans) From Cantisano-Zilkha M. Aesthetic oculofacial rejuvenation. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2010; 
(Peripheral oedema) From Huang H-W, Wong L-S, Lee C-H. Sarcoidosis with bilateral leg lymphedema as the initial presentation: a review of the 
literature. Dermatologica Sinica 2016; 34:29–32.

[[p1333]]
1266    MATERNAL MEDICINE
Major physiological changes occur during pregnancy, which impact on 
several organ systems. These are necessary to support the growing 
fetus, to prepare for delivery and to support lactation. These changes 
can adversely affect the activity and progression of many pre-existing 
medical conditions. Emphasising this fact, information from the UK 
Condential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths has revealed that over recent 
years, approximately two-thirds of maternal deaths occur as the result 
of pre-existing medical conditions, rather than from obstetric causes. 
The most common causes of death were cardiac disease (23%), venous 
thromboembolism (16%) and neurological disorders (13%). Although 
some diseases can undergo remission during pregnancy, others can 
worsen, potentially jeopardising the health and well-being of the mother 
and fetus. In this chapter we review the physiological changes that occur 
during pregnancy and the impact of pregnancy on the diagnosis, clinical 
course and management of common medical conditions. In addition, we 
review the pathogenesis and management of several medical conditions 
specic to pregnancy.
Planning pregnancy in patients with  
medical conditions
Patients with pre-existing medical conditions require careful counsel-
ling when planning a pregnancy to make them aware of the risks that 
pregnancy might pose, as well as the changes in symptoms that might 
be expected to occur during pregnancy. Although each disease is dif-
ferent, as is discussed later in this chapter, the general principles are 
to ensure that drugs that may be fetotoxic are stopped before preg-
nancy is attempted; that high-risk patients are kept under close sur-
veillance during their pregnancy; and that new symptoms that emerge 
during pregnancy are treated seriously and fully investigated where 
appropriate.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The most important changes that occur in the anatomy and physiology 
of major organ systems during pregnancy are discussed below.
Bone metabolism
Major changes in bone metabolism take place to meet the demands of 
the growing fetus. Intestinal calcium absorption increases, due in part to 
increased production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D). Calcium 
is also released from the maternal skeleton due to increased bone 
resorption, stimulated by production of parathyroid hormone-related pro-
tein (PTHrP) by breast and placenta. This results in loss of bone from the 
maternal skeleton during pregnancy that continues until lactation ceases 
and then recovers. Serum concentrations of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 
can increase by up to fourfold but this is due to release of ALP from the 
placenta rather than bone.
Cardiovascular system
Heart rate and stroke volume increase during pregnancy; when com-
bined with peripheral vasodilatation and a reduction in systemic blood 
pressure, this causes a hyperdynamic circulatory state and an increase 
in cardiac output. Diaphragmatic elevation may affect the electrocardi-
ogram (ECG), causing left axis deviation of up to 15°. Other changes 
include T-wave inversion in leads III and aVF, ST depression, small Q 
waves and a sinus tachycardia. Supraventricular and ventricular beats 
are common. Echocardiography shows a modest increase in the dimen-
sions of the cardiac chambers.
Endocrine system
During early pregnancy there is secretion of human chorionic gonadotro-
phin (hCG) by trophoblast cells, which act on the corpus luteum in the 
ovary to stimulate oestradiol and progesterone production (Fig. 32.1). 
Levels of hCG rise rapidly during early pregnancy to reach a peak around 
8 weeks, and then fall before stabilising at a lower level from 20 weeks 
until term. There is a progressive rise in oestradiol and progesterone 
levels; initially, these hormones are produced by the corpus luteum but 
placental production takes over after about 12 weeks. The high levels 
of gonadal hormones suppress pituitary gonadotrophin production but 
prolactin levels rise about 10-fold and there is an increase in volume 
of the anterior pituitary. Serum levels of free T4 increase during the rst 
trimester but, paradoxically, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels fall 
by almost 50%. This is because hCG is homologous to TSH and mimics 
the effect of TSH on the thyroid, stimulating both T3 and T4 production. 
The raised levels of T3 and T4 feed back to the pituitary and reduce TSH 
secretion. Later in pregnancy, there is increased degradation of thyroxine 
by the placenta and levels of thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) rise, caus-
ing the normal range for free T4 and T3 to fall progressively during the 
course of pregnancy. Although TSH levels are difcult to interpret early in 
pregnancy, they provide the best measure of thyroid function after about 
16 weeks' gestation.
Gastrointestinal system
The high levels of progesterone during pregnancy lead to relaxation 
of smooth muscle in the gastrointestinal tract. This causes the lower 
oesophageal sphincter to relax, predisposing to gastro-oesophageal 
reux and reduced gastrointestinal transit; this in turn leads to delayed 
gastric emptying and constipation.
Genitourinary system
Glomerular ltration rate (GFR) increases during pregnancy due to an 
increased cardiac output. By the second trimester, renal perfusion 
increases by up to 80% and GFR by 50%, leading to a fall in serum urea 
and creatinine. Mild glycosuria may be observed during normal preg-
nancy due mainly to an increase in ltered load of glucose. The ureters 
and renal pelvis are slightly dilated, most prominently on the left side, 
leading to the physiological hydronephrosis of pregnancy.
Glucose metabolism
Maternal glucose metabolism changes during pregnancy to optimise 
delivery of glucose and other nutrients to the fetus. During the second 
half of pregnancy in particular, there is maternal insulin resistance due 
largely to an increase in circulating levels of human placental lactogen 
(hPL) (see Fig. 32.1). The net effect is to ensure that glucose is prefer-
entially supplied to the fetus rather than the mother. Following delivery 
of the placenta, there is a rapid decline in hPL and reversal of insulin 
resistance. During pregnancy, fasting plasma glucose decreases slightly, 
while post-prandial blood glucose may increase. Glycosuria may occur, 
even in women who do not have diabetes, due to the increased GFR. 
Insulin secretion in the fetus is driven by fetal glucose levels, which in 
turn are dependent on maternal glucose concentrations. Accordingly, 
in women with diabetes, maternal hyperglycaemia stimulates fetal insu-
lin secretion, which increases fetal growth, resulting in increased birth 
weight or macrosomia.
Haematological system
Haemoglobin normally falls by about 20% during pregnancy since 
plasma volume increases more than red cell volume: the so-called phys-
iological anaemia of pregnancy. The reduction in haematocrit lowers 

[[p1334]]
Investigations    1267
32
blood viscosity but this is offset by an elevation in levels of several clot-
ting factors, resulting in a hypercoagulable state that increases the risk of 
venous and arterial thrombosis.
Respiratory system
Tidal volume (TV) increases during pregnancy due to an increased vital 
capacity and reduced residual volume, and by term the increase in TV is 
about 200 mL. These changes are required to meet the 20% increase in 
oxygen demand that occurs during pregnancy. The PCO2 level decreases 
but this is offset by an increase in renal excretion of bicarbonate, such 
that the blood pH remains relatively stable. Respiratory rate is unaffected 
by pregnancy.
Investigations
The profound changes in physiology and anatomy that occur during 
pregnancy cause changes in the normal reference ranges for several 
TSH-like
effect
Chorion
Thyroid
Early pregnancy
Late pregnancy
Pituitary
Corpus
luteum
Ovary
hCG
hCG
Progesterone
Oestradiol
hPL
Prolactin
Gestation (weeks)
Hormone levels
Oestradiol↑
Progesterone↑
8
16
24
32
40
TSH↓
T3 T4↑
Free T3, T4↓
T3 T4↓
TBG↑
Lactation
Liver
Placenta
Insulin resistance
Glucose↑
Pituitary
Prolactin
hPL
TSH
T3 T4
Fig. 32.1 Hormonal changes in pregnancy. In early pregnancy, oestradiol and progesterone are mainly derived from the corpus luteum in response to human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (hCG), secreted by the trophoblast. The raised levels of hCG also act on the thyroid to stimulate T 3 (triiodothyronine) and T4 (thyroxine) production, which in turn 
suppresses thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) production by the pituitary. Later in pregnancy, oestradiol and progesterone are derived from the placenta, which also produces 
human placental lactogen (hPL), impairing glucose tolerance. There is a progressive reduction of free T 3 and T4 during pregnancy as the result of T3 and T4 degradation by the 
placenta and increased secretion of thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) by the liver.

[[p1335]]
1268    MATERNAL MEDICINE
hormones, electrolytes and other analytes, as summarised in Box 32.1. 
While many investigations can proceed as normal during pregnancy, 
invasive procedures should generally be avoided unless the potential 
benet clearly outweighs the risk. Investigations that can be performed in 
pregnancy are shown in Box 32.2
Imaging
Imaging during pregnancy should be undertaken only when the clinical 
benet outweighs the potential risks to mother and fetus. In suspected 
pulmonary embolus, radionuclide ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan-
ning is preferred over computed tomographic pulmonary angiography 
(CTPA) in women with a normal chest X-ray since (V/Q) scans expose 
the maternal breast and lungs to less radiation than CTPA. However, 
if the chest X-ray is abnormal, CTPA should be performed, since it 
is more likely to yield a denitive diagnosis. The radiation exposure 
for both investigations is well below the maximum recommended fetal 
radiation dose in pregnancy (5 rad). Chest X-rays may also be per-
formed safely at any gestation during pregnancy if clinically indicated, 
since the radiation exposure is very low for the fetus. Magnetic res-
onance imaging (MRI) is safe in the second and third trimesters and 
is useful in the assessment of proximal deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 
and neurological disorders. However, gadolinium- containing contrast 
agents should be used only if absolutely necessary. If gadolinium 
contrast agents are used in women who are breastfeeding, the milk 
should be discarded for 24 hours. Ultrasound imaging is safe during 
pregnancy and useful in the assessment of patients with DVT or intra- 
abdominal pathology.
Presenting problems in pregnancy
Breathlessness
The causes of breathlessness during pregnancy are summarised in 
Box 32.3. Many women experience mild breathlessness as part of 
normal pregnancy, which is known as physiological breathlessness of 
pregnancy. It is thought to be progesterone-mediated and is classically 
of gradual onset and present at rest and on exercise. Physiological 
breathlessness does not require investigation but severe or persistent 
breathlessness should be investigated, especially if accompanied by 
chest pain. The diagnostic approach in pregnant patients with sus-
pected pulmonary embolism differs from that in non-pregnant women. 
Measurement of D-dimer is not helpful since values normally increase 
progressively throughout pregnancy. Accordingly, the rst-line investi-
gation in suspected pulmonary embolism is a (V/Q) scan in a patient 
with a normal chest X-ray and CTPA in a patient with an abnormal 
chest X-ray.
32.1 Common laboratory changes during pregnancy
Laboratory test
Change
Cause
Haematology
Haematocrit
Decrease
Extracellular volume 
expansion
Routine biochemistry
GFR
Urea and creatinine
Alkaline phosphate
Glucose
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease (fasting)
Increase (post-prandial)
Increased renal blood ow
Increased GFR
Release by placenta
Raised insulin
Insulin resistance
Hormones
T4
TSH
Prolactin
Oestradiol)
Progesterone)
hCG
hPL
Increase (rst trimester)
Decrease (later 
pregnancy)
Decrease (rst 
trimester)
Increase
Progressive increase
Increase then decrease
Progressive increase
Stimulation of thyroid by 
hCG
Placental degradation
Increased T4 due to 
stimulation of thyroid by hCG
Increased production by 
pituitary
Production by corpus
luteum then placenta
Production by trophoblast
Production by placenta
(GFR = glomerular ltration rate; hCG = human chorionic gonadotrophin; hPL = human 
placental lactogen; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone)
32.2 Investigations in pregnancy*
Investigation
Use during pregnancy
Comment
Renal biopsy
Can be performed during pregnancy
< 22 weeks is safest; 23–28 weeks is period of 
highest risk
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Safe during pregnancy
Fetal monitoring should be offered pre- and  
post-procedure
Left lateral position is recommended in the second half 
of pregnancy
Low-dose sedation recommended
Colonoscopy
Safe during pregnancy
Fetal monitoring should be offered pre- and  
post-procedure
Low-dose sedation recommended
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
Safe during pregnancy
Fetal monitoring should be offered pre- and  
post-procedure
Low-dose sedation recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging
Not contraindicated at any gestation
Computed tomography
Can be performed at any gestation
Radiation exposure to fetus and mother must be 
considered and addressed in counselling
Chest X-ray
Safe at any gestation
Ultrasound
Safe at any gestation
Echocardiogram
Safe at any gestation
Ambulatory electrocardiogram
Safe at any gestation
*For any investigation, the potential benet must outweigh the risk.

[[p1336]]
Medical disorders in pregnancy    1269
32
Chest pain
Chest pain does not occur during normal pregnancy but the incidences 
of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and aortic dissection are both 
increased. Accordingly, if a pregnant woman develops acute severe 
chest pain suggestive of either of these conditions, she should be inves-
tigated and treated in the same way as a non-pregnant woman.
Circulatory collapse
The differential diagnosis of circulatory collapse is wide and causes 
unrelated to pregnancy are discussed in Chapter 9. Obstetric causes 
include pulmonary embolism, haemorrhage and amniotic uid embo-
lism (AFE). This usually presents with collapse and profound shock 
during delivery or immediately afterwards, often accompanied by a 
severe coagulopathy. It can be difcult to differentiate AFE from other 
causes of maternal collapse, and the diagnosis is often made on 
clinical grounds when other causes of collapse have been excluded. 
Management is supportive, with oxygenation, careful uid balance and 
correction of coagulopathies where necessary, ventilatory support and 
vasopressors.
Another important cause of circulatory collapse is obstetric haemor-
rhage, which can be divided into ante-partum and post-partum sub-
types. Ante-partum haemorrhage is dened as bleeding from the vagina 
after 24 weeks' gestation. Primary post-partum haemorrhage is dened 
as occurring in the rst 24 hours after delivery, and secondary post- 
partum haemorrhage after 24 hours. Haemorrhage may be concealed, 
and physiological changes such as hypotension, tachycardia and 
tachypnoea may be late signs. Management is supportive with adminis-
tration of blood, intravenous uids and oxygen. Patients with post-partum 
haemorrhage may also benet from uterotonic agents such as oxytocin. 
If the bleeding fails to settle, surgical intervention or interventional 
radiology may be required.
Headache
Migraine and tension headache may occur during pregnancy and should 
be assessed along the usual lines, as described in Chapter 28. Important 
causes of headache that are specic to pregnancy are pre-eclampsia, 
which should be suspected in patients with hypertension, oedema and 
proteinuria, and cerebral venous thrombosis, which should be suspected 
when there is a neurological decit or seizures.
Nausea and vomiting
Nausea and vomiting are common during the rst trimester of pregnancy 
and do not usually require any specic investigation or treatment. Other 
causes of nausea and vomiting are summarised in Box 32.4. Severe 
vomiting with signicant weight loss and/or electrolyte disturbance sug-
gests hyperemesis gravidarum, which is discussed in more detail later 
in this chapter.
Oedema
A mild degree of ankle oedema can occur in normal pregnancy but sig-
nicant oedema raises suspicion of pre-eclampsia and this should be 
considered in patients who are also hypertensive and those with pro-
teinuria (Fig. 32.2).
Seizures
The causes and management of seizures during pregnancy are sum-
marised in Box 32.5. An important cause is eclampsia, which should 
be borne in mind in patients with no previous history of seizures and 
accompanying features such as hypertension, oedema and proteinuria. 
Seizures can also occur secondary to electrolyte disturbances associ-
ated with hyperemesis gravidarum or hypoglycaemia. Other disorders 
that are more common during pregnancy and can present with seizures 
include cerebral venous thrombosis and thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (TTP).
Medical disorders in pregnancy
Many disorders present specic management problems before preg-
nancy, during pregnancy and in the puerperium; the most important of 
these are discussed in more detail below.
32.4 Differential diagnosis of severe nausea and 
vomiting in pregnancy
Gastrointestinal
 Peptic ulcer disease
 Gastroenteritis
 Appendicitis
 Pancreatitis
Endocrine and metabolic
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Addison's disease
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Diabetic ketoacidosis
Neurological
 Space-occupying lesion
 Migraine
Pregnancy-associated  
conditions
 Hydatidaform mole
 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
 Hyperemesis gravidarum
Genitourinary
 Urinary tract infection
Psychological
 Bulimia nervosa
Cardiovascular
 Myocardial infarction
32.3 Breathlessness during pregnancy
Cause
Management
Physiological breathlessness of 
pregnancy
No treatment required
Asthma
Treatment as in non-pregnant  
women
Pneumonia
Treatment with antibiotic as in  
non-pregnant women
Valvular heart disease
Treatment as in non-pregnant  
women
Heart failure
Treatment as in non-pregnant  
women
Peripartum cardiomyopathy 
(PPCM)
Treatment as in non-pregnant women
Early delivery if haemodynamic 
deterioration
Pulmonary embolus
Treatment as in non-pregnant women

[[p1337]]
1270    MATERNAL MEDICINE
Hypertension
Hypertension is one of the most common medical problems during preg-
nancy, occurring in about 10%–15% of women. The causes and classi-
cation are summarised in Box 32.6
Pre-existing hypertension
If hypertension is discovered during the rst half of pregnancy, it usu-
ally indicates that there was pre-existing hypertension. This is most 
likely to be due to essential hypertension but secondary causes also 
need to be considered. Hypertension during pregnancy should be 
managed with vasodilators or methyldopa (Box 32.7), taking care 
to avoid hypotension. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors should be stopped in hypertensive women who are planning to 
become pregnant and should be avoided during pregnancy since they 
have fetotoxic effects. Diuretics should also be avoided unless there 
is heart failure, as they can reduce circulating volume and cause pla-
cental hypoperfusion.
Gestational hypertension
Gestational hypertension usually presents in the second half of preg-
nancy and most often resolves by 3 months post partum. It should be 
managed actively with one of the drugs listed in Box 32.7, to reduce the 
risk of progression to pre-eclampsia.
Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia
Pre-eclampsia is a disorder of vascular endothelial dysfunction that 
affects about 10% of all pregnancies worldwide. The risk factors for 
pre-eclampsia are shown in Box 32.8 and the clinical features illus-
trated in Figure 32.2. Management includes control of blood pressure, 
administration of magnesium sulphate as prophylaxis against seizures, 
correction of coagulation abnormalities and monitoring of uid balance. 
If pre-eclampsia occurs early in pregnancy, medical management 
should be initiated with the aim of controlling the condition and main-
taining the fetus in utero as long as possible. If these measures are 
ineffective and eclampsia supervenes (see below), then urgent delivery 
32.5 Causes of seizures during pregnancy
Cause
Management
Epilepsy
Similar to that in non-pregnant women
Avoid valproate
Eclampsia
Antihypertensives
Magnesium sulphate
Careful uid balance
Hypoglycaemia
Glucose
Hyponatraemia
Saline infusion
Alcohol withdrawal
Supportive treatment
Drugs
Supportive treatment
Stroke
As in non-pregnant women
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Low-molecular-weight heparin
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Plasma exchange
Immunosuppressives
32.6 Classication of hypertension during pregnancy
Hypertension
Denition
Hypertension in pregnancy
Blood pressure ≥ 140/90 mmHg on two 
separate occasions, at least 4 hrs apart
Pre-existing hypertension
Hypertension prior to pregnancy or occurring 
before 20 weeks' gestation
Gestational hypertension
Hypertension occurring after 20 weeks' 
gestation without proteinuria or any other 
features of pre-eclampsia
Pre-eclampsia
Hypertension occurring after 20 weeks' 
gestation with proteinuria, maternal organ 
dysfunction or uteroplacental dysfunction
Eclampsia
Generalised seizures in a pregnant woman 
with pre-eclampsia
White coat hypertension
Hypertension that only occurs in a clinical 
environment
Adapted from Brown A, Magee L, Kenny L, et al. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 2018. 
International Society for the Study of Hypertension in Pregnancy (ISSHP) classication, 
diagnosis, and management recommendations for international practice
32.7 Drug treatment of hypertension during pregnancy
Medication
Dosage
Labetalol
100 mg twice daily to 600 mg four times a day
Nifedipine
5 mg once daily to 10 mg once daily
Amlodipine
10mg B.D. to 40mg B.D.
Methyldopa
250 mg twice daily to 1000 mg three times a day
Doxazosin
0.5 mg twice daily to 8 mg three times a day
Flashing lights
Oedema
of face,
hands,
legs
Nausea and
vomiting
Epigastric/right
upper quadrant
pain
Constant
abdominal
pain
(placental
abruption)
Headaches
Delirium
Seizures
Hypertension
Proteinuria
Intrauterine
death
Fetal growth
restriction
Fig. 32.2 Symptoms and signs of pre-eclampsia.

[[p1338]]
Medical disorders in pregnancy    1271
32
32.8 Risk factors for pre-eclampsia
 Previous history of pre-eclampsia
 Multiple pregnancy
 Primiparity
 Genetic predisposition
 Obesity
 Increased maternal age
 Pre-existing medical conditions:
Chronic kidney disease
Hypertension
Diabetes mellitus
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
and connective tissue disease
Adapted from Duckitt K, Harrington D. Risk factors for pre-eclampsia at antenatal booking: 
systematic review of controlled studies. BMJ 2005; 330:565–567
32.9 Causes of pneumonia during pregnancy
Bacterial
 Streptococcus pneumoniae
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
 Legionella
 Haemophilus inuenzae
 Staphylococcus aureus
Viral
 Inuenza viruses
 Varicella zoster
Adapted from Lim W, Macfarlane J, Colthorpe C. Pneumonia in pregnancy. Thorax 2001; 
56:398–405
should be considered, provided the fetus is viable, since this results in 
an immediate cure.
Eclampsia occurs in about 1% of pregnancies and is associated with 
signicant mortality. It usually presents with seizures on a background of 
pre-eclampsia but rarely can occur before the onset of hypertension and 
proteinuria. Treatment is with intravenous magnesium sulphate 4 g intra-
venously over 15 mins followed by an infusion of 1 g/hr titrated to serum 
magnesium for 24 hr, and delivery of the fetus as soon as possible. 
Women with pre-eclampsia are more likely to develop hypertension, 
chronic kidney disease, and cerebrovascular and ischaemic heart disease 
in later life.
Respiratory disease
Asthma
Women with asthma should be managed aggressively during pregnancy, 
since poorly controlled asthma is associated with pre-eclampsia, fetal 
growth restriction, low birth weight and pre-term birth. The management is 
very similar to that in non-pregnant individuals. Short-acting and long-act-
ing β-agonists, inhaled and oral glucocorticoids, intravenous magnesium 
and theophylline can be used freely. Biologic agents such as the monoclo-
nal anti-IgE antibody omalizumab can be given for severe allergic asthma. 
There is less experience with leukotriene receptor agonists during preg-
nancy but they can be given if necessary. It is advisable to involve an anaes-
thetist or intensivist at an early stage in patients with severe exacerbations 
of asthma since airway management is more difcult in late pregnancy.
Respiratory infection
The most common causes of pneumonia during pregnancy are sum-
marised in Box 32.9. Diagnosis and management are broadly the same 
as in non-pregnant patients. Prompt treatment of infections is important 
since mothers with pneumonia are more likely to deliver early and have 
low-birth-weight infants compared with healthy pregnant women.
Bacterial infections
Antibiotics should be given, depending on the causal organism and 
sensitivities, along with supplemental oxygen and uids as required. 
Penicillins, cephalosporins and macrolides such as erythromycin are all 
safe during pregnancy but tetracyclines should be avoided because they 
may be fetotoxic and can cause staining of the teeth in the fetus (see 
Box 6.20).
Viral infections
Viral pneumonia is more common and often more severe during preg-
nancy. Varicella zoster pneumonia in particular is associated with a 
high fetal and maternal mortality rate. It presents with cough, breath-
lessness and pyrexia, and is usually preceded by a vesicular rash up to 
1 week before. Varicella infection can be diagnosed clinically, with labo-
ratory conrmation by culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of uid 
from vesicles, or by serology. Varicella pneumonia causes an interstitial 
pneumonitis with a characteristic nodular appearance on chest X-ray 
(p. 1264). Women with conrmed varicella zoster pneumonia should be 
admitted to hospital for supportive care and treatment with intravenous 
aciclovir for 7–10 days.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) may occur during pregnancy and in the UK is more 
common among African and Asian women. Untreated TB is associated 
with premature delivery and low birth weight. Transmission to the fetus 
can occur but is unusual. If the diagnosis of TB is conrmed, then antitu-
berculous chemotherapy should be given as normal, since the benet of 
treating TB in pregnancy outweighs any potential risks from the medica-
tion. A proportion of pregnant women with TB have coexisting human 
immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection, which confers a poorer prognosis 
and also requires treatment with antiretroviral therapy, as described in 
Chapter 14
COVID-19
Pregnant women are not disproportionately affected by COVID-19 and 
should this occur during pregnancy, the same principles of treatment 
should be followed as for the non-pregnant population.
Gastrointestinal disease
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Hyperemesis gravidarum is a serious condition that affects about 0.5% 
of pregnant women. It typically presents during the rst trimester with 
severe nausea, vomiting and other clinical features (Box 32.10). It is 
associated with signicant morbidity and mortality, due to malnutrition 
and electrolyte imbalance. Wernicke's encephalopathy may develop as 
the result of thiamin deciency. Recurrence is common in successive 
pregnancies. The cause is unknown and the diagnosis is one of exclu-
sion, since alternative causes of severe nausea and vomiting need to 
be ruled out, particularly if the onset of symptoms occurs after the rst 
trimester. Management is with lifestyle advice and support, intravenous 
uids, electrolyte replacement and antiemetics. Thiamin and glucocorti-
coids may be required in the most severe cases.
Inammatory bowel disease
Women with inammatory bowel disease (IBD) should be counselled 
prior to planning a pregnancy. Medications such as azathioprine, sul-
fasalazine, 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), glucocorticoids and tumour 
32.10 Clinical features of hyperemesis gravidarum
 Weight loss of > 5%
 Severe nausea and vomiting
 Electrolyte imbalance:
Hyponatraemia
Hypokalaemia
Hypomagnesaemia
 Dehydration
 Ketosis

[[p1339]]
1272    MATERNAL MEDICINE
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors can be continued as normal 
during pregnancy during the rst and second trimesters but methotrex-
ate must be stopped at least 3 months before conception because of 
its teratogenic effects. Since poorly controlled IBD is associated with 
an increased risk of pre-term birth, low birth weight and miscarriage, 
it is important for the disease to be well controlled before conception. 
The activity of IBD can increase during pregnancy and ulcerative colitis 
is more likely to are than Crohn's disease. Women who experience 
disease ares should be managed by multidisciplinary teams includ-
ing medicine and obstetrics, and monitored closely. It is usual to stop 
TNF-α inhibitors in the third trimester because most drugs in this class 
are actively transported across the placenta, potentially causing immu-
nosuppression in the neonate. Should TNF-α inhibitors be required 
in the third trimester, certolizumab pegol is a good choice since it 
does not cross the placenta in signicant amounts. Most women with 
uncomplicated IBD can have a normal vaginal delivery and do not need 
a caesarean section, but the need for this should be assessed on an 
individual basis by obstetric and medical teams.
Diabetes
It is important to institute meticulous glucose control in pregnancy, as 
maternal diabetes is associated with increased risks of congenital mal-
formations, stillbirth, pre-eclampsia, pre-term delivery, operative delivery, 
neonatal hypoglycaemia and admission to neonatal intensive care.
Gestational diabetes
Gestational diabetes is dened as diabetes with rst onset or recognition 
during pregnancy. This denition will include a few patients who develop 
type 1 diabetes during pregnancy, where prompt action and early insulin 
treatment will be required, and some patients who develop type 2 dia-
betes, or had unknown pre-existing type 2 diabetes, in whom the diabe-
tes does not remit after pregnancy. However, in most cases, gestational 
diabetes develops due to an inability to increase insulin secretion ade-
quately to compensate for pregnancy-induced insulin resistance, and 
most women can expect to return to normal glucose tolerance imme-
diately after pregnancy. Risk factors for gestational diabetes are shown 
in Box 32.11
The diagnosis of gestational diabetes is based on maternal blood glu-
cose measurements that are associated with increased fetal growth. An 
international consensus recommended that glucose values diagnostic 
of gestational diabetes should be lower than those for non-gestational 
diabetes (see Box 32.12). Controversy remains about who should be 
screened, and the screening strategy depends, in part, on the popu-
lation risk. It is widely accepted that women at high risk for gestational 
diabetes should have an oral glucose tolerance test at 24–28 weeks, 
and some guidelines recommend that all high-risk women should be 
screened by measuring HbA1c, fasting blood glucose or random blood 
glucose at the rst booking visit. It should be noted that measurements 
of HbA1c cannot reliably be used to diagnose diabetes in early pregnancy 
and until 3 months post partum, since HbA1c levels fall due to increased 
red cell turnover.
Management
The aim is to normalise maternal blood glucose concentrations and 
reduce the risk of excessive fetal growth. The rst element of manage-
ment is dietary modication, in particular by reducing consumption of 
rened carbohydrate. Women with gestational diabetes should under-
take regular pre- and post-prandial self-monitoring of blood glucose, 
aiming for pre-meal blood glucose levels of < 5.3 mmol/L (96 mg/dL) 
and a 1-hour post-prandial level of < 7.8 mmol/L (142 mg/dL) or a 
2-hour post-prandial level of < 6.4 mmol/L (109 mg/dL). If pharmaco-
logical treatment is necessary, metformin, glibenclamide or insulin can all 
be used. Glibenclamide should be used rather than other sulphonylureas 
because it does not cross the placenta. Other oral therapies or injectable 
incretin-based therapies should not be given in pregnancy.
After delivery, maternal glucose usually returns to pre-pregnancy lev-
els. In the UK, it is currently recommended that women with gestational 
diabetes should have a fasting blood glucose measured at 6 weeks post 
partum and have HbA1c concentrations measured annually to screen for 
the development of diabetes. This is because even those whose glu-
cose tolerance returns to normal post partum are at increased risk for 
developing type 2 diabetes, with a 5-year risk between 15% and 50%, 
depending on the population. Therefore, all women who have had ges-
tational diabetes should be given diet and lifestyle advice to reduce their 
risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life.
Pregnancy in women with established diabetes
Maternal hyperglycaemia early in pregnancy (during the rst 6 weeks 
post conception) can adversely affect fetal development, causing car-
diac, renal and skeletal malformations, of which the caudal regression 
syndrome (abnormal development of the lower part of the spine) is 
the most characteristic. The risk of fetal abnormalities is about 2% for 
non-diabetic women and about 4% for women with well-controlled dia-
betes (HbA1c < 53 mmol/mol) but more than 20% for those with poor 
glycaemic control (HbA1c > 97 mmol/mol). Therefore, it is important for 
women with diabetes to aim to achieve good glycaemic control before 
becoming pregnant. In addition, high-dose folic acid (5 mg daily, rather 
than the usual 400 µg) should be initiated before conception to reduce 
the risk of neural tube defects.
As for gestational diabetes, mothers should attempt to maintain 
near-normal blood glucose levels while avoiding hypoglycaemia through-
out their pregnancy, as this minimises excessive fetal growth and neona-
tal hypoglycaemia. This is often difcult to achieve, however. Pregnancy 
is also associated with an increased risk of ketosis, particularly, but not 
exclusively, in women with type 1 diabetes. Ketoacidosis during preg-
nancy is dangerous for the mother and is associated with a high rate 
(10%–35%) of fetal mortality.
Pregnancy is linked with a worsening of diabetic complications, most 
notably retinopathy and nephropathy, so careful monitoring of eyes and 
kidneys is required throughout pregnancy. If heavy proteinuria and/or 
renal dysfunction exist prior to pregnancy, there is a marked increase in 
the risk of pre-eclampsia, and renal function can deteriorate irreversibly 
during pregnancy. These risks need to be carefully discussed before a 
woman with diabetes is considering pregnancy. The outlook for mother 
and child has been vastly improved over recent years but pregnancy out-
comes are still not equivalent to those of non-diabetic mothers. Perinatal 
mortality rates remain 3–4 times those of the non-diabetic population (at 
around 30–40 per 1000 pregnancies) and the rate of congenital malfor-
mation is increased ve- to sixfold.
32.11 Risk factors for gestational diabetes
 Body mass index > 30 kg/m2
 Previous macrosomic baby weighing ≥ 4.5 kg
 Previous gestational diabetes
 Family history of diabetes (rst-degree relative with diabetes)
 Family origin with a high prevalence of diabetes:
South Asian (specically women whose country of family origin is India, 
Pakistan or Bangladesh)
African Caribbean
Middle Eastern
32.12  Diagnosis of gestational diabetes
 Fasting plasma glucose of ≥ 5.1  mmol/L (92  mg/dL)
 1 hour plasma glucose ≥ 10  mmol/L (180 mg/dL) after a 75 g glucose load
 2 hour plasma glucose ≥ 8.5  mmol/L (153 mg/dL) after a 75 g glucose load

[[p1340]]
Medical disorders in pregnancy    1273
32
Endocrine disease
Thyroid disease
Iodine deciency
Iodine deciency is a major public health issue in many countries, particu-
larly in South-east Asia, the Western Pacic and Central Africa. Severe 
iodine deciency in pregnancy is associated with miscarriage, stillbirth 
and cretinism, with signicant cognitive impairment, gait abnormalities 
and deafness in the affected child. More moderate iodine deciency is 
associated with milder forms of cognitive impairment and affects millions 
of people. The World Health Organization recommends a daily iodine 
intake of 250 µg/day for pregnant women. Treatment of iodine deciency 
in the rst and second trimesters can prevent impaired cognitive devel-
opment but is less effective if started in the third trimester.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism occasionally presents during pregnancy, with symp-
toms such as weight gain, constipation and lethargy, though more com-
monly, women with hypothyroidism are already diagnosed before they 
become pregnant. The diagnosis is easily missed since these symptoms 
are common in normal pregnancy. If suspected, the diagnosis can be 
conrmed by checking thyroid function tests, which show a raised TSH 
and low free T4. The reference range for thyroid function tests is different 
in pregnancy, and results should be checked using a local gestation- 
specic reference range.
Women with hypothyroidism should aim for optimal disease control 
before conceiving, and throughout the pregnancy. Untreated hypothy-
roidism is associated with miscarriage, pre-eclampsia and anaemia. 
During pregnancy, women should have their thyroid function checked 
every trimester, and dose adjustments made depending on the results, 
and blood tests repeated 4–6 weeks after any alterations. Some women 
may require an increase in their thyroxine dose during pregnancy to 
maintain normal TSH levels because there is an increased requirement 
for thyroxine during pregnancy. TSH should be < 2.5mIU/L for women 
on treatment prior to pregnancy.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is more common. There is no evidence 
that treating women with subclinical hypothyroidism and negative thy-
roid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies is benecial. For TPO antibody-positive 
women, there are some data to suggest treating TSH above the upper 
limit of the reference range but less than 10 mIU/L may be benecial for 
pregnancy outcome.
Hyperthyroidism
The coexistence of pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis is unusual, since anov-
ulatory cycles are common in thyrotoxic patients and autoimmune 
disease tends to remit during pregnancy, due to suppression of the 
maternal immune response. Thyroid function tests must be interpreted 
in the knowledge that thyroid-binding globulin, and hence total T4 and 
T3 levels, are increased in pregnancy and that the normal range for TSH 
is lower (see Box 35.10). Despite this, a fully suppressed TSH is usually 
indicative of Graves' disease. When thyroid disease during pregnancy 
is being dealt with, both mother and fetus must be considered, since 
maternal thyroid hormones, TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) and antithy-
roid drugs can all cross the placenta to some degree, exposing the 
fetus to the risks of thyrotoxicosis, iatrogenic hypothyroidism and goitre. 
Moreover, poorly controlled thyrotoxicosis can result in fetal tachycardia, 
intrauterine growth retardation, prematurity, stillbirth and possibly even 
congenital malformations.
Antithyroid drugs are the treatment of rst choice for thyrotoxicosis in 
pregnancy. Newly diagnosed hyperthyroidism during pregnancy can be 
treated with β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) in the short term, 
followed by antithyroid drugs. Propylthiouracil (PTU) is the preferred 
antithyroid drug because treatment with carbimazole during the rst tri-
mester has been associated with the occurrence of choanal atresia and 
aplasia cutis. Hyperthyroid women who become pregnant while taking 
carbimazole or PTU should be advised to continue their current drug in 
pregnancy, with close monitoring. Both carbimazole and PTU cross the 
placenta and are effective in treating thyrotoxicosis in the fetus caused 
by transplacental passage of TRAb. To avoid fetal hypothyroidism, which 
can affect brain development and cause goitre, it is important to use 
the smallest dose of antithyroid drug (typically <  150  mg PTU or 15  mg 
carbimazole per day) that will maintain maternal free T4, T3 and TSH con-
centrations within their respective reference ranges. Thyroid surgery is 
sometimes necessary because of poor drug adherence, drug hypersen-
sitivity or failure of medical treatment and is most safely performed dur-
ing the second trimester. Radioactive iodine is absolutely contraindicated 
throughout pregnancy, as it invariably induces fetal hypothyroidism. 
Frequent review of mother and fetus (monitoring heart rate and growth) 
is important during pregnancy and in the puerperium. Serum TRAb levels 
can be measured in the third trimester to predict the likelihood of neona-
tal thyrotoxicosis. PTU is the drug of choice in the breastfeeding mother, 
as it is excreted in the milk to a much lesser extent than carbimazole. 
Thyroid function should be monitored periodically in the breastfed child.
Post-partum thyroiditis
Post-partum thyroiditis typically presents 3–4 months after delivery. It is 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 20.
Pituitary disease
Prolactinoma
Prolactinomas are the most common pituitary tumours in young women. 
Although fertility is reduced in patients with prolactinoma, pregnancies 
can occur and if this happens the tumour may enlarge as part of the 
physiological pituitary enlargement that takes place during normal preg-
nancy. Macroprolactinomas (≥ 10 mm) are at greater risk of enlarging 
and may cause optic chiasm compression. If women known to have a 
prolactinoma become pregnant, they should have visual eld testing 
each trimester, followed by pituitary imaging by MRI if enlargement is
 suspected from changes in visual elds or from symptoms. Measurement 
of serum prolactin is generally not helpful, since levels increase anyway 
as part of normal pregnancy. Dopamine receptor agonists such as 
cabergoline and bromocriptine should normally be stopped during 
pregnancy, but can be reintroduced if necessary in patients with an 
enlarging prolactinoma that is threatening the visual elds.
Diabetes insipidus
Women with pre-existing diabetes insipidus may nd that their symp-
toms worsen in pregnancy due to placental production of vasopressi-
nase, a protease that degrades vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH). 
Because of this, pregnant women with diabetes insipidus may need 
higher doses of desmopressin until delivery. The development of symp-
toms suggestive of diabetes insipidus, such as thirst and polyuria, during 
pregnancy should raise suspicion of acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP), 
the syndrome of haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets 
(HELLP) or pre-eclampsia, as all of these conditions are also associated 
with decreased breakdown of vasopressinase by the liver.
Sheehan syndrome
This is a form of post-partum hypopituitarism caused by infarction of 
the pituitary, usually associated with hypotension from major post-par-
tum haemorrhage. It can present with failure to establish lactation after 
birth, amenorrhoea or other features of hypopituitarism. The diagnosis 
can be conrmed by tests of pituitary function and treated with hormone 
replacement, as described in Chapter 20.
Parathyroid disease
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is uncommon in women of 
child-bearing age, but if pregnancy does occur in a patient with pre- 
existing PHPT, careful monitoring is required. Women with mild disease 

[[p1341]]
1274    MATERNAL MEDICINE
can be managed conservatively but if serum calcium levels rise above 
2.85 mmol/L (11.5 mg/dL), consideration should be given to parathy-
roidectomy, as fetal mortality is high (up to 40%) in patients with severe 
hypercalcaemia. If parathyroidectomy is required, it should ideally be per-
formed during the second trimester. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
the calcimimetic drug cinacalcet can be used for medical management 
of PHPT during pregnancy.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH) is a benign disorder caused by 
mutations in the calcium-sensing receptor, which is described in Chapter 20. 
Although FHH poses no risk for pregnant women, the hypercalcaemia can 
suppress PTH secretion in neonates that do not inherit the FHH mutation, 
resulting in severe hypocalcaemia. Infants of mothers with FHH should 
have their serum calcium levels monitored during the rst few days of life; if 
hypocalcaemia is detected, intravenous calcium should be given.
Adrenal disease
Women with known adrenal insufciency can continue their glucocor-
ticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement during pregnancy as normal. 
Rarely, adrenal insufciency can present for the rst time during preg-
nancy. If this occurs, the diagnosis is challenging because total cortisol 
normally increases during pregnancy, and short Synacthen tests can be 
falsely normal. Specialist assessment is required. In women with Conn 
syndrome who become pregnant, amiloride should be substituted for 
spironolactone to prevent anti-androgenic effects on a male fetus.
Human immunodeciency virus infection
The course of HIV disease is not altered by pregnancy but treatment with 
antiretroviral therapy should be given during pregnancy to women who 
are HIV-positive, as outlined in Chapter 14. In some societies routine HIV 
testing is recommended at an early stage in pregnancy in all women.
Inammatory rheumatic disease
Most women with inammatory rheumatic disorders have success-
ful pregnancies but it is critically important for them to be given pre- 
conception counselling and to review medication use, optimise disease 
control and make them aware of the risks that pregnancy might pose to 
their condition and vice versa.
Rheumatoid arthritis
Women with rheumatoid arthritis should have a medication review; 
methotrexate, leunomide, mycophenolate and JAK inhibitors should be 
stopped and an alternative substituted before conception if necessary 
(Box 32.13). Rheumatoid arthritis often improves during pregnancy, par-
ticularly in those who are negative for rheumatoid factor or anti-cyclic cit-
rullinated peptide antibodies. There is an increased risk of pre-eclampsia, 
pre-term birth and small babies for women with active disease, empha-
sising the importance of maintaining disease control during pregnancy. 
Glucocorticoids, hydrochloroquine, azathioprine and sulfasalazine can 
all be continued as normal but non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) should be avoided after 28 weeks (see Box 32.13). Inhibitors of 
TNF-α are safe during pregnancy and can be continued if necessary to 
maintain control of the disease. Many TNF-α inhibitors are actively trans-
ported across the placenta and this can lead to immunosuppression 
in the neonate. Accordingly, infants of mothers who have been treated 
with TNF-α inhibitors during the second and third trimesters should not 
be given live vaccines and should be monitored closely for any signs 
of infection, particularly if treatment is continued into the third trimes-
ter. An exception is certolizumab pegol, which is a pegylated antibody 
that is not transported across the placenta but this is used infrequently 
in IBD. Experience with other biologic therapies such as ustekinumab 
and vedolizumab during pregnancy is limited, but increasing and clinical 
experience suggests that these drugs may be used until at least the 
third trimester. Disease ares are common in the post-partum period, 
regardless of serology, and this can pose a problem for breastfeeding 
and care of the infant. Glucocorticoids are a good short-term option to 
control such ares, pending reintroduction of other disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) that might have been stopped prior to 
pregnancy.
Systemic sclerosis
Pregnancy in women with diffuse systemic sclerosis (SSc), those with pul-
monary hypertension or renal involvement and those with disease of recent 
onset (< 4 years) poses risks to mother and fetus. In milder forms of the dis-
ease, however, the prognosis is better (Box 32.14). Raynaud's phenomenon 
32.13 Safety of antirheumatic drugs during pregnancy and breastfeeding
Drug
Safe during pregnancy
Safe during breastfeeding
Comment
Azathioprine
Yes
Yes
Ciclosporin
Yes
Yes
Data on breastfeeding limited
Cyclophosphamide
No
No
Glucocorticoids
Yes
Yes
A good short-term option for disease 
ares
Hydroxychloroquine
Yes
Yes
Janus activated kinase
No
No
Stop before planning pregnancy
Leunomide
No
No
Stop 2 years before planning pregnancy
Methotrexate
No
No
Stop 3 months before planning pregnancy
Mycophenolate
No
No
Stop before planning pregnancy
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
Yes (< 28 weeks)
Yes
Sulfasalazine
Yes
Yes
Co-prescribe with folic acid
Tacrolimus
Yes
Yes
Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
inhibitors
Yes
Yes
Avoid live vaccines in the neonate for 6 
months
Adapted from Ateka-Barrutia O, Nelson-Piercy C. Connective tissue disease in pregnancy. Clin Med 2013; 131:580–584.

[[p1342]]
Medical disorders in pregnancy    1275
32
often improves during pregnancy due to vasodilatation but oesophageal 
symptoms may worsen. Renal crises are no more frequent during preg-
nancy, but if one occurs, ACE inhibitors should be given. Although these 
are normally contraindicated in pregnancy, the potential benet in this situ-
ation outweighs the risk to the fetus. Glucocorticoids, which can be given 
to promote fetal lung maturation in premature babies, should be avoided in 
women with SSc where possible because they may provoke renal crisis.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pregnancy in women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) poses 
several risks to both mother and fetus, especially if there is renal involve-
ment. There is an increased risk of pre-eclampsia, thrombosis, fetal 
growth restriction, pre-term delivery, miscarriage and fetal death. There 
is also a higher risk of lupus are during the puerperium. Good control of 
disease is paramount, since women with SLE who conceive when their 
disease has been quiescent for at least 6 months are less likely to have 
complications than those who conceive when their disease has recently 
been active. It can be difcult to assess disease activity during pregnancy 
because symptoms such as oedema, hair loss, joint pain and fatigue, 
which occur in active SLE, are also common during normal pregnancies. 
The features in Box 32.15 can help differentiate between an SLE are, 
normal pregnancy and pre-eclampsia.
All women with SLE should be tested for anti-Ro and anti-La anti-
bodies, since they can cross the placenta and cause neonatal complete 
heart block or cutaneous lupus, respectively. Medications should be 
reviewed prior to pregnancy, to ensure they are safe, and an alternative 
substituted if necessary (see Box 32.13). The management of patients 
with antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) is described below.
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is associated with an 
increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, including thrombosis, 
miscarriage, fetal death and pre-eclampsia. This applies to primary APS 
and that associated with connective tissue diseases such as SLE. During 
pregnancy, women with APS should be managed with low-dose aspirin 
in combination with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).
Bone disease
Osteoporosis can rarely present for the rst time during pregnancy. 
Typically, this is with either hip or back pain in the third trimester or 
puerperium due to fractured neck of femur or multiple vertebral frac-
tures, respectively. The cause is unknown but it has been speculated 
that in some cases this may be due to amplication of the bone loss 
that normally occurs during pregnancy in women who have pre-existing 
low bone density. In other women, known risk factors for osteoporo-
sis may be identied such as inammatory disease or corticosteroids. 
Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis improves even without treatment 
but patients with severe disease may be left with chronic back pain due 
to vertebral deformity. Bisphosphonates and other osteoporosis treat-
ments are often given empirically post partum in an attempt to increase 
bone density but the effects on fracture outcomes are unclear. Another 
presentation is with a localised form of osteoporosis affecting the femoral 
head, which presents with hip pain. This is thought to be a manifesta-
tion of chronic regional pain syndrome type 1 (CRPS-1). The diagnosis 
can be conrmed by MRI scan which shows bone marrow oedema at 
the affected site. Treatment is symptomatic and the condition usually 
resolves spontaneously post partum.
Cardiac disease
Congenital heart disease
Women who have a history of surgically corrected congenital heart dis-
ease generally tolerate pregnancy well, but are more likely to have babies 
with congenital heart disease and should be offered fetal cardiac scans. 
Acyanotic heart diseases, such as atrial septal defect, ventricular septal 
defect and patent ductus arteriosus, all have a good prognosis in pregnancy. 
Unrepaired cyanotic heart disease has a very poor prognosis in pregnancy, 
as does pulmonary hypertension, regardless of the underlying cause. 
Women with mechanical heart valves require anticoagulation throughout 
pregnancy but their anticoagulation should be planned with consideration 
of substituting warfarin with LMWH and aspirin during the rst trimester to 
reduce the risk of warfarin embryopathy. If necessary, warfarin can be used 
during pregnancy, particularly in the second and third trimesters.
Valvular heart disease
The physiological changes of pregnancy may also unmask previously 
undiagnosed valvular disease. Women with regurgitant lesions, such as 
mitral regurgitation and aortic regurgitation, tolerate pregnancy better 
than those with stenotic lesions. Mitral stenosis causes a reduction in 
blood ow from the left atrium to left ventricle in diastole, which worsens 
during pregnancy due to the increased heart rate and hypervolaemia. 
Those with moderate to severe mitral stenosis (valve area < 1.5  cm2) are 
at particular risk and may develop arrhythmias, tachycardia and pulmo-
nary oedema. Most patients can be managed medically with β-blockers, 
LMWH and furosemide as necessary. Surgical intervention is indicated if 
there is continued haemodynamic compromise despite optimal medical 
management.
32.14 Systemic sclerosis (SSc) and pregnancy
Subtype
Effect of disease on pregnancy
Localised SSc
Good prognosis
Raynaud's may improve
Oesophagitis may worsen
CREST syndrome
Good prognosis
Raynaud's may improve
Oesophagitis may worsen
Diffuse SSc
Increased risk of:
Pre-term delivery
Pre-eclampsia
Fetal growth restriction
Low-birth-weight babies
Maternal and fetal mortality
(CREST = calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, oesophageal involvement, sclerodactyly and 
telangiectasia)
32.15  Differential diagnosis of lupus are during pregnancy
Clinical nding
Lupus are
Pre-eclampsia
Normal 
pregnancy
Hypertension
Yes
Yes
No
Proteinuria
Yes
Yes
No
Red cells/casts in 
urine
Yes
No
No
Liver function 
tests
Normal
Abnormal
Normal
Anti-double-
stranded DNA
Increase
Unchanged
Unchanged
C3 and C4
Low
Elevated or 
unchanged from 
baseline
Unchanged

[[p1343]]
1276    MATERNAL MEDICINE
Myocardial infarction
Pregnancy increases the risk of myocardial infarction. While athero-
sclerosis is the main cause in non-pregnant individuals, coronary artery 
dissection and coronary thrombosis secondary to the hypercoagula-
ble state are more common causes during pregnancy. Management 
is similar to that of non-pregnant women, except that statins and gly-
coprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors such as tiroban should be avoided where 
possible. Clopidogrel can be given but should be stopped around the 
time of delivery to reduce the risk of uterine bleeding and to allow spinal 
anaesthesia to be used if necessary. There is little evidence regarding 
ticagrelor, an alternative antiplatelet drug, during pregnancy. Stenting can 
be performed, but bare-metal stents are preferred because drug-eluting 
stents require dual antiplatelet therapy that cannot be continued around 
the time of delivery.
Aortic dissection
Pregnancy is an independent risk factor for aortic dissection and this 
should be considered when a woman presents with acute severe chest 
pain during pregnancy. The vast majority of cases in pregnancy are ‘type 
A’, involving the ascending aorta (see Fig. 16.71), and require careful 
control of hypertension, caesarean section to deliver the fetus, and emer-
gency surgery to treat the aneurysm.
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) presents with heart failure sec-
ondary to left ventricular systolic dysfunction towards the end of 
pregnancy or in the months following delivery. It is a diagnosis of 
exclusion, made when other causes of heart failure have been ruled 
out. The cause is unknown but PPCM is more prevalent in women 
who are older, multiparous, hypertensive and African Caribbean. It is 
treated by conventional medications for heart failure, including ACE 
inhibitors if necessary, and delivery of the baby. Many women recover 
within 3–6 months of diagnosis but the prognosis is variable. There 
is a signicant chance of reduction in cardiac function in subsequent 
pregnancies.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy carries a poor prognosis if the pre-pregnancy 
ejection fraction is below 30% or if symptoms are in New York Heart 
Association grades 3 or 4. Management is as described for PPCM.
Renal disease
Renal tract infection
Pregnancy predisposes women to urinary tract infection. If asymptomatic 
bacteriuria is discovered during pregnancy it should be treated promptly 
with antibiotics, to prevent ascending renal tract infection. Pyelonephritis 
is more common in pregnancy due to the physiological dilatation of the 
upper renal tract; if it does occur, it can trigger premature labour.
Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) may occur during pregnancy or in the puer-
perium due to a variety of causes (Box 32.16). Women with AKI 
caused by pre-eclampsia are prone to pulmonary oedema. Particularly 
close attention to uid balance is very important for these women. 
Intravenous uid is rarely indicated for women with pre-eclampsia, and 
most will undergo a diuresis in the days following the diagnosis and the 
AKI will resolve. If there is a coexisting condition such as sepsis with 
associated hypotension, then intravenous uids may be helpful. It is 
wise to enlist the assistance of critical care medicine specialists early 
for such patients.
In the post-partum period, AKI may occur as the result of post-partum 
haemorrhage or pre-eclampsia, and sometimes these occur in combi-
nation. Although pre-eclampsia resolves after delivery, AKI can be at its 
worst in the rst few days post partum, especially when exacerbated by 
obstetric haemorrhage.
Glomerular disease
Proteinuria caused by glomerular disease is usually exacerbated during 
pregnancy, and nephrotic syndrome may develop without any altera-
tion in the underlying disease activity in individuals who had only slight 
32.16 Causes of acute kidney injury in pregnancy
Mechanism
Cause
Features
Pre-renal
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Nausea and vomiting
Dehydration
Presentation in rst trimester
Post-partum haemorrhage
Vaginal bleeding immediately post partum
Placental abruption
Abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding in second or third trimester
Septic abortion
Presentation with hypotension, shock and pyrexia
Renal
Pre-eclampsia
Presentation in second and third trimesters with new-onset hypertension and proteinuria
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Possible antenatal or post-partum presentation with headache, irritability and drowsiness
Haematology shows thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Presentation with vomiting and abdominal pain in third trimester
Abnormal liver function tests
Liver ultrasound can be normal
Acute interstitial nephritis
Most common cause is use of non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs
Post-renal
Acute urinary retention
Usual presentation is in third trimester due to enlarged uterus causing ureteric obstruction; 
sometimes presents post partum
Adapted from Palma-Reis I, Vais A, Nelson-Piercy C, et al. Renal disease and hypertension in pregnancy. Clin Med 2014; 13:57–62.

[[p1344]]
Medical disorders in pregnancy    1277
32
proteinuria before pregnancy. This further increases the risk of venous 
thromboembolism, the leading cause of maternal deaths in higher-
income countries.
Chronic kidney disease
Women with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are at increased risk of 
pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction, miscarriage, pre-term delivery 
and fetal death (Fig. 32.3). Pregnancy can also cause acceleration of 
maternal renal decline. The factors that inuence pregnancy outcome 
for women with CKD are baseline renal function, hypertension, degree of 
proteinuria and the underlying cause of CKD. Women with CKD should 
have pre-pregnancy counselling, be closely monitored by a multidisci-
plinary team throughout pregnancy, and be given low-dose aspirin as 
prophylaxis against pre-eclampsia.
Renal replacement therapy
Fertility is reduced among women on renal replacement therapy and 
there is increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Despite this, 
many women receiving renal replacement therapy have successful 
pregnancies. More intensive dialysis is recommended in pregnancy, and 
particular attention should be paid to addressing issues around blood 
pressure, uid balance and anaemia.
Renal transplant recipients
Pregnancy should be delayed for a minimum of 12 months following 
renal transplantation, to allow the graft to stabilise, on minimum immu-
nosuppressive drugs. The outcome is best for women with a well-func-
tioning graft, with no proteinuria or hypertension. Women with renal 
transplants can deliver vaginally but in practice there is a higher incidence 
of caesarean section in this group, due to the higher incidence of pre-
term delivery.
Liver disease
Specic causes of liver disease during pregnancy are discussed below.
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) is a rare and serious condition 
that typically presents in the third trimester with vomiting, abdominal 
pain, jaundice and other symptoms (Box 32.17). It is more common in 
rst pregnancies and multiple pregnancies, and is associated with male 
fetuses. Rarely, fulminant liver failure may occur. The diagnosis can usu-
ally be made on the basis of the clinical features, abnormal liver function 
tests (LFTs) and the appearances of fatty liver on ultrasound. A liver biopsy 
is rarely needed to make the diagnosis but shows microvascular steat-
osis. Management is with supportive care and by delivery of the fetus. The 
development of AFLP has been linked in some cases with an inherited 
deciency of the enzyme long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) 
in the baby.
HELLP syndrome
The syndrome of haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets 
(HELLP) is thought to be part of the spectrum of pre-eclampsia. It usu-
ally presents antenatally but can also appear for the rst time in the 
postnatal period. The presenting symptoms can be the same as those 
of pre-eclampsia but can also include headache, right upper quadrant 
pain and visual disturbance. HELLP can be complicated by liver hae-
matoma and capsular rupture. Management involves supportive care, 
control of hypertension, correction of coagulopathy and delivery of the 
fetus.
Obstetric cholestasis
Obstetric cholestasis is estimated to affect about 1% of pregnancies in 
women of European descent, although the prevalence is about 1.5% 
in women of Indian-Asian and Pakistani-Asian descent. The cause is 
incompletely understood but the condition is thought to be due in part 
to the cholestatic effect of high oestrogen levels. The typical presenta-
tion is in the third trimester with pruritus, particularly affecting the soles 
and palms. Laboratory testing reveals raised levels of bile acids and 
abnormal LFTs. The diagnosis can be made on the basis of these clinical 
features when other causes of liver dysfunction and pruritus have been 
excluded. Treatment is with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) at a starting 
dose of 250 mg twice daily, to improve symptoms and liver function. 
However, this treatment does not reduce the risk of adverse fetal out-
comes. Rifampicin may be given as an additional therapy if UDCA is inef-
fective, and vitamin K should be given if clotting is abnormal. Aqueous 
cream with menthol can also be effective in soothing pruritus There is an 
increased risk of fetal mortality with evidence of a particularly high risk 
when bile acid levels are over 100 µmol/L. Some centres induce labour 
before 40 weeks in an effort to reduce the risk. The risk of recurrence in 
future pregnancies is high.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Fetal growth
retardation
Pre-term
delivery
Pre-
eclampsia
Fetal death
Creatinine <125
Creatinine 125–180
Creatinine >180
Dialysis
Percentage affected
Fig. 32.3 Adverse pregnancy outcomes in chronic kidney disease. (Creatinine 
is in µmol/L. To convert to mg/dL, multiply by 0.011.) Data from Williams D, Davison 
D. Chronic kidney disease in pregnancy. BMJ 2008; 336:211–215
32.17 Criteria for diagnosis of acute fatty liver of pregnancy
 Vomiting
 Abdominal pain
 Polydipsia/polyuria
 Encephalopathy
 Elevated bilirubin (> 14 µmol/L (> 0.82 mg/dL))
 Low glucose (< 4 mmol/L (< 72.4 mg/dL))
 Elevated urate (> 340 µmol/L (> 5.7 mg/dL))
 Leucocytosis (> 11  ×109/L)
 Ascites or bright liver on ultrasound
 Elevated transaminases (alanine/aspartate aminotransferase (ALT/AST) > 42 U/L)
 Elevated ammonia (> 47 µmol/L (> 81.7 mg/dL))
 Renal impairment (creatinine > 150 µmol/L (> 1.7 mg/dL))
 Coagulopathy (prothrombin time > 14 secs or activated partial thromboplastin 
time > 34 secs)
 Microvascular steatosis on liver biopsy
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy can be diagnosed when ≥ 6 of the above  
features are present in the absence of another explanation.
Adapted from Ch’ng CL, Morgan M, Hainsworth I, et al. Prospective study of liver dysfunction in 
pregnancy in Southwest Wales. Gut 2002; 51:876–880

[[p1345]]
1278    MATERNAL MEDICINE
Viral hepatitis
The course of hepatitis B is unchanged in pregnancy, but it is important 
to identify women who have active infection to reduce the risk of vertical 
transmission to the fetus; this risk is up to 90% in women who are hep-
atitis B e-antigen-positive. Vaccinations and immunoglobulin should be 
given to infants of mothers who test positive for hepatitis B, and antiviral 
agents should be given to the mother after delivery. Vertical transmission 
rates of hepatitis C are low in the absence of HIV infection and so no 
action is required for the infant, unless there is co-infection with HIV; in 
this case, antiviral drugs should be considered. Pregnant women are at 
greater risk of contracting hepatitis E than the non-pregnant population. 
It is transferred via the faeco-oral route, and is usually a mild self-limiting 
illness outside of pregnancy. However, it can cause fulminant hepatic 
failure in up to 20% of pregnant women.
Neurological disease
Epilepsy
Women with epilepsy should have pre-pregnancy counselling, should 
be advised to take high-dose folic acid from pre-conception, and should 
have their their antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) reviewed. Many AEDs are 
associated with teratogenicity, and the risk increases with dose and use 
of multiple medications. Sodium valproate in particular is associated with 
a 40% risk of persistent neurodevelopmental disorders and a 10% risk of 
physical birth defects, which is considerably higher than for other AEDs. 
Ideally, sodium valproate should be avoided in women of child-bearing 
potential and an alternative AED substituted with a better safety prole, 
such as lamotrigine, levetiracetam or carbamazepine if it is safe to do so. 
The minimum number of drugs at the lowest effective dose required for 
control of epilepsy should be given, and women should be reminded of 
general safety advice, such as showering instead of bathing. Emergency 
management of seizures in a pregnant woman with epilepsy (without 
eclampsia) is the same as that in non-pregnant women. While preg-
nancy does not generally affect the frequency of seizures in women with 
well-controlled epilepsy, those who enter pregnancy with poorly con-
trolled epilepsy are likely to deteriorate. The plasma levels of some AEDs 
such as lamotrigine can fall in pregnancy. Seizures are more common 
at the time of delivery and women should be advised to deliver in a unit 
staffed with personnel able to manage this.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) may worsen during pregnancy 
due to weight gain. Treatment with acetazolamide can be continued dur-
ing pregnancy but should be avoided in the rst trimester due to lack of 
safety data. Therapeutic lumbar puncture can also be helpful. The mode 
of delivery is not affected by IIH and spinal analgesia can be given as 
normal.
Migraine
Migraine often improves during pregnancy but if attacks occur they 
should be managed with simple analgesia and antiemetics. If necessary, 
prophylaxis can be given with aspirin, β-blockers or tricyclic antidepres-
sants. Safety data on use of triptans during pregnancy are limited but 
reassuring. Triptans can therefore be used for the treatment of migraine 
if other therapies are ineffective.
Stroke
Stroke is twice as common in pregnant women as in non-pregnant 
women of the same age. The risk is highest during the third trimester and 
puerperium. The management of stroke during pregnancy is similar to 
that in non-pregnant patients. The risk of cerebral venous thrombosis is 
greatly increased during pregnancy. The presentation is with headache, 
seizures and neurological decits such as hemiparesis. If the diagnosis 
is suspected, neuroimaging should be performed with MRI or CT venog-
raphy. Management of acute infarct should be as for the non-pregnant 
patient and include consideration of thrombolysis.
Psychiatric disorders
Mood changes are common during pregnancy but more severe psychi-
atric disorders, such as depression or psychosis, typically present within 
2–4 weeks of delivery (see Box 31.34). These disorders are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 31
Haematological disease
Anaemia
The causes of anaemia during pregnancy are summarised in Box 32.18. 
Iron deciency anaemia is most commonly due to a 20% increased 
demand for iron. In most cases, it responds well to oral iron supple-
mentation, with a rise in haemoglobin of approximately 0.8  g/L per 
week. If the haemoglobin does not rise following a 4-week trial of iron 
supplementation, alternative causes of anaemia should be considered. 
Non-adherence to oral iron is common and intravenous iron should be 
considered in women with iron deciency and failure of oral treatment. It 
is generally not necessary to investigate iron deciency anaemia during 
pregnancy unless there is clinical evidence of gastrointestinal blood loss, 
which should be investigated in the normal way.
Rhesus disease
Women who are negative for the Rhesus antigen should be offered treat-
ment with anti-RhD immunoglobulin around the time of delivery to reduce 
the risk of haemolytic disease of the newborn. More details are provided 
in Chapter 25 and Box 25.19
Thrombocytopenia
The causes of thrombocytopenia during pregnancy are summarised in 
Box 32.19. The most common cause is gestational thrombocytope-
nia, which typically occurs towards the end of pregnancy and resolves 
spontaneously after delivery. It is not associated with adverse pregnancy 
32.18  Causes of anaemia in pregnancy
Microcytic
 Iron deciency
 Haemoglobinopathies
 Thalassaemia
Normocytic
 Anaemia of chronic disease
 Haemorrhage
 Haemolysis
Macrocytic
 Vitamin B12/folate deciency
 Liver disease
 Alcohol excess
32.19 Causes of thrombocytopenia during pregnancy
 Gestational thrombocytopenia
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 HELLP (haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets)
 Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

[[p1346]]
Further information    1279
32
outcomes and requires no specic intervention. Pregnancy may occur 
in women with pre-existing idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). 
This should be managed with glucocorticoids and/or immunoglobulin, 
with the aim of maintaining the platelet count above 80 ×109/L at the time 
of delivery, in case spinal anaesthesia or caesarean section is required. 
Thrombocytopenia may also occur as a component of haemolytic urae-
mic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). 
Both are characterised by microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia, acute 
kidney injury and thrombocytopenia, but in TTP neurological symptoms 
and fever also occur. These conditions are rare but important to recog-
nise since up to one-quarter of cases occur during pregnancy and the 
post-partum period. TTP is managed with plasma exchange, fresh fro-
zen plasma and sometimes glucocorticoids or rituximab. Platelet trans-
fusion should be avoided.
Venous thromboembolism
The risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) is 4–5 times higher in preg-
nancy than in non-pregnant women. Women should receive risk assess-
ments for VTE during their pregnancy, based on individualised risk factors 
(see Box 32.20). On the basis of their personal level of risk, women will 
be given general advice such as ensuring adequate hydration and mobil-
ity, and those at higher risk will be advised to take daily low-mol ecular-
weight heparin (LMWH) during pregnancy and the post-partum period. 
It is a safe drug in pregnancy, and does not cross the placenta. Deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT) is the most common presentation and more 
commonly affects the left leg in pregnancy. Treatment with LMWH should 
be started once the clinical suspicion has been raised (unless there is a 
strong contraindication), and diagnostic imaging sought. Measurement 
of D-dimer is not useful in pregnancy because levels rise as part of nor-
mal pregnancy, and clinical decision rules such as Wells score are not 
validated for use in pregnancy.
Doppler ultrasound scan is the investigation of choice. If the initial 
Doppler ultrasound scan is negative, and clinical suspicion low, treat-
ment with LWMH can be stopped. However, if the clinical suspicion 
remains high, treatment can be stopped, and the scan repeated on day 
3 and/or day 7. If proximal DVT is suspected, then an MRI of the abdo-
men should be considered.
Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a signicant cause of death in pregnancy. 
It usually presents with symptoms such as breathlessness, pleuritic 
chest pain and haemoptysis, and signs such as tachypnoea, tachycar-
dia, hypoxia and hypotension. Initial investigations should include an 
ECG, CXR and blood tests, including a troponin. Further details of inves-
tigations for possible PE are in the Imaging section earlier in this chapter.
Treatment of VTE in pregnancy is with LMWH at a higher dose than 
outside of pregnancy, based on the patient's weight. For women with 
massive PE, systemic or catheter-directed thrombolysis should be 
considered.
Women with a previous history of VTE who are receiving warfarin or 
direct oral anticoagulants as prophylaxis should have these stopped 
prior to conception and LMWH should be substituted. Women on treat-
ment dose LMWH need careful planning around the time of delivery, to 
32.20 Risk factors for VTE in pregnancy
Pre-existing risk factors
 Previous VTE
 Thrombophilia (inherited and acquired)
 Medical comorbidities, e.g. cancer, active IBD, active SLE, nephrotic syndrome
 Age > 35
 Obesity
 Smoking
 Gross varicose veins
 Parity ≥3
Obstetric risk factors
 Multiple pregnancy
 Pre-eclampsia
 Prolonged labour > 24 hours
 Mid-cavity of rotational operative delivery
 Stillbirth
 Pre-term birth
 PPH
Transient risk factors
 Surgery while pregnant
 Hyperemesis gravidarum
 Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
 Immobility
 Systemic infection
 Long-distance travel
Adapted from RCOG Green-top Guideline 37 A: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism 
during pregnancy and the puerperium, April 2015.
balance the need for anticoagulation against bleeding risk from epidural/
spinal anaesthetic techniques, and delivery. LMWH and warfarin are both 
safe in breastfeeding. There is insufcient evidence regarding direct oral 
anticoagulants in breastfeeding, and they are considered unsafe.
Further information
British Society for Rheumatology and British Health Professionals in 
Rheumatology guideline on prescribing drugs in pregnancy and breastfeeding. 
BSR/BHPR; September 2016.
British Thoracic Society/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. SIGN 
158 – British guideline on the management of asthma. Edinburgh: Health 
Improvement Scotland; 2019. Useful asthma guidelines.
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Thromboembolic disease 
in pregnancy and the puerperium: acute management. Green-top guideline. 
London: RCOG; April 2015. A useful evidence-based guideline on the 
investigation of pulmonary embolism in pregnancy.
Websites
npeu.ox.ac.uk/mbrrace-uk National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit: a very useful 
resource with detailed and extensive information on causes of maternal deaths, 
stillbirths and infant deaths in the UK.

[[p1347]]
This page intentionally left blank

[[p1348]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 32.1. A 32-year-old woman presents at 14 weeks’ gestation to the 
Emergency Department, with dyspnoea and pleuritic chest pain. 
Her BP is 70/40 mmHg, heart rate 140 beats/min, respiratory 
rate is 28 breaths per minute, oxygen saturations 85% on air, and 
temperature 36.5°C. She undergoes a CTPA scan, which reveals 
large bilateral pulmonary emboli, with evidence of right heart 
strain. Which of the following is correct?
 
A.  The fetus should be delivered immediately to aid maternal 
resuscitation
 
B.  She should be considered for systemic intravenous 
thrombolysis
 
C.  The patient should be transferred to a specialist cardiothor-
acic centre
 
D.  The patient should be counselled about direct oral anticoag-
ulants (DOACS)
 
E. She should be advised against future pregnancy
Answer: B.
This woman has evidence of massive pulmonary emboli, and should 
be considered for systemic thrombolysis, which is not contraindicated 
in pregnancy. Delivering the fetus will not alter the resuscitation of this 
woman, because a fetus at 14 weeks will not cause IVC compression. 
In addition, this woman has not undergone a cardiac arrest, where a 
perimortem section is indicated in arrested patients at greater than 20 
weeks’ gestation. She does not require transfer, but instead needs 
urgent management at the hospital she presented to. DOACs are not 
currently considered safe in pregnancy, and would be inadequate to be 
the initial treatment for massive pulmonary emboli both inside and out-
side of pregnancy. Future pregnancy is a possibility, with planning and 
prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin.
 32.2. A 40-year-old woman presents at 30 weeks’ gestation with a 
swollen left calf. She has a history of protein C deciency and 
Crohn’s disease, which has been aring in the last few weeks. 
She has been advised to take prophylactic low-molecular-weight 
heparin, but has struggled with administering the injections. 
ADoppler ultrasound scan of her left leg is negative. What is the 
most appropriate course of action?
 
A. Reassure her and discharge her
 
B. Demonstrate how to safely administer the injections
 
C. Admonish her for not taking the injections
 
D. Repeat the scan on day 3
 
E. Refer to haematology
Answer: D.
This woman is at high risk of VTE, and has not been receiving ade-
quate prophylaxis. The scan should be repeated on day 3, because clin-
ical suspicion remains high.
 32.3. A 23-year-old woman undergoes delivery at 37 weeks’ gestation, 
having been diagnosed with pre-eclampsia. She has an acute 
kidney injury (AKI), with a creatinine of 130 μmol/L. There are no 
other causes and she is euvolaemic. Which of the following is the 
most appropriate management?
 
A.  Refer to nephrology for consideration of renal replacement 
therapy
 
B.  Give 250 ml bolus of 0.9% saline, followed by 125 mL/hour 
and monitor uid balance closely
 
C.  Advise the patient to drink to thirst, and monitor uid balance 
closely
 
D.  Give 1000 mL bolus of Hartmann’s solution, and monitor uid 
balance closely
 
E.  Start prednisolone 20 mg once daily, monitor uid balance 
closely and repeat bloods daily
Answer: C.
In a euvolaemic patient with an AKI secondary to pre-eclampsia, it is 
highly likely that she will undergo a diuresis without intervention, and the 
AKI will resolve. Giving intravenous uid puts the woman at risk of pul-
monary oedema. There is no indication for steroids or renal replacement 
therapy.
 32.4. A 27-year-old woman presents with pruritus at 32 weeks’ 
gestation. She is diagnosed with obstetric cholestasis 
(intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy). Which of the following 
statements is true?
 
A. Her risk in subsequent pregnancies is increased
 
B.  She should be started on ursodeoxyxcholic acid (UDCA) to 
reduce the risk of stillbirth
 
C. She is likely to need a caesarean section
 
D. Vitamin K is contraindicated, so INR can be monitored
 
E. She should be admitted to hospital for observation
Answer: A.
Women with obstetric cholestasis (OC) are more likely to experience 
OC in future pregnancies. UDCA may improve her symptoms and liver 
function, but there is no evidence to show it improves fetal outcomes. 
There is no indication for caesarean section or admission based on the 
diagnosis alone and information given. Vitamin K should be given to 
women to correct coagulopathy.
 32.5. A woman with known epilepsy experiences three generalised 
tonic–clonic seizures, from which she does not recover 
consciousness in between. She is 13 weeks pregnant and has 
protein ++ on her urine dip. What is the appropriate emergency 
drug treatment?
 
A. IV magnesium sulphate
 
B. IV lorazepam
 
C. Buccal midazolam
 
D. IV phenytoin
 
E. Rectal diazepam
Answer: B.
This woman is in status epilepticus, and the initial treatment is with 
intravenous benzodiazepines. She is likely to need additional drugs to 
gain control of her seizures. IV magnesium is a treatment for eclamptic 
seizures, but at 13 weeks’ gestation, it is too early in the pregnancy for 
eclampsia. The protein on her urine dipstick needs to be quantied with 
laboratory testing, and an explanation sought. Giving buccal therapies is 
inadvisable in patients with decreased conscious level. IV phenytoin may 
be needed as an additional therapy, but is not the rst or best choice 
in an emergency. Rectal therapies are not rst-line treatment for status 
epilepticus.

[[p1349]]
Adolescent and 
transition medicine
33
RJ Mann
Transition from paediatric to adult health services 1282
Functional anatomy and physiology 1284
Endocrine changes 1284
Physical changes 1284
Cognitive and behavioural changes 1284
Investigations 1286
Clinical assessment 1286
Presenting problems 1287
Adherence 1287
High-risk behaviour 1288
Unplanned pregnancy 1289
Clinical presentations 1289
Neurological disease 1290
Respiratory disease 1290
Cardiovascular disease 1291
Oncology 1291
Renal disease 1291
Organ transplantation 1292
Diabetes 1292
Gastrointestinal disease 1292
Rheumatology and bone disease 1293
Summary 1293

[[p1350]]
1282    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
Historically, childhood illnesses were characterised by a series of acute 
episodes, often infective, on a background of an otherwise healthy 
patient. Adult medicine traditionally comprised patients with progressive 
conditions, and increasing pathology with advancing age. A number of 
factors have led to the recognition that boundaries between adult medi-
cine and paediatric care are not clear-cut, and recent evidence has con-
rmed that anticipating and carefully planning the transition of children 
with long-term conditions (LTCs) into adult services improves care and 
outcomes. About 14% of children in the industrialised world are diag-
nosed with an LTC and in the majority of patients the disorder will persist 
into adulthood. Common illnesses include asthma, epilepsy, congenital 
heart disease, diabetes and childhood cancer (Box 33.1). Similar trends 
are developing worldwide, with increasing survival rates of children with 
complex pathology, and increasing prevalence of lifestyle-related condi-
tions such as obesity, hypertension and type 2 diabetes. Specic factors 
that make transition planning important in young people with LTCs are 
outlined in Figure 33.1
Planning the process of transition from paediatric to adult health 
services and improving the assessment of young people as they enter 
those adult services have been shown to impact positively on long-term 
health outcomes. There is a need for physicians to gain new skills in the 
care of young people and adults who have conditions that have arisen 
in childhood. This includes developing specic skills in the management 
of adolescents and young adults, managing the process of transition 
and developing knowledge of relevant medical conditions. The overall 
approach to transition medicine, as well as important disease-specic 
issues, will be considered in this chapter.
Transition from paediatric to adult health 
services
Effectiveness of transition planning
A review of the effectiveness of transition planning has conrmed improved 
health outcomes when specic interventions to improve coordination 
between adult and paediatric services are implemented. Most research 
in this eld has been undertaken with young people with diabetes, and 
many of the outcome measures relate to that condition. The principles 
of transition planning and the potential benets are, however, likely to be 
generalisable to other LTCs that present in childhood. Young people with 
serious LTCs are among the most complex and high-risk patients to care 
for in adulthood, and it is important to work closely with them as they move 
to adult services, to try to improve their long-term outcome.
General principles of transition planning
Paediatric services are organised and delivered in a very different way 
to adult medical services. They encompass a period of life that spans 
from infancy to independence, and progress from taking parents’ views 
as paramount to needing to recognise the wishes of the young person. 
After transition, young people move from medical services that have been 
family-centred and focused around maximising the child’s development, 
to a service that encourages patient autonomy, in which employment 
and reproduction are important measures of outcome. At the same time 
as undergoing transition within medical services, young people are mak-
ing multiple other transitions in their lives as they move from a dependent 
to an independent way of living (Fig. 33.2). They often move away from 
the family home, and parents who formerly held responsibility for patient 
33.1 Important long-term conditions of childhood that affect 
adult health
Neurology
 Epilepsy
 Cerebral palsy
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Respiratory medicine
 Cystic brosis
Endocrinology
 Diabetes mellitus
Cardiology
 Hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy
 Congenital heart disease
Nephrology
 Renal insufciency
 Renal transplant
Gastroenterology
 Inammatory bowel disease
Rheumatology
 Inammatory rheumatic disease
 Osteogenesis imperfecta
 Hypophosphataemic rickets
Oncology
 Survivors of childhood cancer
Infectious disease
 HIV/AIDS
 Malaria
Transition
planning
Survivors
of previously
lethal conditions
New clinical
specialties, e.g.
adult congenital
heart disease
High rates
of loss to
follow-up
Ongoing
medical problems,
or complications
of previous
therapy
Complex
physiological
and behavioural
changes
Adolescence
associated with
non-adherence
Improve outcome
Fig. 33.1 Reasons to consider transition planning.
Autonomous
Dependent
Transition
Employment
Education
Graduation
Financially
independent
Financially
dependent
Employment/
benefits
Adult
relationships,
family planning
Pre-pubertal
Puberty
Independent
living
Live with
family
Leave home
Patient takes
responsibility
Parents
oversee care
Loss of 
parental
control
Fig. 33.2 Lifestyle changes during transition to adulthood.

[[p1351]]
Transition from paediatric to adult health services    1283
33
management, coordination of care, communication and consent to treat-
ments will be demoted to an advisory role. Paediatric services are not well 
placed to meet this change in focus from the patient as a child to the patient 
as an independent adult, and young people benet from the move to adult 
services as long as their specic needs as a young adult are recognised.
Principles of prescribing during transition
Hepatic drug metabolism increases from neonatal levels during childhood, 
eventually decreasing to adult levels after puberty. Once puberty has been 
completed, adolescents can be considered, in pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic terms, to behave like adults. It is important to remember 
that many young people have considerably lower body mass and therefore 
body mass index (BMI) than adults, and care needs to be taken to avoid 
excessive dosage in physically smaller patients.  Medicines are often pre-
scribed on a dose per kilogram basis in children, to ensure that they are 
not exposed to inappropriately high drug concentrations. In young people 
who are obese (those in whom actual body weight is > 20% of their ideal 
weight), this can potentially lead to problems if the calculated dose per 
kilogram exceeds the standard adult  dose.  Accordingly, the ideal weight 
for the patient’s height rather than actual body weight should be used to 
calculate drug dosages when prescribing for obese young people.  This 
can be easily done in clinical practice using centile charts to calculate ideal 
body weight based on the patient’s age and height.  Whether or not the 
patient is obese it is important not to exceed the recommended adult dose 
when prescribing for young people. 
A systematic approach to transition planning
Several steps need to be undertaken to develop a successful programme 
for transition of care. The key components are summarised in Box 33.2. 
The rst step is to establish a policy in consultation with young people and 
train staff in the policy. Subsequently, systems need to be developed to 
identify patients in need of transition and track them as they pass through 
the programme. Adult health-care providers need to be identied and pro-
cesses developed for introducing the young person to the adult team. This 
should be followed by written communication between the paediatric and 
adult teams, and then a rst consultation with the adult team at which the 
transfer can be reviewed and a care plan developed. There should subse-
quently be written communication between the adult and paediatric teams 
to conrm that handover has occurred, followed eventually by integration 
of the young person’s care into the adult service.
A number of organisations have published guidelines to planning tran-
sition services. Two of the best known include the ‘Ready Steady Go’ 
programme in the UK and the American Academy of Pediatrics’ ‘Got 
Transition’ (see ‘Further information’). Details of the sorts of competen-
cies that a young person might need before making a full transition to 
adult medical services are outlined in Box 33.3
When should transition happen?
The optimum timing for transition is not specically dened; it is a pro-
cess that evolves over a number of years, during which puberty and then 
adolescence occur. Transition should generally be initiated at around 
33.2  Core elements in developing a transitional 
care programme
Establishing transition policy
 Develop policy, with input from young people
 Train staff in operation of policy
Tracking and monitoring
 Establish process to identify patients
 Develop systems to track individual progress
 Incorporate transition planning into clinical care
Transition readiness
 Identify suitable adult care provider
 Establish process for introduction to adult team
 Provide written information about joint rst consultation
Transition planning
 Ensure communication between paediatric and adult teams
 Identify need for handover consultation
 Prepare written medical handover:
Diagnosis
Current treatment
Previous key issues
 Send relevant information in advance
 Provide information and community support
Transfer to adult services
 Arrange rst consultation
 Review transfer package with team
 Identify concerns of young person
 Review young person’s health priorities
 Update medical summary and emergency care plans
Integration into adult services
 Communicate with paediatrics and conrm transfer
 Help young adult to access other adult services
 Continue individualised care plan tailored to young person
 Seek feedback from young adult about transition
33.3  Key features in assessing readiness for 
transition to adult services
(K) Knowledge
 1. Describes condition, effects and prognosis
 2. Understands medication purpose and effects
 3. Understands treatment purposes and effects
 4. Knows key team members and their roles
(S) Self-advocacy
 1. Can attend part/whole clinic appointment on their own
 2. Knows how to make appointments/alter appointments
 3. Has understanding of condentiality
 4. Orders repeat prescriptions
 5. Takes some/complete responsibility for medication/other treatment
 6. Knows where to get help
(H) Health and lifestyle
 1. Understands importance of diet/exercise/dental care
 2. Understands impact of smoking/alcohol/substance use
 3. Understands sexual health issues/pregnancy/sexually transmitted infections
(A) Activities of daily living
 1. Self-care/meal preparation
 2. Independent travel/mobility
 3. Trips/overnight stays away from home
 4. Benets/nancial independence
(V) Vocational
 1. Current and future education/impact of condition on career plans
 2. School attendance and performance
 3. Work experience and access to careers advice
 4. Outside activities and interests
 5. Disclosure to school/employer
(P) Psychosocial
 1. Self-esteem/self-condence
 2. Body/self-image
 3. Peer relationships/bullying
 4. Support networks/family/disclosure to friends
 5. Coping strategies
(T) Transition
 1. Understands concept of transition
 2. Agrees transition plan
 3. Attends transition clinic
 4. Visits adult unit (if appropriate)
 5. Sees primary care team/other clinical staff independently

[[p1352]]
1284    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
12 years of age. Completion time then varies from person to person, also 
depending on the model of adult services available. Most commonly, 
full transition occurs between 16 and 18 years of age (Fig. 33.3). This 
coincides with many other areas where young people are considered to 
have made the transition to adulthood, such as the completion of formal 
education.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Puberty and adolescence are developmental stages through which 
children progress during the second decade of life. During this phase, 
several physical, biochemical and emotional changes occur. The most 
important are discussed in more detail below.
Endocrine changes
The hormonal and physical stages of progression through puberty in 
males and females are summarised in Figure 33.4. Puberty is initiated 
by pulsatile increases in gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) by 
the hypothalamus, which in turn stimulates pulsatile release of lutein-
ising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) by the pitu-
itary. In males, the increased production of LH stimulates Leydig cells 
in the testes to produce testosterone, and FSH acts on Sertoli cells to 
stimulate sperm production, as described on page 667 and shown in 
Figure 20.14. The rise in testosterone increases skeletal growth, pro-
motes development of the male genital organs and stimulates growth of 
pubic, facial and axillary hair. In females, FSH and LH act on the ovary 
to promote follicle production, ovulation and menstruation, as described 
on page 667 and shown in Figure 20.15. Other hormonal changes in 
all adolescents include a rise in adrenal androgens and a rise in growth 
hormone, which in turn stimulates production of insulin-like growth fac-
tors 1 and 2 (IGF-1 and IGF-2). Insulin production also rises by about 
30% during puberty. These hormonal changes contribute to the biologi-
cal, morphological and psychological changes seen during the teenage 
years. Adolescence (as opposed to puberty) comprises not only the 
physical changes of puberty, but also the wider emotional and psycho-
logical changes of progression into early adulthood. The emotional and 
psychological changes are associated with physical maturation but also 
with sociocultural inuences. The feelings and behavioural development 
of normal adolescence are complex but tend to follow fairly predictable 
patterns.
Physical changes
In girls, there is an increased rate of growth, followed soon after by the 
development of breasts and pubic hair. Menstruation typically starts 
after the rate of growth has peaked. In boys, puberty begins with 
testicular enlargement, followed soon after by a growth spurt and the 
development of pubic hair. In clinical practice, Tanner staging is used as 
a method of documenting progression of physical changes that occur 
during puberty (Fig. 33.5). The average age at onset of puberty in the 
UK is about 11 years in girls and 12 years in boys, but normal puberty 
has a very wide range of onset. Factors that are important in predicting 
age of onset of normal puberty include family history (age of onset is 
strongly predicted by the parents’ pattern of onset) and body mass, 
with heavier children entering puberty at a younger age. The current 
trends towards improved nutritional status and increased obesity in 
particular are driving earlier onset of puberty. Delayed puberty is dened 
to have occurred when the age at onset is more than 2.5 standard devi-
ations above the national average, which in the UK is about 13 years 
in girls and 14 years in boys. If puberty is delayed beyond this point, 
investigations may be needed to determine the underlying cause. Many 
children who have had long-term health conditions during childhood 
experience a delayed onset of puberty because chronic ill health slows 
longitudinal growth and causes functional hypogonadotrophic hypog-
onadism. Glucocorticoid therapy also contributes to growth retardation 
in children with chronic inammatory diseases. An X-ray of the left wrist 
can be used to assess bone age accurately, and a bone age that is 
more than 2 years behind the chronological age should prompt consid-
eration of further investigations.
Cognitive and behavioural changes
As young people move from their early teenage years to later adoles-
cence there is a move away from the family towards personal independ-
ence. This is often characterised by change from a self-centred focus, 
associated with a sense of awkwardness and worries about being 
normal, towards increased self-condence and an awareness of weak-
nesses in parents and others in authority. In late adolescence, young 
people reach a stage of self-reliance, increased emotional stability and 
improved ability to think ideas through. Finally, young adults begin to 
develop rm belief systems, autonomy and independence. With time, 
there is reduced conict with parents and other gures in authority and 
full maturity develops.
In terms of cognition, there is a transition from being mostly interested 
in the present, in short-term outcomes and instant gratication, through 
to increased concern for the future and a greater focus on one’s longer-
term role in life. Sexuality and relationships clarify during adolescence, 
and individuals move from early awkwardness and uncertainty to a rmer 
sense of their sexual identity, and then development of more serious and 
longer-term relationships. In terms of morals and values, young people 
move from a period of risk-taking behaviour and experimentation through 
to understanding the potential consequences of such behaviour for their 
future health and well-being. Young adults develop a greater capacity for 
setting personal goals and an increased focus on self-esteem. Finally, 
family, social and cultural traditions regain some of their previous impor-
tance, and by the time young people emerge from adolescence, they 
Transfer to adult service with
transfer package
Prepare for adult model
Discuss transfer
Make aware of
transition planning
12 years 14 years 16 years 18 years 20 years 22 years 24 years 26 years
Integrate into adult care
Initiate planning
Fig. 33.3 Timing of transition.

[[p1353]]
Functional anatomy and physiology    1285
33
Acne appears
Axillary hair appears
Breasts develop
Uterus enlarges
Menstruation begins
Pubic hair appears
Vaginal epithelium
cornifies
Epiphyseal union
hastened
Body contours
rounded
Adrenal
cortices
ACTH
GnRH
LH and FSH
Prolactin
Pituitary LH and
FSH secretion
increased
Higher cerebral
centres ‘trigger’
puberty
Reticular zone
enlarges
Adrenal
androgens
increased
Oestrogen
produced
Progesterone
increased
Ovaries
A
Fig. 33.4 Hormonal events of puberty.
 In the ovary, FSH acts on granulosa cells to stimulate oestrogen production, whereas LH acts on theca cells to stimulate 
progesterone production. Androgens are also produced in small amounts by theca cells in response to LH (not shown). 
 In the male, LH acts on interstitial Leydig cells to 
stimulate testosterone production. FSH with testosterone acts on Sertoli cells to stimulate spermatogenesis. (ACTH = adrenocorticotrophic hormone; FSH = follicle-stimulating 
hormone; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; LH = luteinising hormone) From Smith RP. Netter’s Obstetrics and gynecology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier, 
Inc.; 2008
Acne appears
Facial hair appears
Musculature
develops
Larynx enlarges
(voice deepens)
Axillary hair appears
Some breast
enlargement
may occur
Pubic hair appears
Penis, prostate and
seminal vesicles
enlarge
Epiphyseal union
hastened
Adrenal
cortices
ACTH
GnRH
LH and FSH
Prolactin
Pituitary LH and
LSH secretion
increased
Higher cerebral
centres ‘trigger’
puberty
Reticular zone
enlarges
Adrenal
androgens
increased
Testosterone
increased
Testes
B

[[p1354]]
1286    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
have usually developed insight and a greater focus on long-term well-be-
ing. It is the development of these more mature personality traits that 
are important for the more active role in health care that is needed for 
patients to function well within an adult model of medicine. Some young 
people do vary slightly from these broad patterns but the feelings and 
behaviours described are, in general, considered normal for each stage 
of adolescence. Understanding these changes in emotional and psycho-
logical behaviour underpins the approaches that are needed to meet the 
challenges of managing long-term conditions in older adolescents and 
young adults.
Investigations
Several changes take place during adolescence in terms of skeletal 
growth, organ development and body composition, which can inu-
ence the interpretation of results. Examples include fusion of the epi-
physes as puberty progresses, increases in bone mineral content and 
density as the skeleton grows, and changes in the reference range of 
certain biochemical tests. Most of these changes occur gradually dur-
ing puberty and there are rarely abrupt alterations in adult biochemical 
concentrations. It is important to use age-adjusted biochemical refer-
ence ranges until puberty has been completed. Several biochemical 
changes take place in the composition of body uids between infancy 
and puberty.
Some of the key changes in biochemical markers are outlined in Box 
33.4. More detail on reference ranges for specic analytes is provided 
in Box 35.9. The elevation in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels during 
adolescence relates to the bone isoenzyme produced by osteoblasts in 
the growing skeleton during the growth spurt. Further investigations for 
raised levels of ALP are not required in adolescence, as long as other 
liver function tests, including γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT), are normal.
In general, under normal physiological conditions, the reference 
ranges of most biochemical tests remain fairly constant between 
puberty and menopause in women and between puberty and middle 
age in men.
Clinical assessment
The initial patient consultation at transition is of vital importance for 
establishing a potentially life-long professional relationship with the 
Tanner
stage
I
II
III
IV
V
Female
Breast
Pubic
hair
Pubic
hair
Mature stage.
Projection of papilla
with recession of
areola to contour
of breast
Projection of
areola and papilla
to form mound
above breast
Further enlargement
of breast and areola
with no separation
of contours
Elevation of breast
and papilla as a
small mound
Pre-adolescent
Dark, coarse and
curled hair
extending to inner
thighs
Darker, coarse and
curled hair but
covering smaller
area than in adult.
No spread to medial
surface of thighs
Darker, coarse and
curled hair
Sparse, long and
straight
None
Pre-adolescent
None
Penis, testes
and scrotum of
adult size
Further growth in
length and width
of penis, testes
and scrotum
Growth of penis and
further growth of
testes and scrotum.
Skin of scrotum
becomes darker and
more wrinkled
Growth of testes
and scrotum. Skin
on scrotum
reddens and
becomes wrinkled
Genitalia
Male
Dark, coarse and
curled hair
extending toward
umbilicus
Darker, coarse and
curled hair but
covering smaller
area than in adult
Darker, coarse and
curled hair
Sparse, long and
straight
Fig. 33.5 Tanner staging of puberty.

[[p1355]]
Presenting problems     1287
33
patient, as well as identifying key features in the history, examination 
and assessment of their overall needs. Parents commonly attend a rst 
adult appointment with their son or daughter, and it is usually neces-
sary to allow longer for this initial assessment. Often, the rst transition 
appointment is undertaken jointly with the paediatrician in a specialist 
transition clinic and this will enable a thorough face-to-face handover 
of all the key facts.
A detailed transition referral letter should clearly describe the diag-
nosis, current and previous treatments, and key interventions that have 
been undertaken while the patient was under the care of paediatric 
services. It is important to check the main details with the young person 
and to make sure there are no other factors that they feel are of rele-
vance. There are a few features in the history that merit special atten-
tion, particularly at the rst consultation, as outlined in Box 33.5. Many 
young people with an LTC attend their rst adult outpatient department 
consultation with their parents, and it is important either to create a 
time to ask personal and lifestyle-related questions separately from the 
main history – that is, privately – or to make sure that these can be 
condentially explored in future.
Presenting problems 
Adherence
Adherence is dened as ‘the extent to which a person’s behaviour, 
in terms of taking medications, following diets or executing lifestyle 
changes, coincides with medical or health advice’. The term ‘adher-
ence’ is used in preference to ‘compliance’ because it focuses on 
whether a person actively adheres to the regimen rather than passively 
follows the doctor’s orders. It also implies partnership and cooperation 
between the patient and the care-giver. More recently, clinicians have 
moved to seeking patients’ concordance with management plans. 
‘Concordance’ refers to a consultation process that has an underly-
ing ethos of shared decision-making. It has become clear that cur-
rent levels of adherence do not deliver the full benets of medication. 
Historical paternalistic medical practice does not maximise the chances 
of patients adopting the changes and treatments they need to improve 
their outcomes. Reaching a concordant position with patients involves 
a range of approaches (such as patient-centredness or shared deci-
sion-making) and a number of specic actions (such as exploring anxi-
eties about medication side-effects, individualising regimens to suit the 
patient’s lifestyle, offering a range of treatment options) and has not 
been evaluated comprehensively.
Adherence to clinic attendance, investigation and treatment often 
falls signicantly in adolescence and during transition to adult services. 
Measurement of adherence is challenging and reported rates vary 
according to the method of assessment. Adolescents may also have 
varying adherence levels within their treatment regimen. An important 
example is in patients who have undergone organ transplantation, in 
whom low adherence to immunosuppressive medication is a signi-
cant cause of graft rejection and may cause death. Adherence merits 
careful consideration when caring for adolescents and young adults, 
and focusing on strategies to improve adherence at this initial stage 
of patient management can deliver life-long improvements in health 
outcomes. Young teenagers mainly believe in things that they have 
directly experienced and do not fully appreciate the unseen conse-
quences of not taking their medications. In time, adolescents learn to 
33.4  Biochemical changes during transition
Analyte
Comment
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Increased during adolescence
Activity may continue to rise, at least in 
men, until middle age
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Activity higher in infancy, decreases 
during childhood, and rises again with 
skeletal growth during puberty
Peak in females at median 11 years 
and in males at 13 years
Levels decrease rapidly after puberty, 
particularly in girls; adult levels 
achieved after epiphyses fused
Insulin-like growth factor 1
Levels 30% higher during adolescence
Serum creatinine
Increases steadily from infancy to 
puberty parallel to development of 
skeletal muscle; until puberty, there 
is little difference in concentration 
between males and females
Uric acid concentration
Decreases from high levels at 
birth until 7–10 years of age, then 
increases, especially in boys, until  
16 years
33.5  Features in transition assessment
Features of history and/or 
examination
Reason
History*
Main/presenting condition and 
detailed review of clinical course
Understand detail and severity of 
illness; understand which treatments 
have been undertaken and which have 
been successful
Family history:
Draw family tree of all rst-degree 
and any relevant/affected second-
degree family members
Many long-term conditions arising 
during childhood have signicant 
genetic and familial factors to be taken 
into account
Current drug therapy, signicant 
previous therapies
Many drugs have signicant long-
term implications, levels may need 
monitoring, may have teratogenic 
effects to consider
Any surgical or other relevant 
medical history
Understand which treatments have 
been undertaken and which have been 
successful
Pubertal status/age of menarche
Helps assess disease severity plus 
patterns of growth
Informs about patient’s reproductive 
health and family-planning wishes
Social history:
In education or in work?
Receiving appropriate benets/
support?
Financial or other practical 
concerns?
Living with parents/left home?
Assesses wider effects of patient’s 
health on their independent living, as 
well as their nancial and practical 
circumstances
Can be a proxy measure of disease 
severity and identies their support 
mechanisms, which also helps in the 
assessment of their current needs
Systems enquiry
Any other related/unrelated symptoms 
or problems
Physical examination
Height, weight, calculation of body 
mass index
Blood pressure
Urinalysis if relevant
Assessment of pubertal status
General physical examination
Although young people are often 
accompanied by a parent, examine 
them separately and use this 
opportunity to consider asking about 
private matters, such as partners, 
sexual activity and drug or alcohol use
*Throughout the rst consultation, condence and competence in decision-making/capacity to 
consent should be assessed. If there are concerns about capacity, clarify key decision-makers.

[[p1356]]
1288    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
develop hypothetical thinking and to analyse more complex informa-
tion and decision-making. The ability to engage in formal thinking is 
inconsistent at rst, and at times of stress (such as during an illness) 
adolescents may regress to more simple ways of problem-solving. 
Despite their maturing skills, they may remain self-centred and feel 
invincible. Factors that positively and negatively affect adherence are 
outlined in Box 33.6. Interventions to improve adherence are summa-
rised in Box 33.7
Recent literature suggests that two-way communication between 
patients and professionals about medicines leads to improved satis-
faction with care, knowledge of the condition and treatment, adher-
ence, health outcomes and fewer medication-related problems. 
Younger adults and those coming to adult services following transition 
from paediatric services have very different expectations in terms of 
the nature of the patient–doctor relationship and are more likely to 
require a more collaborative approach to development of manage-
ment plans to maximise their concordance with treatment in the long 
term.
High-risk behaviour
The high-risk behaviour that can be undertaken by adolescents is 
well documented and is seen across many cultures. It is important 
to assess this by history-taking at the time of transition (Box 33.8). 
Adolescents who have had LTCs during childhood are at greater risk 
of undertaking harmful behaviour and there is evidence that a poor 
long-term health outlook is associated with risk-taking behaviour earl-
ier in life.
Globally, the leading causes of death among adolescents are road 
injury, human immunodeciency virus (HIV) infection, suicide, lower res-
piratory infections and interpersonal violence; many of these deaths 
are linked to risk-taking behaviours such as excess alcohol and drug 
intake. Quite apart from mortality, there are other signicant adverse 
events linked to risk-taking behaviour in adolescents: excess alco-
hol ingestion is also associated with non-fatal road trafc accidents, 
unwanted and unprotected sexual activity, and violence as both per-
petrator and victim.
There are a number of theories about the neurodevelopmental changes 
associated with these behaviour changes. At around 11 years of age, the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and parietal lobes begin a period of pruning of 
neuronal axons. It is theorised that these changes represent the start 
of the process of increasing frontal lobe control. A separate process 
that occurs at the same time predisposes the adolescent to risk-tak-
ing behaviour and impulsivity: frontostriatal reward circuits mature rela-
tively early and encourage the adolescent towards adult activities such 
as alcohol and drug use, and sexual intercourse, which carry potential 
health risks. At this stage, the PFC has not yet matured to the point 
where the individual can assess risk adequately. The PFC and its con-
nections are structurally unable to provide sufcient control. It is thought 
33.6  Factors affecting adherence
Negative factors
 Older adolescent
 Mental health issues with care-giver
 Family conicts
 Complex therapy
 Medication with side-effects
 Denial of illness
Positive factors
 Positive family functioning
 Close friends
 Internal locus of control
 Treatment with immediate benets
 Patient’s belief in seriousness of illness and efcacy of treatment
 Physician empathy
33.7  SIMPLE strategies to improve adherence
Simplify regimen
 Use once daily/twice daily regimens if possible
 Match regimen to bedtime and meals
 Use pill box or alarms on phone
 Organise services around patient (combined clinics, exible timing and 
appointments)
Impart knowledge
 Share decision-making
 Provide clear instructions:
Limit to three or four major points
Use simple, everyday language
Use written information or pamphlets and verbal education at all encounters
 Supply addresses of quality websites
 Provide advice on how to cope with medication costs
Modify patient beliefs
 Empower patients to self-manage their condition:
Ask about their needs
Ask what might help them become and remain adherent
Ensure they understand the risks of not taking their medication
Address fears and concerns about taking the medication
Provide communication
 Improve interviewing skills
 Practise active listening
 Provide emotional support – treat the whole patient and not just the disease
 Provide clear, direct and thorough information
 Elicit the patient’s input in treatment decisions
 Allow adequate time for patients to ask questions
 Build trust
Leave the bias
 Learn more about low health literacy and how it affects patient outcomes
 Consider care of ethnically and socially diverse patient populations
 Acknowledge biases in medical decision-making (intentional or unintentional)
 Address dissonance of patient–provider race/ethnicity and language
 Take extra time to overcome cultural barriers
 Ask specically about attitudes, beliefs and cultural norms around medication
 Use culturally and linguistically appropriate targeted patient interventions
 Increase engagement, activation and empowerment
 Tailor education to the patient’s level of understanding
Evaluate adherence
 Direct:
Number of repeat prescriptions
Biomarkers of response
Measurement of drug levels
 Indirect:
Self-reporting: ‘When did you last forget your medicine?’; ‘How often have you 
forgotten your medicines this week?’
Excerpted with permission from the American College of Preventive Medicine. Medication Adherence: Improving Health Outcomes Time Tool: A Resource from the American College of Preventive 
Medicine 2011. Retrieved from https://ogg.osu.edu/media/documents/agingconnections/MedicationAdherenceTool_syndromes-screenings.pdf

[[p1357]]
Clinical presentations    1289
33
that this maturational gap in PFC control of the pleasure-seeking brain 
systems is responsible for the risk-taking lifestyle that characterises the 
period of adolescence.
A number of studies have investigated personality and other factors 
that contribute to different risk-taking behaviours during adolescence: 
essentially, younger adolescents and females tend to rate activities as 
being more risky, and are therefore less likely to undertake them. Older 
males and those of lower educational status are higher-risk takers. 
Specic protective factors include high self-esteem and a strong orien-
tation to an internal locus of control; young people who feel they have 
less control and inuence over themselves and their behaviour are more 
likely to undertake high-risk activities. Many young people with serious 
long-term health conditions are disempowered in a number of ways and 
there is evidence that they are predisposed to be high-risk takers during 
adolescence. Examples of risk-taking behaviour include not only alcohol 
and drug intake, but also non-adherence to medicines and other aspects 
of health care, such as diet in diabetes.
It is not easy to affect behaviour during this period of non-adherence. 
Isolated educational intervention is not sufcient to improve outcome; 
for example, there is a wealth of evidence showing that adolescents 
know about the behaviours needed to prevent transmission of HIV, but 
many do not adhere to this advice. Long-term health-care providers have 
an invaluable role in supporting adolescents during this period of their 
development as adults, as many important health-related and lifestyle 
habits are established during this period: more than 90% of smokers 
start smoking in adolescence, and life-long habits around eating and 
exercise are laid down during the teenage years. Focusing on the needs 
of the emerging adult for autonomy and using the highest levels of 
communication and patient engagement signicantly improve outcomes 
for patients with LTCs.
Unplanned pregnancy
In many parts of the world, females commonly undergo their rst preg-
nancy during or just after adolescence. The median age for rst preg-
nancy varies from 19 years in India and parts of Asia, through to 25 
years in the United States and around 30 years in Australia and Western 
Europe. Teenage pregnancy rates are high across the world (Box 33.9). 
Information from the UK suggests that 1 in 6 pregnancies is unplanned, 
and 1.5% of women between the ages of 18 and 45 face an unplanned 
pregnancy each year. It is therefore vital to anticipate and discuss the 
issues surrounding reproductive health with all young people before and 
during transition, as well as during early adulthood. Young people with 
serious LTCs have a number of additional factors to be taken into con-
sideration when discussing reproduction, and these discussions need 
to take place long before a family is planned. General physicians do not 
need to be able to undertake complex genetic counselling and investi-
gation, but should be able to provide advice about the recurrence risk of 
common inherited conditions, as well as that of the more common mul-
tifactorial LTCs, many of which have an inherited or genetic component.
Clinical presentations
In almost every clinical setting, there is the potential for a young adult 
with a serious LTC that has arisen during childhood to present to adult 
physicians. Medical services can improve the care and outcome for this 
vulnerable group by planning a systematic approach to transition, as 
described above, and by focusing the clinical consultation on issues of 
relevance and importance to each particular patient. The key issues to 
consider for a number of the most common LTCs of childhood are dis-
cussed below.
33.8  History-taking in adolescent patients
Home life
 Relationships
 Social support
 Household chores
Education
 School
 Exams
 Work experience
 Career
 University
 Financial issues
Activities
 Peers, people that patients can 
rely on
 Exercise and sport
Driving
 Aged 16 if disabled
Drugs
 Cigarettes and alcohol: how much, 
how often
 Non-prescription drugs
Diet
 Nutritional content (calcium, 
vitamin D)
 Weight
 Caffeine (diet drinks)
 Binges/vomiting
Sex
 Concerns
 Periods
 Contraception (in relation to 
medication)
Sleep
 Amount
 Difculty getting to sleep
 Frequent waking
 Early waking?
Suicide
 Depression
 Mood
 Disabled adolescent men high risk
From Segal TY. Adolescence: what the cystic brosis team needs to know. J R Soc Med 2008; 
101(Suppl 1):15–27.
33.9  Adolescent pregnancy rates/1000 women aged 15–19 
years (2018)
Region
Pregnancy rate
World
42
Arab world
46
Caribbean small states
50
Central Europe and the Baltics
19
East Asia and Pacic
21
East Asia and Pacic (excluding high income)
22
Euro area
7
Europe and Central Asia
17
Europe and Central Asia (excluding high income)
25
European Union
9
Fragile and conict-affected situations
91
Heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC)
100
Latin America and Caribbean
62
Latin America and Caribbean (excluding high income)
63
Least developed countries: UN classication
93
Middle East and North Africa
40
Middle East and North Africa (excluding high income)
44
Data from: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT

[[p1358]]
1290    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
Neurological disease
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is a chronic disorder, the hallmark of which is recurrent, unpro-
voked seizures. Epilepsy that has presented during childhood, as opposed 
to adulthood, is less often associated with underlying central nervous 
system malignancy and is well controlled with rst-line anticonvulsants in 
around 80% of cases. Young people who still have epilepsy or are on 
anticonvulsant therapy as they progress into adulthood are more likely to 
have underlying structural brain disease, such as cerebral palsy, or have 
more complex or syndromic epilepsy. In many of them, epilepsy may be 
associated with learning difculties or other neurological conditions.
Epilepsy presents several problems during transition. Adherence to 
medication can be an issue and patients with low adherence to epilepsy 
medicines have higher mortality, higher hospital admission rates and 
higher Emergency Department attendances. Conversely, high adherence 
rates at initiation of epilepsy therapy are associated with improved long-
term seizure freedom and higher seizure freedom at 4 years. Epilepsy 
can also affect employment options for young people, as about 30% of 
patients still have breakthrough seizures while on treatment. Certain types 
of employment, such as working within the emergency services or armed 
forces, or becoming a pilot or driver of a heavy goods vehicle, may there-
fore not be possible. Driving restrictions may also limit options for some 
other occupations. Young women with epilepsy should be advised that 
oral contraceptives are less effective with enzyme-inducing antiepileptic 
drugs; they should also be made aware of the risk of teratogenicity with 
many antiepileptic drugs, most notably sodium valproate, which should 
be avoided in pregnancy if at all possible. Pre-conceptual counselling is 
desirable for all young girls with epilepsy and pre-conceptual folic acid 
supplementation is advisable to reduce the risk of neural tube defects.
Alcohol use in moderation does not affect seizure control in the major-
ity of patients, but withdrawal from alcohol in dependent patients is epi-
leptogenic and heavy alcohol use should be discouraged. Information 
about marijuana and epilepsy risk is lacking, but regular marijuana use 
and excess drinking are associated with poor adherence to medication 
regimens and increased seizure risk.
Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy comprises a range of non-progressive neurological 
impairments, present from the time of birth or arising in early childhood. 
Although the neuropathology is non-progressive, the manifestation of 
problems can evolve, with progressive motor dysfunction related to 
increased spasticity and possibly progressive seizure activity.
Patients with severe cerebral palsy present specic problems during 
transition and early adulthood. They may be paraplegic or quadriplegic 
and most non-ambulatory individuals have signicant intellectual disa-
bility. This group of patients will be unable to live independently during 
adulthood and need ongoing long-term care. Delivering medical care to 
these individuals poses several problems, including practical issues such 
as consideration of capacity and consent to treatment. Other comorbid-
ities include gastro-oesophageal reux (often related to abnormal lower 
oesophageal function), seizures and feeding difculties often requiring 
gastrostomy. These individuals usually require a complex care package 
involving many members of the multidisciplinary team. There are also 
risks of abuse and neglect in the care of adults with severe disability and 
this needs to be borne in mind when considering atypical problems or 
unusual presentations in this vulnerable patient group. Depending on the 
severity of the patient’s condition, end-of-life care may need to be dis-
cussed and planned with the family and other care-givers.
Muscular dystrophy
The muscular dystrophies are a group of diseases that cause progres-
sive weakness and loss of muscle mass. The disorders differ in terms 
of which muscle groups are affected, the degree of weakness and the 
rate of disease and symptom progression. All the inherited muscular 
dystrophies that present during childhood need active management 
during transition. One of the most important and most severe condi-
tions is Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), which is associated with a 
progressive decline in mobility, coupled with cardiac dysfunction due to 
cardiomyopathy, and respiratory failure requiring respiratory support as 
the disease progresses. Physicians should ensure that the whole family 
is aware of the wider genetic issues. Female carriers of the DMD gene 
mutations can suffer muscle fatigue and are at risk of cardiomyopathy, 
as well as there being obvious risks for their male offspring. On average, 
patients with DMD survive until their late teens to early twenties, and 
those with less severe muscular dystrophies, such as Becker dystrophy, 
survive until their thirties. Although fertility is reduced, young men with 
these conditions may themselves father children. Male offspring will be 
unaffected but all female infants of affected males will be carriers.
As the muscular dystrophies progress, a complex package of care 
involving a multidisciplinary team is necessary; it should include respira-
tory input to assess the need for ventilatory support, which is a common 
endpoint for many patients. At the present time, there is no denitive treat-
ment. Glucocorticoids (prednisolone at 0.75 mg/kg/day) have been shown 
to improve muscle strength and are frequently used, but carry an increased 
risk of osteoporosis and vertebral fractures. New therapeutic approaches 
are being developed with the aim of ameliorating disease progression in 
patients with nonsense mutations. One involves the use of drugs such 
as ataluren, which promotes binding of transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules 
at the site of stop codons with a mismatch in one base (near-cognate 
tRNAs) which results in read-through of the stop codon causing a full-
length protein to be produced with an amino acid substitution rather than 
a truncated non-functional protein. Other potential treatment options for 
patients with DMD include the use of drugs that are targeted at splice sites 
to promote exon skipping. Eteplirsen is one such drug which promotes 
skipping of exon 51 in patients who have a mutation within this exon. 
Another is golodirsen, which promotes skipping of exon 53 in patients with 
mutations in this exon. Another approach that is under investigation is to 
use idebenone, which an antioxidant drug that facilitates electron transport 
in mitochondria. At the moment, however, the evidence for clinical benet 
of all of these drugs remains somewhat limited.
Patients with DMD usually require social and nancial support. It is 
important to consider end-of-life care plans with patients and family 
members. Involvement from palliative care teams, as well as psychologi-
cal, spiritual and wider non-medical support, is essential.
Respiratory disease
Cystic brosis
Cystic brosis (CF) is a single-gene autosomal recessive disorder that 
affects about 1 in 2000 to 1 in 3000 individuals of European descent 
(p. 510). Clinical manifestations are caused by defects in an ion transporter 
termed the cystic brosis transmembrane conductor regulator (CFTR) pro-
tein. With improved supportive care, the median survival in the UK is now 
more than 50 years. It is well recognised that young people with life-limit-
ing conditions face particular challenges during transition: individuals often 
exhibit high-risk behaviour during adolescence, and this was particularly 
true in the past when long-term survival rates were poor. The rates of 
non-concordance with medication and with time-consuming physiother-
apy and nebuliser regimens are high and adversely affect outcome and 
survival. Exercise tolerance and employment are likely to be restricted as 
time progresses, and patients need particular support managing the slow 
decline in function and well-being that occurs throughout their adult lives.
In terms of fertility and child-bearing potential, the picture is complex 
and merits detailed discussion with patients. It is not often discussed 
openly by the paediatrician or during childhood, other than with the par-
ents when the patient is young. The vas deferens is absent in 98% of 
males with CF and seminal vesicular dysfunction means that ejaculates are 

[[p1359]]
Clinical presentations    1291
33
low in volume. While boys are infertile, newer reproductive therapies, such 
as the availability of intracytoplasmic sperm injection, mean that father-
hood is possible. The opportunity for assisted reproduction should be 
discussed early so that people can make informed choices at an appropri-
ate stage of their lives. Females with CF who have good nutritional status 
and reasonable health status have normal fertility and genetic counselling 
should be offered early. Contraception needs to be discussed with women 
who are not planning a pregnancy, since pulmonary hypertension is an 
absolute contraindication for the oral contraceptive pill (OCP). Women 
also need to be advised about the effects of antibiotics on OCP effective-
ness. New orally available small-molecule therapies, including lumacaftor 
and ivacaftor, have recently been licensed; they can partially rectify func-
tional defects in the CTFR and have improved outcome. These drugs are 
having a positive effect on symptom control and are potentially disease-
modifying. The triple drug combination of elexacaftor–tezacaftor–ivacaftor 
is an important new therapy for individuals who have at least one F508del
mutation, which includes approximately 85% of people with CF in the 
United States. Other therapeutic approaches, including gene therapy and 
mRNA-editing therapies, are also being explored as treatments for CF. 
Common issues encountered during transition of CF patients are summa-
rised in Box 17.34
Cardiovascular disease
Congenital heart disease
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common congenital anom-
aly, affecting about 1% of live births. Among birth defects, CHD is the 
leading cause of mortality. Maternal illnesses such as rubella and injec-
tion of teratogenic agents during pregnancy, along with paternal age, 
all play roles in pathogenesis. Although some chromosomal anomalies, 
such as trisomy 13, 18 and 21 and monosomy X (Turner syndrome), 
are strongly associated with CHD, these account for only 5% of cases. 
Microdeletion and single-gene mutations can also be important, such as 
in DiGeorge syndrome (22q11.2 microdeletion). Overall, the most com-
mon congenital valvular anomalies are aortic and pulmonary stenosis. 
The most common structural anomaly is ventricular septal defect.
There is a wide range of severity of CHD but many patients with 
life-limiting conditions (usually complex structural anomalies such as 
tetralogy of Fallot or hypoplastic left heart syndrome) survive to adult-
hood. Genetic counselling of affected individuals is important, as there is 
a 1%–2% recurrence risk of any cardiac anomaly in offspring. Affected 
patients should be transitioned to a cardiologist with experience in CHD 
since this has become a subspecialty in own right. More details are pro-
vided on page 465 and in Box 16.103
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is characterised by 
left ventricular wall hypertrophy, impaired diastolic lling and abnormal-
ities of the mitral valve. These features can cause dynamic obstruction 
of the left ventricular outow tract, diastolic dysfunction, myocardial dys-
function and an increased risk of supraventricular and ventricular tachy-
arrhythmias. HOCM is a genetic disorder caused by mutations affecting 
the genes that encode cardiac sarcomere proteins and is most frequently 
transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. It may present for the rst 
time during adolescence with cardiac arrest or sudden cardiac death. 
Predictive genetic testing is possible but challenging because of the 
large number of causal mutations. In clinical practice, careful analysis 
of the family history can be useful in identifying those at risk of inherit-
ing the disease. If no gene anomaly has been identied within a family, 
rst-degree relatives may need screening by electrocardiography (ECG) 
and echocardiography. Identication of a genetic anomaly is most helpful 
in allowing identication of family members who do not need echocar-
diograms or clinical follow-up. Children of affected parents should be 
screened every 3 years until puberty, and then annually until 20 years of 
age. If there is no evidence of HOCM in early adulthood, it is unlikely that 
the condition will develop in later life.
Oncology
Around 1 child in 500 will develop cancer by the age of 14 years. 
Leukaemia is the most common, accounting for about 33% of cases; 
central nervous system tumours are the next most common, accounting 
for around 25% of all childhood cancers. Fifty years ago, 75% of children 
diagnosed with cancer died, but overall survival rates now range from 
75% to 80%. Between 60% and 70% of young adults who have sur-
vived childhood cancer will develop at least one medical disability, most 
commonly as a result of their therapy rather than their primary cancer. 
There is a three- to sixfold increased risk of a second cancer, with an 
absolute risk of about 10% before 50 years of age. It is therefore impor-
tant for these individuals to be kept under surveillance during transition 
and beyond.
Endocrine and reproductive disturbances are the most common late 
effects, affecting 40%–60% of survivors. Infertility can be an issue in both 
males and females receiving cytotoxic medications, unless it has been pos-
sible to store semen and ovarian tissue in advance of treatment. Other long-
term risks include hypopituitarism, growth hormone deciency and pubertal 
delay (especially in boys) from brain irradiation. Radiotherapy to the neck 
can cause hypothyroidism and increases the risk of thyroid cancer. Total-
body irradiation offered as conditioning for bone marrow transplantation 
affects both ovarian and testicular function, and many of the chemothera-
peutic agents used have adverse effects on fertility. Chemotherapy-induced 
ovarian failure is typically associated with high-dose alkylating agents such 
as cyclophosphamide, and this is an independent risk factor for premature 
ovarian failure. In recent years, patients have been offered ovarian and tes-
ticular tissue retention and fertility issues are being discussed with families 
during childhood, but often the patients themselves have limited levels of 
knowledge of the details. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy in childhood 
signicantly reduce ovarian reserves. When combined with the progressive 
ovarian decline that occurs in all women throughout adulthood there is a 
signicant risk of premature menopause or ovarian failure, with 8% of sur-
vivors affected. Young women need to be aware of these risks during their 
early adulthood to help with family and lifestyle planning; for example, they 
may wish to plan to have children earlier in their adult life rather than risking 
ovarian decline.
Cardiomyopathy is another complication of anthracyclines such as dox-
orubicin and daunorubicin. Serious cardiac complications include arrhyth-
mias, dilated cardiomyopathy from myocardial necrosis, and angina or 
myocardial infarction arising from vaso-occlusion or vasospasm.
In addition to physical effects, children who have faced life-threatening 
illness in childhood may experience psychological and family difculties 
during adulthood. Cognitive impairment is more common in children who 
have received chemotherapy or radiotherapy to the brain, and problems 
can include lower IQ, problems with memory and attention, poor hand–
eye coordination and behaviour or personality problems, combined with 
the well-recognised and physical complications of cancer treatment in 
childhood.
Increasing recognition of these issues has resulted in active monitoring 
programmes for survivors of childhood cancer, who are best seen in spe-
cialist ‘late effects’ multidisciplinary clinics, where teams include oncolo-
gists, psychologists and specialists from other relevant disciplines.
Renal disease
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) accounts for some of the most complex 
long-term illnesses in childhood. The most common causes during child-
hood and adolescence are shown in Box 33.10. The primary pathology 
can be varied and many conditions have no specic treatment, but the 
overall approach to management of progressive renal insufciency is the 
same. Internationally agreed denitions of CKD staging in children differ 

[[p1360]]
1292    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
from those in adults and are summarised in Box 33.11. In adults the rate 
of albumin excretion is included in CKD denitions, as outcome corre-
lates with the level of albuminuria, but in children similar data are lacking 
and so the staging system is based on glomerular ltration rate alone. 
The majority of children with CKD stage 3 or higher will ultimately require 
renal replacement therapy but the timescale for reaching this stage can 
vary widely. The mainstay of support is to delay progression by treatment 
of secondary factors that are known to be associated with progressive 
decline in renal function: namely, hypertension, proteinuria and anaemia.
Organ transplantation
Children requiring renal replacement therapy are the most common recip-
ients of kidney transplants in childhood. Liver and heart transplantation, 
followed by lung and small bowel transplantation, are well recognised 
but less commonly undertaken procedures. Non-adherence to immuno-
suppressive regimens during adolescence is a well-known risk factor for 
graft failure. The reported incidence of graft failure due to non-adherence 
is 10%–15% but this is likely to be an under-estimate. Rates of non-
adherence are highest among adolescents and young adults. As well as 
non-adherence to immunosuppression, non-adherence to testing and 
clinic attendance adversely affects the care and outcome of around 1 in 
8 kidney transplant patients. Poor adherence is associated with patients 
with worse psychological status and family dysfunction; adherence has 
been shown to improve with education and increased motivational fac-
tors, as might be expected. This offers the opportunity to improve graft 
survival. At present, 50% of cadaveric grafts and around 68% of live 
donor grafts are still functioning 10 years post transplant. There is no clear 
difference between children and adults in survival of transplanted kidneys.
Many medications used in transplant medicine and in renal disease can 
have long-term effects on health. Inhibition of linear growth is seen even 
with low doses of glucocorticoids, such as prednisolone 0.125 mg/kg/day 
on a long-term basis. Alternate-day regimens are generally considered pref-
erable in childhood. The height reduction associated with long-term gluco-
corticoid use in childhood is dose-dependent, and even for children with 
asthma treated with inhaled glucocorticoids, an average height reduction 
of 1.2 cm is reported. This is can also be associated with delayed puberty, 
as well as an increased risk of osteoporosis in adulthood. Post-transplant 
lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs) are a well-recognised and potentially 
life-threatening complication in solid organ recipients. PTLD is the most 
common malignancy complicating solid organ transplantation, accounting 
for 20% of all cancers. They represent a range of lymphoproliferative disor-
ders, from infectious mononucleosis and lymphoid hyperplasia to malignant 
lymphoma. Most cases of PTLD are associated with Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV), leading to uncontrolled B-cell proliferation and tumour formation. Up 
to 10% of solid organ transplant recipients develop PTLD but the risk is 
almost four times higher in patients under 20 years of age, as opposed 
to those aged 20–50. This increased risk relates mainly to the develop-
ment of EBV infection after transplantation; most adults are already EBV-
seropositive at the time of transplantation and therefore at lower risk of 
this complication. The type of organ transplant that has been undertaken 
predicts PTLD risk, with the cumulative incidence over 5 years ranging from 
1% to 2% in haematopoietic cell transplant and liver transplants, 1%–3% 
in renal transplants, 2%–6% in heart transplants and 2%–9% in lung trans-
plants to as high as 11%–33% in intestinal or multi-organ transplants. The 
different rates possibly relate to the varying degrees of immunosuppression 
required. The incidence of PTLD is highest in the rst year after transplan-
tation, when it is associated with the highest levels of immunosuppression.
Diabetes
Adherence and concordance with medication are a particular chal-
lenge in adolescents who have developed diabetes during childhood. 
Studies of adolescents with type 1 diabetes have revealed that 25% 
were neglecting insulin injections, 81% were not following their diet, and 
29% were not measuring their glucose level and were completing a daily 
diary with ctitious results. Research has also shown that the outcome 
of diabetes is improved with a formal transition programme (Box 33.12). 
Good control of diabetes is particularly important during this phase since 
microvascular disease often emerges around time of transition, although 
it can occur sooner in patients with early-onset diabetes.
Gastrointestinal disease
Inammatory bowel disease
The prevalence of inammatory bowel disease (IBD) in childhood is increas-
ing, and the incidence of Crohn’s disease (CD) in particular is rising in both 
children and adults, probably due to currently undened environmental fac-
tors. Current treatment aims are outlined in Box 33.13. Standard measures 
33.10  Causes of renal impairment in childhood and 
adolescence
 Obstructive uropathy
 Renal hypoplasia/dysplasia
 Reux nephropathy
 Focal segmental glomerular sclerosis
 Polycystic kidney disease
33.11  Staging of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in children over 
2 years of age*
Stage
Glomerular ltration rate 
(GFR) (mL/min/1.73 m2)
Description
1
>90
Normal or high
2
60–89
Mildly decreased
3a
45–59
Mildly to moderately decreased
3b
30–44
Moderately to severely 
decreased
4
15–29
Severely decreased
5
<15
Kidney failure
*Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2012 classication. Chronic kidney 
disease is dened either as GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 for >3 months, regardless of whether 
other CKD markers are present, or as GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 accompanied by evidence of 
structural damage or other markers of kidney abnormalities, including proteinuria, albuminuria 
and pathological abnormalities in histology or imaging. In adults, albumin excretion is also 
included in CKD staging as the level of albuminuria correlates with outcome. These data are 
lacking in children and so albuminuria is not used to classify paediatric CKD.
33.12  Impact of transition planning on outcome in diabetes
Intervention
Outcome measures
Disease-specic education
Lower HbA1C
Generic education/skills training
Fewer acute complications:
Hypoglycaemia
Admissions with ketoacidosis
Transition coordinator
Lower rate of loss to follow-up
Joint paediatric/adult clinic
Fewer chronic complications:
Hypertension
Nephropathy
Retinopathy
Separate young adult clinic
Improved self-management
Improved disease-specic knowledge
Out-of-hours phone support
Improved screening for complications
Enhanced follow-up
Better quality-of-life scores

[[p1361]]
Clinical presentations    1293
33
include exclusive enteral nutrition for 6–8 weeks using a whole-protein 
(polymeric) formula, which induces initial remission in 80% of children. 
This is equivalent to glucocorticoid therapy but offers improved nutritional 
status and superior mucosal healing. Glucocorticoids can also be used to 
induce remission, as well as to treat exacerbations, but should be followed 
up by immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine or methotrexate. 
Adolescents and children are more likely than adults to require biologics 
and around 20% need treatment with tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) 
inhibitors such as iniximab or adalimumab. Around 20% of children with 
CD require surgery within 5 years of diagnosis; limited resections and stric-
turoplasty are considered best practice to preserve gut length and prevent 
short bowel syndrome.
Children with ulcerative colitis (UC) are more likely than adults to pres-
ent with pancolitis (approximately 80% versus 40%–50% in adults). Mild 
disease should be treated initially with oral 5-ASA preparations such as 
mesalamine or sulfasalazine. If the response is inadequate, oral glucocorti-
coids can be used, but caution must be exercised because of the adverse 
effects on skeletal growth and bone mineral density. Thiopurines such as 
6-mercaptopurine or azathioprine are frequently used as steroid-sparing 
agents, with progression to anti-TNF-α therapy for those who still do not 
respond. There is less evidence for efcacy of TNF-α inhibitors in adoles-
cents with UC than those with CD; they seem to be effective at inducing 
an initial response but less useful for maintaining long-term remission, since 
a signicant proportion of patients still require colectomy (20% at 1 year) 
or long-term glucocorticoids. Ciclosporin is probably more effective than 
iniximab in adolescents with refractory UC. As with other young people 
who have long-term conditions, adherence to medication is particularly 
important to reduce the risk of relapse. In terms of lifestyle advice, smoking 
is a particular risk since it increases both the rate and severity of relapses. 
Body image can be a particular challenge for young adults with IBD, and 
those with colostomies or stulae, for example, can nd this part of their 
illness particularly difcult. Delayed puberty and short stature are impor-
tant comorbidities, partly related to medication side-effects and also to the 
nature of the inammatory bowel disease itself.
Rheumatology and bone disease
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the term used to describe a wide vari-
ety of inammatory rheumatic diseases that present during childhood. 
Oligoarticular juvenile arthritis has a good prognosis and often remits dur-
ing adulthood, and so transitioning patients to adult rheumatology services 
may not always be required. The same does not hold true for systemic JIA 
and polyarticular JIA, which often require long-term immunosuppressive 
therapy through transition and beyond into adulthood. Smoking is a risk 
because it increases the activity of inammatory disease and reduces the 
effectiveness of biologics. Adherence to and concordance with medication 
remain a challenge, as in other chronic diseases. Functional limitation sec-
ondary to joint damage may limit employment opportunities. Contraceptive 
advice is important in patients on methotrexate.
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a complication of long-term glucocorticoid therapy that 
may be required in patients with inammatory disease, transplantation 
and DMD.
There is a paucity of evidence about best practice in glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis in children and adolescents, but in general the 
teenage years are a period of considerable bone mineral deposition and 
offer a chance to enhance bone mineral density signicantly. It is impor-
tant to ensure adequate calcium and vitamin D intake and to supplement 
if necessary. Therapy with bisphosphonates is often initiated in patients 
with clinical vertebral fractures although the evidence base for prevention 
of fractures with treatment in childhood and adolescence is limited.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder most commonly 
caused by mutations in the type 1 collagen genes which typically pre-
sents with multiple low-trauma fractures during infancy and childhood. 
The incidence of fractures falls substantially in adolescence, probably 
because of the increase in bone mass which occurs as the result of skel-
etal growth. However, the incidence of fractures in OI during transition 
and in young adults is about 10–100 times higher throughout life as com-
pared with the general population. Intravenous bisphosphonates such 
as pamidronate and zoledronic acid are widely used in the treatment of 
children with osteogenesis imperfecta (those with long-bone deformities, 
vertebral compression fractures, and three or more fractures per year, 
in whom the benet/risk ratio is thought to be positive), although the 
evidence base for prevention of fractures is poor and mainly based on 
observational studies.
There is much debate about whether continuing bisphosphonate ther-
apy into adulthood is benecial due to concerns about suppression of 
bone turnover in the long term. Affected individuals and their parents can 
nd this change in treatment strategy confusing and it is important to 
explain the underlying rationale in order to manage expectations.
Hypophosphataemic rickets
Hypophosphataemic rickets is a rare genetic disorder caused by muta-
tions in genes that regulate phosphate excretion. Adherence to phos-
phate supplements and, to a lesser extent, vitamin D metabolites 
represents an important issue in optimising management during child-
hood and this becomes even more challenging in transitioning patients. 
The treatment of X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets (XLH) in children 
has, however, been revolutionised by burosumab, a neutralising antibody 
to FGF23 given by subcutaneous injection once monthly which corrects 
the metabolic disorder and has been shown in clinical trials to be signif-
icantly more effective in the treatment of XLH than standard care. While 
skeletal deformity does not progress following closure of the epiphyses, 
different problems arise in adolescent patients when there is suboptimal 
control of hypophosphataemia, including painful pseudofractures and 
arthralgia associated with enthesopathy. The renal phosphate leak tends 
to improve to an extent during adolescence and early adulthood and 
the requirement for phosphate is reduced, but many patients still require 
treatment in adulthood.
Summary
Young people who have suffered long-term conditions during childhood 
represent a particularly high-risk group of patients as they progress through 
adolescence to become young and, nally, mature adults. They bring with 
them specic medical risks and complications related to their previous med-
ical treatment, and knowledge of these is important to identify the long-term 
complications of the therapies to which they have been exposed. They 
are a patient group that can display complex and often abnormal illness 
behaviour. Understanding this and implementing an effective process for 
transition from paediatric to adult services can reduce the signicant risks 
that these patients face in early adulthood. As they mature and develop 
more adult intellectual and emotional behaviour patterns, the risks to their 
health and well-being reduce. Patients in transition can be a particularly 
33.13  Treatment strategy in Crohn’s disease
 Induce and maintain clinical remission
 Optimise nutrition
 Optimise bone health
 Optimise growth and pubertal progress
 Minimise adverse drug effects

[[p1362]]
1294    ADOLESCENT AND TRANSITION MEDICINE 
challenging group to manage, but investment of time and effort at this stage 
of their lives can be extremely rewarding and can bring signicant improve-
ments in long-term health-related outcomes.
Further information
Books and journal articles
Atreja A, Bellam N, Levy SR. Strategies to enhance patient adherence: Making it 
simple. Med Gen Med 2005;7:4.
Crowley R, Wolfe I, Lock K, McKee M. Improving the transition between paediatric 
and adult healthcare: a systematic review. Arch Dis Child 2011;96:548–553.
Nagra A, McGinnity P, Davis N, et al. Implementing transition: Ready Steady Go. 
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2015;100:313–320.
Segal TY. Adolescence: what the cystic brosis team needs to know. J R Soc 
Med 2008;101(Suppl 1):15–27.
Websites
acpm.org/?Adherence American College of Preventive Medicine: detailed review 
of adherence.
health.org.uk/sites/default/les/QualityImprovementMadeSimple.pdf Sample 
clinical tools and measurement resources for quality improvement purposes .
uhs.nhs.uk More clinical tools and measurement resources.
readysteadygo.net Transition and Patient Empowerment Innovation, Education 
and Research Network: Ready, Steady, Go programme.

[[p1363]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 33.1.  When considering renal transplant rejection rates in children, 
kidney survival rates are better in:
 
A. Males
 
B. Older adolescents
 
C. Patients who have not been dialysed prior to transplantation
 
D. A parent donor rather than a sibling
 
E.  A deceased donor under 2 years old rather than an older 
donor
Answer: C.
Five- and 10-year kidney survival rates have improved steadily in 
recent years, such that organ survival rates are now around 80% and 
60%, respectively. Much of this has been delivered through improved 
immunosuppressive regimens, but there are patient-specic factors that 
also affect kidney survival. A worse outlook is seen in females, children of 
African and Caribbean origin and older adolescents in whom adherence 
is less good and transition to adult services is a negative factor. Kidney 
survival rates in general are better for living rather than deceased donors, 
but children rarely have brothers or sisters (some of whom are HLA iden-
tical) old enough to be an organ donor; as a result, most living donated 
allografts are from a parent, who is an obligate one haplotype match. 
Optimal HLA matching is important to minimize sensitization, particularly 
for young recipients who will need retransplantations in later life. The 
best 5-year graft survival (90%) in paediatric patients is seen in patients 
who received a pre-emptive transplant or after short-term dialysis (< 45 
days). The poorest graft survival (52%) is in adolescent patients trans-
planted after long-term dialysis (> 2.2 years). Kidneys from the youngest 
deceased donors have the poorest survival rates, although conversely, 
younger recipients tend to have improved renal transplant survival overall 
compared to older children.
 33.2.  Many children with long-term conditions (such as inammatory 
bowel disease, the arthritides or connective tissue disorder, 
nephrotic syndrome, cystic brosis, or transplantation) have 
been taking long-term corticosteroids. When considering 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) important issues to consider 
include:
 
A.  20% of patients will have a reduction in skeletal growth/nal 
adult height – females being more signicantly affected than 
males
 
B.  20% of patients develop Cushingoid features with long-term 
steroid use – but low-dose steroids are not associated with 
this risk
 
C.  Children and young people have lower rates of mood and 
behaviour changes with steroid therapy than adults
 
D.  25% of patients have biochemical evidence of hypothal-
amic-pituitary axis (HPA) suppression and this predisposes 
them to viral infections
 
E.  Half of all steroid-related deaths are due to infection and 
varicella zoster is the single commonest causative organism 
in patients who die from steroid-related sepsis
Answer: E.
Treatment with long-term steroids carries signicant long-term health 
risks, and these are particularly important for children who have been 
exposed to steroids for long periods of time during their childhood. Up 
to 20% experience reductions in growth – males are more signicantly 
affected than females and there is an average signicant weight gain of 
5%–10%. Children and young people seem more vulnerable to mood and 
behaviour side-effects than adults and steroid psychosis can be a particu-
lar problem in adolescents. Sixty per cent of patients on long-term steroids 
have biochemical evidence of HPA suppression and this makes them par-
ticularly vulnerable to infections. Varicella is the commonest cause of sep-
sis-related deaths and sepsis is the most serious of the described ADRs.
 33.3.  When considering the initiation of transition planning, which of 
the following is true?
 
A.  It is sensible to plan this to coincide with the end of the 
young person’s time in full-time education
 
B.  Transition planning is better delayed in patients with learning 
difculties to aid their understanding of the process
 
C.  Transition planning should begin between 11–12 years of 
age in all young people with a long-term condition likely to 
need treatment in adulthood
 
D.  Transition planning should be started earlier in children with 
more severe conditions
 
E.  It is best to involve adult clinicians in shared clinical care as 
early as possible in the transition process
Answer: C.
Transition planning should be initiated at around 12 years of age in 
all patients who are likely to have ongoing health needs in adulthood, 
regardless of disease severity, the presence of learning difculties or even 
the patient’s willingness to consider transfer to another provider. The 
face-to-face consultation with adult colleagues and shared clinical deci-
sion-making is one of the nal steps before full transfer to adult services.
 33.4.  Obesity is a growing problem in paediatrics and adolescence. 
When prescribing drugs for patients who are overweight which 
of the following is true?
 
A.  When prescribing drugs on a dose per kilogram basis it is 
important that the actual weight for height is used when cal-
culating drug dosages, even if the calculated dose exceeds 
the recommended adult dose
 
B.  When prescribing drugs on a dose per kilogram basis, it is 
important that the optimal weight for height is used when 
calculating drug dosages and not to exceed the recom-
mended adult dose
 
C.  Adult drug dosages can safely be used in male and female 
children above 16 years since growth has stopped by then
 
D.  Hydroxychloroquine can be prescribed using either optimal or 
actual body weight in adolescents who are clinically obese
 
E.  Obesity in adolescents is generally dened to be present 
when the actual body weight is more than 30% greater than 
optimal body weight
Answer: B.
Many paediatric prescribing regimens use a dose per kilogram reg-
imen to avoid overdosing. However, in obese young people (those in 
whom actual weight is > 20% ideal weight) this can result in a risk of 
overdosing. Accordingly, ideal body weight rather than actual body 
weight should be used when calculating drug dosages. Centile charts 
can be used to calculate ideal body weight in growing children based 
on age and height. It should be noted that height and weight continue to 
increase through the late teenage years in boys, whereas in girls, both 
tend to stabilise around the age of 16 years. Whether or not the patient is 
obese, it is important to ensure that the actual dose prescribed does not 
exceed the standard adult dose.

[[p1364]]
 33.5.  A 19-year-old male presented to your hospital after a witnessed 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. He was previously t and well but 
resuscitation was not successful and the clinical diagnosis was of 
sudden cardiac death (SCD). The family are seeking advice about 
the risks for the wider family; there are two surviving siblings, 
aged 16 and 12 years old. Which of the following is true:
 
A.  The cause of death can be identied in 60% of cases once 
histopathology results are available
 
B. The siblings need to undergo cardiac screening
 
C.  First-degree relatives should undergo ECG, echocardio-
gram, exercise tolerance test, Holter monitor, cardiac MR 
and adrenaline challenge
 
D.  If the post mortem is normal, a primary arrhythmia syn-
drome is the most likely diagnosis. The majority of these are 
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner
 
E.  It is important to diagnose hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(HCM) as this has genetic implications and treatment with 
propranolol modies disease progression
Answer: D.
Sudden cardiac death in the young is a devastating event and gen-
erates signicant familial anxiety. If post mortem examination is normal 
then inherited arrhythmia is the most likely diagnosis (such as long QT 
syndrome, Brugada syndrome). Genetic testing in the proband is helpful, 
but rst-degree family members should also undergo detailed cardiolog-
ical assessment including ajmaline challenge to exclude Brugada syn-
drome. The diagnostic yield is much higher if parents are included as well 
as siblings – extending the investigations to surviving family members 
increases the chances of reaching a denitive diagnosis to 40% even in 
cases where post mortem examination is normal. HCM could be diag-
nosed at post mortem examination and is relatively common, affecting 
1 in 500 people. It too has autosomal dominant inheritance. Treatment 
with beta blockers reduces the incidence of sudden death but has not 
been shown to alter progression of hypertrophy. An implantable cardiac 
debrillator ICD is considered the only effective strategy for prevention of 
arrhythmic SCD in patients with HCM.

[[p1365]]
Ageing and disease
34
TJ Quinn
Assessment of the older adult 1296
Demography 1298
Functional anatomy and physiology 1298
Biology of ageing 1298
Physiological changes of ageing 1298
Core concepts in older adults 1298
Frailty, disability and multimorbidity 1298
Rehabilitation 1301
Investigation and management 1301
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment 1301
Decisions about investigation and treatment 1302
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine  1302
Falls and collapse  1303
Dizziness 1303
Confusion (dementia and delirium) 1304
Continence 1305
Infection in the older adult 1306
Prescribing and deprescribing 1307
Other problems in old age 1308

[[p1366]]
1296    AGEING AND DISEASE
Pulse
Atrial fibrillation
Hydration
Skin turgor
Oedema, including sacral
oedema
Mucous membranes
Erect and supine
blood pressure
Postural hypotension,
see opposite
Hearing
Wax
Hearing aid used
Muscle
Wasting
Strength
Faecal impaction
Prostate size/consistency
in men
Palpable bladder
Nutrition
Body mass index
(Height calculated from arm
demispan or knee height to
compensate for loss of
vertebral height)
Recent weight loss,
e.g. loose skin folds
Joints
Deformity
Pain
Swelling
Range of movement
Skin
Pressure areas
Pattern of bruising (falls,
non-accidental)
Bladder and bowel
Gait and balance
Get up and go test
(see opposite)
Walking aid used
Vision
Visual acuity
Glasses worn/present
Cataract
Cognitive function
Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(see Ch. 31)
Assess for delirium
Assess mood
Measurement of knee height
(see Ch. 22)
Severe kyphosis
Cataract
Sacral pressure sore
Full systems examination
with particular attention
to the above
2
3
1
14
12
13
11
10
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
5
7
9
10
Oral cavity
Dentition
Swallow assessment
8
11
12
Feet
Ulcers
Onychogryphosis
Neuropathy
13
14
6
4
9
8
Oral Candida and poor
dentition
Insets (kyphosis) From Afzal Mir M. Atlas of clinical diagnosis, 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Saunders, Elsevier Ltd; 2003; (oral candida and poor dentition) From Ibsen O. Oral pathology 
for the dental hygienist, 7th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier Inc.; 2017; (sacral pressure sore) From Walls R, et al. Rosen’s emergency medicine: Concepts and clinical 
practice, 9th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc., 2017.
Assessment of the older adult

[[p1367]]
Assessment of the older adult    1297
34
History
Approach
 Find a quiet area free from external distractions
 Ensure the patient can hear
 Slow down the pace
 Carry out a full systematic enquiry
Content
 Establish the person’s goals and expectations of treatments
 Medication history, including adherence, recent changes to medications  
and any non-prescribed drugs or supplements
 Past medical history, even from many years previously
 Establish usual function – change in function is often a sign of  
illness
 Ask specically about: mobility, continence, cognition,  
self-care
Collateral
 Obtain a collateral history from a suitable informant (relative,  
care-giver or family doctor)
 Ask about care-giver stress 
Social assessment
Home circumstances
 Living alone, with another person or in a care home
Stairs, access to toilet, adequate heating
Activities of daily living (ADL)
 Tasks for which help is needed:
Basic ADL: bathing, dressing, walking
Extended ADL: shopping, cooking, housework
Social support
 Informal assistance: relatives, friends, neighbours
 Formal assistance: social care, home help, meals on wheels 
Examination – general points
 Thorough and systematic
 Tailored to the patient’s stamina and ability to cooperate, may need to be 
performed in stages
 Includes cognitive function, gait, hearing and vision
 Initial assessment is screening rather than diagnostic; for example, screening 
visual acuity can be performed using different sizes of print in a newspaper
 Maintains safety; for example, ensure you have appropriate assistance before 
mobilising an unwell older adult for the rst time
 Includes assessment of risk of future events; for example, assessing skin for 
risk of pressure sores, assessing gait and balance for risk of falls 
Cognitive screening
 Sensitively, enquire about level of education and ability in reading and writing.
 Maximise cognitive abilities, ensure glasses are worn, hearing aids turned on.
 Screen for delirium using a validated tool such as 4-A test. If the person 
struggles with this test then more detailed direct testing may not be possible.
 Use a multidomain cognitive assessment validated for the language of the 
person being tested (e.g. Montreal Cognitive Assessment, see Ch. 31).
 Complement the cognitive assessment with collateral information, use a 
structured questionnaire such as the AD8.
 Change in cognition is important; look for results of any previous cognitive tests 
in medical records. 
 Have the person supine and relaxed for at least 5 minutes.
 Measure blood pressure with manual sphygmomanometer.
 Keep the sphygmomanometer cuff on the person’s arm.
 Stand the person up rapidly but safely (in some cases lying to sitting measures 
may be needed).
 Check standing blood pressure immediately and then at 1, 2, 3 minutes.
 Ask about symptoms with each blood pressure check.
 A fall of >20 mmHg systolic or >10 mmHg diastolic denes postural 
hypotension, but important symptomatic drops may be seen with lesser falls  
in blood pressure. 
4
To assess gait and balance, ask the patient to stand up from a sitting position, walk 3 m, turn and go back to the chair. This can be timed and usually takes less than 12 seconds. 
However, observed performance is more important than precise timing.
Unsteady on
standing?
Difficulty rising?
Unsteady gait?
Unsteady on
turning?
Unsteady on
sitting down?
14

[[p1368]]
1298    AGEING AND DISEASE
Demography
Improvements in health care, lifestyle and public health measures have 
resulted in prolonged life expectancy across the world. For example, in the 
UK, the total population has grown by 11% over the past 30 years, but the 
number of people aged over 65 years has grown by 24%, with the steep-
est rise in those aged over 80. In contrast, the working age population has 
remained relatively static. Similarly, the proportion of people aged over 65 
in India has increased by 35.5%, which is almost twice the rate of growth 
of the general population. The rate of population ageing is much faster in 
developing countries and so there will be less time to adjust to its impact.
Thus, the old-age dependency ratio, which is the ratio of peo-
ple of working age to people over retirement age, has substantially 
increased. Since young people support older members of the pop-
ulation both directly and indirectly through taxation and pension 
contributions, the consequences of this change are far-reaching. It 
is important to emphasise, however, that many older people also sup-
port the younger population, through the care of children and other 
older people.
Life expectancy gains are seen even in old age (Box 34.1); women 
aged 80 years can expect to live for a further 10 years. However, rates 
of disability and chronic illness rise sharply with ageing and have a major 
impact on health and social services. In the UK, the reported preva-
lence of a chronic illness or disability sufcient to restrict daily activities is 
around 25% in those aged 50–64, but 66% in men and 75% in women 
aged over 85.
Functional anatomy and physiology
Biology of ageing
At a biological level, ageing can be dened as the progressive accu-
mulation of random molecular defects that build up over the life 
course. Despite multiple repair and maintenance mechanisms, even-
tually these defects result in functional impairments of tissues and 
organs.
Genes that contribute to ageing proles include those involved in reg-
ulation of DNA repair, telomere length and insulin signalling. However, 
genetic factors only account for around 25% of the variance in human 
lifespan with lifestyle and environmental factors more important 
determinants.
At a cellular level, production of reactive oxygen species is thought to 
play a major role in ageing. These molecules cause oxidative damage 
at a number of targets (Box 34.2). The rate at which damage occurs 
is variable and is inuenced by environmental and lifestyle factors. 
There is evidence in some organisms that this interplay is mediated 
by insulin signalling pathways and chronic inammation, so called 
inamm-ageing.
Physiological changes of ageing
Physiological features of disease-free, normal ageing have been 
described (Fig. 34.1). However, ageing is so often associated with con-
comitant disease that the use of the term ‘normal’ is debatable. Age-
related changes alone are usually not enough to interfere with organ 
function, but reserve capacity can be signicantly reduced with implica-
tions for response to an external stressor like disease.
Ageing is characterised by substantial inter-individual variation in func-
tion. Thus, each person must be assessed individually, and the same 
management cannot be applied unthinkingly to all people of a certain 
age. This heterogeneity in the ageing phenotype is predominantly driven 
by environmental and lifestyle factors, such as poverty, exercise and cig-
arette smoking. By implication, a healthy lifestyle should be encouraged 
even in older age.
Core concepts in older adults
Frailty, disability and multimorbidity
Frailty
Frailty is dened as the inability to withstand minor stresses because 
of reduced functional reserve in several organ systems. Thus, in frailty 
even a trivial illness may result in organ failure and death (Fig. 34.2). 
The term ‘frail’ has often been used rather vaguely, sometimes to jus-
tify a lack of adequate investigation and intervention in older people. 
Frailty research has substantially increased in the last decades and 
we now have a better understanding of the meaning and implications 
of frailty.
34.1  Mean life expectancy in years, UK and India
Males
Females
UK
India
UK
India
At birth
79.1
65.1
83.0
67.2
At 60 years
22.8
16.7
25.5
18.9
At 70 years
15.0
10.9
17.1
12.4
At 80 years
8.7
7.5
9.9
8.0
34.2 Structural damage contributing to ageing
 Nuclear chromosomal DNA: mutations and deletions ultimately lead to aberrant 
gene function and potential for malignancy.
 Telomeres: these structures at the ends of chromosomes shorten with each 
cell division. When sufciently eroded, cells stop dividing. This ‘biological 
clock’ prevents uncontrolled cell division and cancer. Telomeres are particularly 
shortened in patients with premature ageing due to progeria.
 Mitochondrial DNA: mutations and deletions resulting in reduced cellular energy 
production and ultimately cell death.
 Proteins: glycosylation due to spontaneous reactions between proteins and 
sugars damages structure and function.
Demographic change has meant that older people now represent the 
core practice of medicine. A knowledge of the effects of ageing and 
the associated clinical problems is therefore essential for all clinicians. 
The older population is diverse; a substantial proportion of 90-year-
olds enjoy an active healthy life, while some 70-year-olds are severely 
disabled by chronic disease. The terms ‘chronological’ and ‘biolog-
ical’ ageing have been coined to describe this phenomenon. In the 
context of medical care, biological age is the more important factor 
to consider.
Geriatric medicine is concerned particularly with frailty – where physio-
logical capacity is so reduced that even minor illness has serious conse-
quences. Management in frailty differs from that in a robust younger adult in 
fundamental ways. Disability and multiple comorbidities can complicate both 
assessment and treatment and acute illness may present with non-specic 
symptoms. A broad knowledge of medicine is required, as disease in any, 
and often many, organ systems has to be managed at the same time. Finally, 
the person’s expectations and goals of treatment may differ from younger 
adults and these should be established as early as possible.
Older people are under-represented in clinical trials. Accordingly, there 
is often little high-quality evidence on which to base practice. However, 
some interventions have a compelling evidence base, such as the pro-
cess of Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment.

[[p1369]]
Core concepts in older adults    1299
34
Respiratory system
 Reduced lung elasticity and
 alveolar support
 Increased chest wall rigidity
 Increased V/Q mismatch
 Reduced cough and ciliary action
CNS and muscle
 Neuronal loss
 Cochlear degeneration
 Increased lens rigidity
 Lens opacification
 Anterior horn cell loss
 Dorsal column loss
 Slowed reaction times
  Loss of type II muscle fibres
  Reduction in muscle satellite cell        
    numbers
Cardiovascular system
 Reduced maximum heart rate
 Dilatation of aorta
 Reduced elasticity of conduit/
    capacitance vessels
 Reduced number of pacing
 myocytes in sinoatrial node
Endocrine system
 Deterioration in pancreatic -cell
    function
Renal system
 Loss of nephrons
 Reduced glomerular filtration rate
 Reduced tubular function
Gastrointestinal system
 Reduced motility
Bones
 Reduced bone mineral density
Respiratory system
 Reduced vital capacity and peak
 expiratory flow
 Increased residual volume
 Reduced inspiratory reserve volume
 Reduced arterial oxygen saturation
 Increased risk of infection
CNS
 Increased risk of delirium
 Presbyacusis/high-tone hearing loss
 Presbyopia/abnormal near vision
 Cataract
 Muscle weakness and wasting
 Reduced position and vibration
 sense
 Increased risk of falls
Cardiovascular system
 Reduced exercise tolerance
 Widened aortic arch on X-ray
 Widened pulse pressure
 Increased risk of postural
 hypotension
 Increased risk of atrial fibrillation
Endocrine system
 Increased risk of impaired
 glucose tolerance
Renal system
 Impaired fluid balance
 Increased risk of
 dehydration/overload
 Impaired drug metabolism
 and excretion
Gastrointestinal system
 Constipation
Bones
 Increased risk of osteoporosis and
    fracture
Changes with ageing


Fig. 34.1 Features and consequences of normal ageing.
There are various complementary approaches to the assessment of 
frailty (Box 34.3). The cumulative decit model counts the number of 
age-related symptoms, signs, diagnoses and test abnormalities. If this 
count is compared against a pre-dened list of issues, then a frailty index 
can be calculated. The phenotypic approach is based on a series of 
common features associated with poor outcomes, such as exhaustion 
and reduced strength. Finally, the syndromic approach recognises that 
patients with frailty tend to respond to disease in stereotyped ways. A list 
of presentations that are markers of underlying frailty was rst described 
by Sir Bernard Isaacs in his text on ‘Geriatric Giants’. Formal phenotyp-
ing and frailty indexing are mostly used in research settings. In clinical 
practice, clinicians can often recognise frailty based on initial assess-
ment. Frailty scales, such as that described by Rockwood, offer guid-
ance and illustration to allow the categorisation of clinical frailty into an 
ordinal scale (Fig. 34.3).
Older people with frailty benet from a clinical approach that addresses 
both the acute illness and their underlying loss of reserves. It may be 
possible to prevent further loss of function through early intervention. 
For example, a frail woman with myocardial infarction may benet from 
cardiovascular secondary prevention medications but may benet even 
further from an exercise programme that improves musculoskeletal func-
tion, balance and aerobic capacity. Establishing a patient’s level of frailty 
also helps inform decisions regarding further investigation, management 
and the need for rehabilitation.
Disability
Disability is an umbrella term for describing loss of function that results from 
complex interactions between health, environmental and personal factors. 
The WHO International Classication of Functioning, Disability and Health 
(ICF) provides a framework for understanding this concept at the levels of 
basic body structure and function, activity limitations (previously called dis-
ability) and participation in society (previously called handicap) (Fig. 34.4). 
Care of the older adult should seek not only to cure or limit disease but also 
to minimise the resulting disability. Given the multifaceted nature of disability, 
this often requires a team approach with expertise in differing areas.
Multimorbidity
Multimorbidity describes a state where multiple health conditions coexist in 
an individual. A related term is comorbidity which describes conditions that 
exist alongside a disease of interest. There is no consensus on the total num-
ber of conditions that should dene multimorbidity and with increasing age, 
accumulation of chronic conditions is almost invariable. Regardless of the 
denition used, multimorbidity is a driver for future disability, hospitalisation 
and death. Related to multimorbidity is the concept of polypharmacy, where 
multiple medications are used to treat each chronic disease individually.
Traditional health-care systems are poorly equipped to manage multi-
morbidity. When each disease is dealt with by a separate team of special-
ists, this places a high burden on the patient and can lead to inefciency, 

[[p1370]]
1300    AGEING AND DISEASE
Functional ability
Time
Healthy older age
Minor illness
Major illness
Rehabilitation
Dependency
Death
A
Functional ability
Time
Frailty
Minor illness
Major illness
Rehabilitation
Dependency
Death
B
Fig. 34.2 Differing responses to illness in health and frailty. Note that in frailty 
the response to illness is more severe and even minor illness can cause functional 
issues requiring rehabilitation.
34.3 Two approaches to assessment of frailty
Fried Frailty phenotype
 Weak hand grip strength
 Slow walking speed
 Self-reported exhaustion
 Physical inactivity
 Unintentional weight loss
Frailty syndromes
 Immobility (decline in function)
 Instability (falls)
 Incontinence
 Intellectual impairment (dementia, delirium)
 Iatrogenic disease and social isolation
replication and sometimes mutually incompatible approaches to the 
management of each disease.
It is important to understand the difference between frailty, disability 
and multimorbidity. These concepts frequently coexist, but they are dis-
tinct. Disability indicates established loss of function while frailty indicates 
increased vulnerability to loss of function. Disability may arise from a sin-
gle pathological event (such as a stroke) in an otherwise robust individ-
ual. When frailty and disability coexist, function may deteriorate markedly 
even with minor illness, to the extent that the patient can no longer man-
age independently. Multimorbidity is also not equivalent to frailty or dis-
ability; it is possible to have several diagnoses without major impact on 
homeostatic reserve or function.
Clinical Frailty Scale*
1 Very Fit — People who are robust, active,
energetic and motivated. These people
commonly exercise regularly. They are among
the fittest for their age.
2 Well— People who have no active disease
symptoms but are less fit than category 1.
Often, they exercise or are very active
occasionally, e.g. seasonally.
3 Managing Well — People whose medical
problems are well controlled, but are not
regularly active beyond routine walking.
4 Vulnerable — While not dependent on
others for daily help, often symptoms limit
activities. A common complaint is being
"slowed up", and/or being tired during the day.
5 Mildly Frail — These people often have
more evident slowing, and need help in high
order IADLs (finances, transportation, heavy
housework, medications). Typically, mild
frailty progressively impairs shopping and
walking outside alone, meal preparation
and housework.
7 Severely Frail — Completely dependent
for personal care, from whatever cause
(physical or cognitive). Even so, they seem
stable and not at high risk of dying (within
6 months).
8 Very Severely Frail — Completely
dependent, approaching the end of life.
Typically, they could not recover even from a
minor illness.
Scoring frailty in people with dementia
The degree of frailty corresponds to the degree of dementia.
Common symptoms in mild dementia include forgetting the
details of a recent event, though still remembering the event
itself, repeating the same question/story and social
withdrawal.
In moderate dementia, recent memory is very impaired,
even though they seemingly can remember their past life
events well. They can do personal care with prompting.
In severe dementia, they cannot do personal care without
help.
* I. Canadian Study on Health & Aging, Revised 2008
2. K. Rockwood et al. A global clinical measure of fitness
and frailty in elderly people. CMAJ 2005; 173:489-495 .
© 2009. Version I .2_EN. All rights reserved Geriatric Medicine Research,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. Permission granted to copy for
research and educational purposes only.
6 Moderately Frail — People need help with
all outside activities and with keeping
house. Inside, they often have problems with
stairs and need help with bathing and might
need minimal assistance (cuing, standby) with
dressing.
An additional Clinical Frailty Scale category of 9 is often 
used to denote terminal illness. These are people with a life
expectancy of less than 6 months but not frail by other
criteria.
Fig. 34.3 The Clinical Frailty Scale.

[[p1371]]
Investigation and management    1301
34
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation aims to improve the ability of people of all ages to perform 
activities that are important to them. Rehabilitation is often needed in 
older adults for two reasons: acute illness can be associated with decline 
in functional ability and with increasing age comes increasing risk of 
chronic disabling conditions such as osteoarthritis or stroke.
The rehabilitation process
Rehabilitation is a holistic, problem-solving process focused on improv-
ing the patient’s physical, psychological and social function. It entails:
 Assessment. The nature and extent of the patient’s problems can 
be identied using the WHO ICF (see Fig. 34.4). Doctors tend to 
focus on health conditions and impairments but patients are often 
more concerned with daily activity and ability to participate in soci-
ety. Specic assessment scales, such as the Barthel Index of basic 
activities of daily living (ADL) (Box 34.4) are useful to quantify func-
tion but additional assessment is needed to determine the underly-
ing causes and interventions required.
 Goal-setting. Goals should be specic to the patient’s problems, 
should be realistic and agreed between the patient and the rehabili-
tation team.
 Intervention. This includes treatments needed to achieve goals 
and to maintain health and quality of life. Interventions may include 
hands-on treatment by therapists using a functional, task-orien-
tated approach, education, training and psychological support. The 
emphasis on the type of intervention will be individualised, according 
to the patient’s goals and abilities.
 Re-assessment. There is ongoing re-evaluation of the patient’s 
function and progress towards the goals by the rehabilitation team, 
the patient and the care-giver. Interventions may be modied as a 
result.
Multidisciplinary team working
Effective rehabilitation requires a multidisciplinary team approach; 
core members of the team are described in Box 34.5. Others may 
also be involved as needed, such as audiometrists to correct hear-
ing impairment, podiatrists for foot problems and orthoticists where 
a  prosthesis or splinting is required. Good communication and 
mutual respect are essential. Regular team meetings allow sharing 
of  assessments, agreement on rehabilitation goals and interventions, 
evaluation of progress and planning for discharge. Rehabilitation is not
when the  doctor orders ‘physiotherapy’ or ‘a home visit’ and takes no 
further role.
Rehabilitation outcomes
There is evidence that rehabilitation improves functional outcomes and 
reduces mortality in older people following acute illness like stroke and 
hip fracture. These benets accrue from complex multicomponent 
interventions, but occupational therapy to improve personal ADLs and 
individualised exercise interventions have been shown to be effective in 
improving functional outcome in their own right.
Investigation and management
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment
One of the most powerful tools in the management of older people 
is Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA) (Fig. 34.5). The term 
assessment is in fact a misnomer; CGA is not merely assessment, but a 
dynamic, iterative process of identifying and managing all factors affect-
ing the health and well-being of an older person. The process should 
begin as soon as possible following acute illness or functional decline. 
The outcome should be a coordinated, goal-driven, management plan 
that not only addresses the acute presenting problems but also seeks to 
improve the patient’s overall health and function.
Impairment
Alteration in structure or function
Pain from broken bone
Societal participation
Fulfilment of desired
social roles
Unable to attend church
Rehabilitation
Pathology: fracture neck of femur
Activity
Performance in ADL
Unable to walk
Fig. 34.4 The WHO international classication of function. Note that the various 
levels of function interact, and relationships are potentially bidirectional. For example, 
while a broken bone (impairment) may directly limit walking (activity), a maladaptive, 
antalgic gait (activity) may also impair healing (impairment). Pathology may directly and 
indirectly have an impact at all levels of function. This has implications for treatment 
and a rehabilitation strategy will need to target all levels of function. 
(ADL = activities of daily living)
34.4 How to assess basic activities of daily living using the 
Modied Barthel Index*
Independent
Needs help
Unable to do
Mobility
15
10
5 wheelchair
0
Stairs
10
5
0
Transfers (bed to 
chair)
15
10 minor help
5 major help
0
Continent bladder
10
5 occasional 
incontinence
0
Continent bowels
10
5 occasional 
incontinence
0
Grooming
5
0
0
Toilet use
10
5
0
Feeding
10
5
0
Dressing
10
5
0
Bathing
5
0
0
*The 100-point version is illustrated. If a person is completely unable to perform a task, the 
score is zero. The total score reects the degree of dependency.
34.5 Multidisciplinary team (MDT) roles
Team member
Activity assessed and promoted
Physiotherapist
Mobility, balance and upper limb function
Occupational therapist
ADL, home environment and care needs
Dietitian
Nutrition
Speech and language therapist
Communication and swallowing
Social worker
Care needs and discharge planning
Nurse
Self-care, feeding, continence, skin care
Doctor
Diagnosis and management of medical 
problems

[[p1372]]
1302    AGEING AND DISEASE
Disease
  severity
      and
  comorbidity
Mental
health
and
cognition
Support
networks
      and
    needs
   Function and
       ability
Fig. 34.5 The core elements of Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment.
The CGA approach was pioneered by Dr Marjory Warren in the 1930s. 
Her comprehensive assessment and rehabilitation of supposedly incur-
able, bedridden older people revolutionised the approach of the medical 
profession to frailty and laid the foundations for the modern specialty 
of geriatric medicine. There is now excellent evidence from systematic 
reviews that CGA reduces death or deterioration and increases the 
chances of living independently at home. Current evidence suggests that 
the process works best when delivered by a dedicated multidisciplinary 
team on a specialist inpatient unit.
Decisions about investigation and treatment
Accurate diagnosis is important at all ages but management plans in 
older adults need to be mindful of the implications of frailty, disability 
and multimorbidity. However, old age alone should not permit denying 
potentially useful treatments. Change in function should never be dis-
missed as due to age alone. For example, it would be wrong to supply a 
wheelchair to a patient struggling to mobilise, when simple tests would 
have revealed treatable osteoarthritis and angina. So how do clinicians 
decide when and how far to investigate?
Does the patient want this investigation?
Older people may have strong views about the extent of investigation 
and the treatment they wish to receive, and these should be sought 
from the outset. A key issue is to establish what the patient wants from 
investigation and treatment. Many older people do not desire prolon-
gation of life; rather they aspire to maintain physical function, gain 
relief from symptoms and preserve the ability to live independently. 
It can be useful to proactively document the person’s wishes, par-
ticularly around the interventions that are acceptable to them, so that 
difcult decisions around ceilings of care do not have to be made in 
an emergency. There can be situations where a person is unable to 
sufciently understand or communicate their circumstances to make 
informed decisions. Every effort should be made to maximise the 
patient’s ability to participate in decision-making and this may require 
input from other team members such as speech and language ther-
apy. Family or care-givers may be able to give information on views 
previously expressed by the patient or on what they believe the patient 
would have wanted under the current circumstances. However, fam-
ilies should never be made to feel responsible for difcult decisions. 
Advance directives or ‘living wills’ allow people to document their 
views and are used if they no longer are able to make or communi-
cate these decisions. Advance directives and family wishes cannot 
authorise a doctor to do anything that, in their professional opinion, is 
not clinically appropriate.
Will the investigation be feasible?
Does this patient have the capacity to tolerate the proposed inves-
tigation? For example, do they have the aerobic capacity to undergo 
bronchoscopy? Will delirium prevent them from remaining sufciently 
still to allow magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning of the brain? 
Increasing frailty, disability and comorbidity make it less likely a patient 
will be able to withstand an invasive intervention.
Will the investigation alter management?
Would the patient be t for, or benet from, the treatment that would 
be indicated if investigation proved positive? Again, frailty, disability and 
comorbidity are more important than age itself in determining this. When 
a patient with severe heart failure and a previous disabling stroke pre-
sents with a suspected cancer on chest X-ray, detailed investigation and 
staging may not be appropriate if they are not t for surgery, radical radi-
otherapy or chemotherapy. On the other hand, if the same patient pre-
sented with dysphagia, investigation of the cause would be important, 
as they might be able to tolerate endoscopic treatment to palliate an 
obstructing oesophageal lesion and allow resumption of oral diet.
Will management benet the patient?
It is important to consider whether interventions that might be consid-
ered as standard-of-care for younger people are likely to be benecial 
in older people living with frailty. For example, while guidelines may rec-
ommend tight glycaemic control in diabetes mellitus, such treatment 
may not accord with the wishes of a patient in a care home who nds 
regular blood tests distressing, or who is more worried about immediate 
 hypoglycaemia than future vascular complications.
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine
Characteristics of presenting problems in old age
The traditional single-organ, single-disease-based paradigm is rarely 
helpful in older people. Most presentations are multifactorial, with a social 
and environmental aspect, and there is rarely a single unifying diagnosis. 
The diagnostic formulation is more commonly a list of problems, some 
acute and some chronic. There are certain features of illness presenta-
tion that are particular to older patients.
Late presentation
Many people (of all ages) accept ill health as a consequence of ageing 
and may tolerate symptoms for lengthy periods before seeking medi-
cal advice. Comorbidities may also contribute to late presentation. For 
example, in a patient whose mobility is limited by stroke, angina may 
only present when coronary artery disease is advanced, as the patient 
has been unable to exercise sufciently to cause symptoms at an earlier 
stage.
Atypical presentation
The classical presentations of diseases are rarely seen in frailty. 
Infection may present with delirium and no clinical pointers to the organ 
system affected. Myocardial infarction may present as weakness and 
fatigue, without chest pain or dyspnoea. The reasons for these atypi-
cal presentations are not always easy to establish. Perception of pain 
is altered, and the pyretic response is blunted in old age. Cognitive 
impairment may limit the patient’s ability to give a history of classical 
symptoms.
Acute illness and changes in function
A change in functional ability is a common presentation of illness in frailty. 
Often labels such as ‘failure to cope’, and ‘off feet’ are used, but these 

[[p1373]]
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine    1303
34
fracture of more than 10%. If osteoporosis is diagnosed, specic drug 
therapy may be considered after informing the patient what their abso-
lute risk of a fracture is over the subsequent 5 years with and without 
treatment. In the frailest patients, such as those in institutional care, cal-
cium and vitamin D3 supplements have been shown to reduce both falls 
and fractures.
Dizziness
Dizziness is very common, affecting at least 30% of those aged over 65 
years in community surveys. It can be disabling in its own right and is 
also a risk factor for falls and functional decline.
The management of dizzy spells is complicated by the difculty that 
patients have in describing the symptoms. Important questions in the 
history include establishing timing and whether it is an acute event (sug-
gesting stroke) or a more chronic problem (such as a space-occupying 
lesion); whether continuous (for example labyrinthitis) or episodic (for 
example benign positional paroxysmal vertigo) and any provoking or 
relieving factors (for example the effect of change in posture).
There may be a predominant symptom complex (although more than 
one of these may be present).
are not diagnoses, and should not prevent a comprehensive assessment 
for underlying precipitants. It is vital to establish the person’s usual level 
of functioning and the chronicity of any change. Collateral information 
from a relative or care-giver (by telephone if necessary) can be useful.
Multiple pathology
Presentations in older patients have diverse differential diagnosis, and 
various contributory problems, both acute and chronic, can coexist. For 
example, a patient may have recurrent falls because of osteoarthritis of 
the knees, drug-induced postural hypotension and poor vision from cat-
aracts. All these factors must be addressed to prevent further falls.
Approach to presenting problems in old age
For the sake of clarity, the common presenting problems are described 
individually but, in reality, older patients often present with several pres-
entations at the same time. Syndromes such as falls, or incontinence 
represent a nal common pathway that is the result of a variety of insults. 
For most presenting problems in old age the clinician has to search for 
and treat any acute illness as well as identifying and reversing predispos-
ing risk factors. The initial approach to assessment is often less focused 
than would be typical in a younger, robust patient (Box 34.6).
Falls and collapse
A commonly used denition describes a fall as an unexpected event in 
which the person comes to rest on the ground without known loss of 
consciousness. Around 30% of people over 65 years of age fall each 
year and this gure rises to more than 40% in those aged over 80.
Important aspects in the assessment of falls include an assessment of 
the mechanism, risk factors and consequences.
Mechanism
Falls are one of the classic presentations of acute illness in frailty. The 
reduced reserves in older people’s neurological function mean that they 
are less able to maintain their balance when challenged by an acute 
illness. The history may give a clear account of an accident, for example 
a trip on uneven ground. However, a proportion of older people who 
‘fall’ have, in fact, had a syncopal episode. A collateral falls history from 
a witness is crucial as people who lose consciousness do not always 
remember having done so. As differentiating syncopal and non-syncopal 
falls is challenging, all patients who fall should have a 12-lead electrocar-
diogram and assessment for postural hypotension (see p. 1297).
Risk factors
Risk factors for falls should be considered in the history and examina-
tion (Box 34.7). If problems are identied with muscle strength, balance 
or vision, these should be investigated and treated as needed. Careful 
assessment of the patient’s gait may provide important clues to an 
underlying diagnosis (Box 34.8).
Management
Older adults who have fallen more than once in the past year and those 
who are unsteady during a ‘get up and go’ test (see p. 1297) require 
further assessment and may benet from multidisciplinary intervention. 
Evidence-based interventions to prevent or reduce recurrent falls involve 
a multifactorial, multidisciplinary approach (Box 34.9). People at low or 
moderate risk of falls benet most from balance and strength training 
delivered by physiotherapists or other suitably trained practitioners. An 
assessment of the patient’s home environment for hazards should be 
undertaken by an occupational therapist, who may also provide personal 
alarms so that the person can summon help, should they fall again. A 
medication review is required, rationalising medications that may be con-
tributing to sedation, syncope or postural hypotension.
Calculation of fracture risk using tools such as FRAX or QFracture 
should be performed and dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) bone density 
scanning considered in patients with a 10-year risk of major osteoporotic 
34.6 Screening investigations for acute illness
 Full blood count
 Urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, calcium and glucose
 Chest X-ray
 Electrocardiogram
 C-reactive protein: useful marker for infection or inammatory disease
 Procalcitonin: inammatory marker more specic to bacterial infection
 Lactate: non-specic marker of severe illness
 Urinalysis: although a positive urine dip is not synonymous with urinary tract 
infection
 Blood cultures if pyrexial
34.7 Risk factors for falls
 Muscle weakness
 History of falls
 Gait or balance abnormality
 Use of a walking aid
 Visual impairment
 Arthritis
 Impaired activities of daily living
 Depression
 Cognitive impairment
 Age over 80 years
 Psychotropic medication
34.8 Abnormal gaits and probable causes
Gait abnormality
Probable cause
Antalgic
Arthropathy
Waddling
Proximal myopathy
Stamping
Sensory neuropathy
Foot drop
Peripheral neuropathy or radiculopathy
Ataxic
Sensory neuropathy or cerebellar disease
Shufing/festination
Parkinson’s disease
Marche à petits pas
Small-vessel cerebrovascular disease
Hemiplegic
Cerebral hemisphere lesion

[[p1374]]
1304    AGEING AND DISEASE
34.9 Evidence-based interventions to reduce the risk of falls 
and fractures
 Exercise (should include components of lower limb strength and balance 
training):
Multimodal group exercise and Tai Chi are both effective
 Calcium and vitamin D supplementation:
Main evidence of effectiveness for patients in institutional care
 Home environment assessment and modication
 Medication review:
 Particularly medications with central actions such as hypnotics but also those 
with anticholinergic and hypotensive actions
 Cataract surgery:
Effective if for rst cataract
Other vision interventions ineffective and may increase falls risk
 Anti-slip shoes:
Effective only in icy conditions
 Cardiac pacemaker for carotid sinus hypersensitivity
 Pre-syncope, light-headedness, impending faint. Suggestive of 
reduced cerebral perfusion. While structural cardiac disease (aortic 
stenosis) and arrhythmia must be considered, autonomic disor-
ders such as postural hypotension are the most common cause. 
Regardless of cause, antihypertensive medications may exacerbate 
symptoms and deprescribing may help.
 Vertigo, an illusion of movement. Suggestive of (peripheral) labyrinthine 
or (central) brainstem disease. In older patients this is most commonly 
due to peripheral causes, but if any brainstem symptoms or signs are 
present, MRI of the brain is required to exclude a central lesion.
 Disequilibrium unsteadiness, off balance, veering to one side. 
Suggestive of joint or neurological disease.
 Psychological anxiety and hyperventilation can be experienced as 
dizziness, or can complicate dizziness from other causes.
As with many conditions of older age, dizziness is often multifactorial. 
For example, a patient may have an acute labyrinthitis in the context of 
small-vessel cerebrovascular disease and peripheral neuropathy. A multi-
faceted approach is needed and making small improvements in each 
contributing problem can have a large effect on symptoms and function.
Confusion (dementia and delirium)
Dementia
Dementia is a syndrome characterised by progressive loss of func-
tion across multiple cognitive domains (executive function, language, 
 memory etc.). The cognitive decits should be sufcient to cause prob-
lems in everyday activities. Where a person has cognitive impairment but 
no functional limitation this is often termed mild cognitive impairment. 
Further details on the assessment and management of dementia are 
available in Chapter 31. 
A common clinical problem is trying to establish whether an older adult 
presenting with confusion has pre-existing, and potentially undiagnosed 
cognitive decline, or a more acute change that may suggest a delirium. To 
complicate the assessment, dementia and delirium commonly coexist. 
Cognitive screening of the patient can provide useful information and 
is described in Chapter 31. However, direct assessment of the patient 
may not always be possible, particularly if the person is medically unwell. 
Collateral information from someone that knows the person well, often 
termed an informant, can be useful. Figure 34.6 suggests a short, struc-
tured approach to the informant interview to assess for pre-existing 
cognitive disorders.
Delirium
Delirium is a syndrome characterised by acute cognitive impairment, 
precipitated by an insult such as illness or surgery. Delirium is common, 
affecting around 25% of all hospital inpatients; 50% following hip frac-
ture and 75% in intensive care. Delirium is associated with poor out-
comes, including increased length of hospital stay, institutionalisation 
and mortality. Although traditionally considered a transient phenomenon, 
longer-lasting effects of delirium are described. In particular, delirium is a 
powerful risk factor for subsequent dementia and there is considerable 
overlap between ‘persistent delirium’ and dementia. The most important 
risk factors for delirium are frailty, dementia and a previous history of 
delirium. Other modiable and non-modiable risk factors are shown in 
(Box 34.10).
Presentation
Delirium presents as an acute change (hours to days) in cognition that 
often uctuates over time. Collateral information is crucial to assess 
whether impaired cognition in the context of illness represents an acute 
change (delirium) or is a more chronic phenomenon (more likely demen-
tia). The dening neuropsychological feature of delirium is a decit in 
attention, although this can be accompanied by problems in other cog-
nitive domains. Based on psychomotor patterns, subtypes of delirium 
are described. Patients with hyperactive delirium are often agitated and 
restless, whereas hypoactive delirium can present as lethargy and seda-
tion. A mixed picture with periods of hyper- and hypoactivity is common. 
Hypoactive delirium is more common in frailty and can be easily missed 
unless specically looked for.
Clinical assessment
In order to manage delirium effectively, the rst step is to make a diagno-
sis. Screening tools such as the 4AT (Box 34.11) can be used to detect 
delirium and differentiate it from dementia and these should be applied to 
all older patients admitted to hospital. Once a diagnosis of delirium has 
been established, attempts should be made to identify reversible pre-
cipitating factors, especially acute illness. An accurate drug and alcohol 
history is required with a focus on any drugs recently started or stopped. 
Full physical assessment may be difcult, especially in hyperactive delir-
ium if the person resists examination. Assessment for localising neuro-
logical signs and stigmata of head injury are essential as these would 
suggest the need for neuroimaging.
Management
The best management of delirium is to prevent it happening. The land-
mark studies of the Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP) demonstrated 
that a package of non-pharmacological interventions can reduce the 
incidence of delirium and its severity (see Box 34.10).
Once a diagnosis of delirium is established, the priority is to treat the 
underlying precipitating factors, recognising that these may be multiple. 
Life-threatening causes should be assessed for immediately, including 
sepsis, drug and alcohol intoxication or withdrawal, hypoglycaemia 
and other metabolic disorders. This should be followed by a systematic 
34.10 Multicomponent interventions to prevent delirium
Risk factor
Intervention
Bowel and bladder
Assess and treat constipation, avoid 
urinary catheters
Dehydration
Regular assessment and prompting for 
uids and food
Environmental
Orientation and cognitive stimulation 
activities; limit ward moves
Medications
Medication review and stopping or 
reducing culprit drugs
Sleep disturbance
Noise reduction (ear plugs), non-
pharmacological sleeping aids
Sensory impairment
Screen for visual and hearing 
impairments, adaptive equipment (large-
text, hearing aids)

[[p1375]]
Presenting problems in geriatric medicine    1305
34
approach to look for and treat any other potentially reversible precipi-
tants, remembering that in frailty, seemingly trivial factors such as consti-
pation or a urinary catheter may be sufcient to cause or prolong delirium. 
Interventions that may promote recovery from delirium are similar to those 
that prevent delirium and include an environment that permits orienta-
tion (clocks, windows) and minimises external stimuli. Management also 
includes prevention of complications by attending to hydration, nutrition 
and early mobilisation. The role of drug therapy in delirium is controver-
sial and most guidelines recommend non- pharmacological strategies as 
rst line. However, in a patient with psychotic features who is extremely 
distressed or where safety is at risk, a trial of low-dose antipsychotic 
medication may be indicated.
Continence
Both urinary and faecal incontinence are common in older age but they 
are not an inevitable consequence of ageing. These conditions are 
under-diagnosed and often only come to medical attention when suf-
ciently severe to cause a social or hygiene problem. Many older adults 
may not volunteer problems with continence due to embarrassment or 
wrongly attributing the symptoms as a natural consequence of ageing. 
Sensitive enquiry into bladder and bowel health should be a routine part 
of the medical history for this patient group. In the context of frailty, new 
incontinence can be a sign of acute illness and a sudden change in con-
tinence always demands thorough assessment.
Treatment should always begin with lifestyle changes and behavioural 
approaches (Fig. 34.7). Containment strategies, including catheters and 
pads, should never be viewed as rst-line or denitive management, but 
may be required as a nal resort if the perineal skin is at risk of break-
down or quality of life is affected. True incontinence is not synonymous 
with ‘functional’ incontinence, where the problem is an inability to access 
a toilet in time rather than an issue with the mechanics of excretion.
Bladder health
Urinary incontinence is dened as the involuntary loss of urine. It occurs 
in all age groups but is especially common in older age and frailty, with 
up to 80% of care-home residents being incontinent of urine. The ini-
tial assessment should seek to identify and address contributory fac-
tors and some of these may be easily remedied, for example infection, 
34.11 How to make a diagnosis of delirium: the 4A Test (4AT)
1 Alertness
This includes patients who may be markedly drowsy (e.g. difcult to rouse and/or 
obviously sleepy during assessment) or agitated/hyperactive. Observe the patient. 
If asleep, attempt to wake with speech or gentle touch on shoulder. Ask the patient 
to state their name and address to assist rating:
Normal (fully alert and not agitated, throughout 
assessment)
0
Mild sleepiness for < 10 secs after waking, then 
normal
0
2 Four-question abbreviated mental test (AMT4)
Ask the patient their age, date of birth, the place where they are (name of the 
hospital or building), the current year:
No mistakes
0
1 mistake
1
≥ 2 mistakes/untestable
2
3 Attention
Say to the patient: ‘Please tell me the months of the year in backwards order, 
starting at December.’ To assist initial understanding, one prompt of ‘What is the 
month before December?’ is permitted:
Achieves ≥ 7 months correctly
0
Starts but scores < 7 months/refuses to start
1
Untestable (cannot start because unwell, drowsy, 
inattentive)
2
4 Acute change or uctuating course
Evidence of signicant change or uctuation in: alertness, cognition, other mental 
function (e.g. paranoia, hallucinations) arising over the last 2 weeks and still 
evident in last 24 hrs:
No
0
Yes
4
Total 4AT score (maximum possible score 12)
 ≥ 4: possible delirium ± cognitive impairment
 1–3: possible cognitive impairment
 0: delirium or severe cognitive impairment unlikely (but delirium still possible if 
information in 4 incomplete)
1. Problems with judgement (e.g., problems making decisions, bad financial
    decisions, problems with thinking)
Remember, “Yes, a change” indicates that there has been a change in the
last several years caused by cognitive (thinking and memory) problems
YES,
A change
NO,
No change
N/A,
Don’t know
Patient ID#:
CS ID#:
Date:
AD8 Dementia Screening Interview
2. Less interest in hobbies/activities
3. Repeats the same thing over and over (questions, stories or statements)
4. Trouble learning how to use a tool, appliance, or gadget (e.g., VCR,
    computer, microwave, remote control)
5. Forgets correct month or year
7. Trouble remembering appointments
6. Trouble handling complicated financial affairs (e.g., balancing chequebook,
    income taxes, paying bills)
8. Daily problems with thinking and/or memory
TOTAL AD8 SCORE
Fig. 34.6 Eight-item informant interview to differentiate ageing and dementia (AD8). The AD8 is a screening test for the early cognitive changes that are common to 
many forms of dementia (Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal, vascular dementia). The test is best used as part of an interview with an informant, e.g. spouse, care-giver. A 
score of 2 or more ‘Yes’ answers suggests that a cognitive syndrome is likely. From Galvin JE, et al. The AD8: A brief informant interview to detect dementia. Neurology 2005; 
65:559–564. Copyright © 2005 Washington University, St Louis, Missouri. All Rights Reserved.

[[p1376]]
1306    AGEING AND DISEASE
Active case finding
Urinary incontinence
Overflow
(residual
volume > 100 mL)
Surgical relief of
obstruction
(prostatectomy)
Intermittent
catheterisation
if no obstruction
Stress
Pelvic floor
muscle training
Surgical
intervention if
unsuccessful
If still incontinent:
 Establish the pattern of urinary
   loss (use a three-day diary)
 Measure residual urine volume
  (by ultrasound)
 Assess for vaginal prolapse and
  atrophic vaginitis (women)
 Assess prostate by rectal
 examination (men)
Address contributory factors:
 UTI
 Severe constipation
 Diuretics
 Hyperglycaemia
 Hypercalcaemia
 Restricted mobility
Urge
Bladder
retraining
Antimuscarinic
drugs
(solifenacin,
tolterodine)
Life style modification for all
incontinence:
 Weight loss if obese
 Reduce caffeine consumption
 Smoking cessasion
 Regular planned toileting
   (prompted toileting in dementia)
Fig. 34.7 Assessment and management of urinary incontinence in old age.
See also Box 18.52. (UTI = urinary tract infection). Based on European Association 
ofUrology Guidelines 2018.
constipation, pelvic prolapse. The type of incontinence should be ascer-
tained as this will guide subsequent treatment.
 Urgency incontinence is usually due to detrusor over-activity and 
results in urgency and frequency. Bladder retraining is the rst-line 
intervention, occasionally antimuscarinic medications are needed 
but these should be used with caution in frailty and cognitive 
impairment.
 Stress incontinence is due to weakness of the pelvic oor muscles, 
which allows leakage of urine when intra-abdominal pressure rises, 
such as on coughing. It may be compounded by atrophic vagini-
tis, associated with oestrogen deciency in old age, which can be 
treated with oestrogen pessaries.
 Overow incontinence is demonstrated by a signicant post-void 
residual on bladder scanning. It is most commonly seen in older 
men with prostatic enlargement, which obstructs bladder outow.
 Mixed incontinence more than one continence issue may be 
 present, most commonly urgency and stress in females and  
overow and urgency in males.
Bowel health
Both constipation and faecal incontinence are common in older age and 
often coexist. Problems with bowel habit are often multifactorial and may 
result from cognitive factors, local bowel factors and external factors 
such as immobility. Assessment should include enquiring about diet, 
medication, previous surgery and lifelong bowel habit. The examination 
should include an anorectal assessment looking for prolapse, anal tone 
and faecal loading.
In patients with severe stroke disease or dementia, treatment may be 
difcult as cortical inhibitory signals are lost. A timed/prompted toileting 
programme may help.
Infection in the older adult
Infection is one of the commonest reasons for older adults to seek med-
ical attention. All the considerations around disease in older age and 
frailty that have been discussed in this chapter remain pertinent in rela-
tion to infection – non-specic presentations, challenges of comorbidity, 
competing risks and benets of interventions. In fact, infection could be 
considered an exemplar of the need for an adapted management strat-
egy in older age.
Ageing and the immune system
Older adults, particular those living with frailty, face an increased risk and 
severity of infection. Although absolute numbers of immune cells do not 
change substantially with age, immune function decreases leading to 
less efcient responses of both the innate and adaptive immune sys-
tems, a phenomenon which is sometimes referred to as immunosenes-
cence. Age-related changes in anatomy and physiology also occur that 
predispose to infection in certain sites. For example, in the respiratory 
system, blunting of cough reex, impaired mucociliary clearance and 
decreased respiratory muscle strength with subsequent hypoventilation, 
increase the risk of pulmonary infection. Age-related changes in bladder 
function and thinning of the skin may partly explain the high prevalence of 
infection in these sites with older age. Factors that are common in older 
adults but not part of biological ageing are also important. These include, 
multiple morbidity, polypharmacy including use of antibiotics and immu-
nosuppressants, and environmental exposures to pathogens.
Assessment
The diagnosis of infection in older age is challenging as symptoms and 
signs are often atypical and non-specic. Frailty syndromes of delirium and 
functional decline are common while ‘classical’ features of the disease such 
as pyrexia may be absent. Older adults have a lower baseline temperature 
and blunted or absent fever response to infection. Thus, a core temper-
ature of greater than 38°C is likely to be indicative of important disease. 
Unfortunately, the temperature response is non-specic in older adults and 
non-infective causes such as myocardial infarction and deep vein throm-
bosis need to be considered. The commonest infections seen in older age 
are respiratory, urinary and skin. However, with frailty, atypical infections 
and infections in atypical sites are often seen. Thus, the assessment of the 
unwell older adult always needs to consider infection and physical exami-
nation needs to be comprehensive including pressure areas, the oral cavity 
and intravenous cannulation sites. Consideration of the patient’s environ-
ment may offer clues to the underlying pathogen. The patient from a care 
home or who has had a prolonged hospital admission will be at risk from 
differing causative pathogens to the robust community-dwelling older adult.
Management
Treating infection in the older adult poses further challenges. The pharm-
acokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antibiotics change with ageing 
and older adults are at greater risk of adverse drug reactions. Given the 

[[p1377]]
Prescribing and deprescribing    1307
34
difculty of making an initial diagnosis, the use of empirical broad-spec-
trum antibiotics may seem intuitive, but this approach is strongly dis-
couraged not least due to the risks of Clostridioides difcile infection and 
promoting antibiotic-resistant strains. If the patient is not septic or rapidly 
deteriorating there should be time for investigations, including relevant 
cultures, before initiating antibiotic therapy. In liaison with the microbi-
ology laboratory the prescribed therapy can be rationalised as results 
become available.
The adage ‘prevention is better than cure’ is particularly relevant in 
older age. Vaccination programmes for seasonal inuenza, pneumococ-
cus and herpes zoster can all reduce incidence, severity or complica-
tions from the relevant infections. Health-care associated infection is a 
particular concern in frailty and all staff working with frail older adults 
need to be mindful of infection control policies including meticulous hand 
washing between patient encounters. Without these measures, hospital 
ward and institutional care settings are at risk of outbreaks of diseases 
such as norovirus, scabies, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
and more recently COVID-19 (Box 34.12).
Prescribing and deprescribing
The multimorbidity that accompanies ageing often leads to poly-
pharmacy (Box 34.13 and see Box 2.23). This has been dened as the 
use of four or more drugs, and is associated with adverse outcomes 
including falls, hospitalisation and increased risk of death. While some 
of these outcomes are caused by drug–drug interactions and adverse 
effects, others are due to the underlying problems for which the drugs 
were prescribed in the rst place.
An important component of any older adult assessment is a critical 
review of medications. This group can be the victim of well-intentioned, 
but ultimately harmful, prescribing cascades where new medications 
are introduced to combat effects of other medications and these new 
medications in turn have adverse effects that result in further pre-
scribing. Of course, for many older people, taking multiple drugs is 
entirely appropriate, as such therapy is required to treat multiple dis-
eases. Getting the right balance between over- and undertreatment is a 
dynamic process and requires frequent, careful exploration of the per-
son’s treatment goals.
Adverse drug reactions
The more drugs that are taken, the greater the risk of an adverse drug 
reaction (ADR) (Box 34.14). ADRs are the cause of around 5% of all 
hospital admissions but account for up to 20% of admissions in those 
aged over 65. The risks associated with polypharmacy are compounded 
by age-related changes in pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic fac-
tors as described in Chapter 2. Older people are especially sensitive to 
drugs that can cause postural hypotension or volume depletion and cen-
trally acting drugs can often cause or exacerbate cognitive syndromes. 
However, the clinical presentations of ADRs are diverse, so for any pre-
senting problem in old age the possibility that the patient’s medication 
is a contributory factor should always be considered. Prescribers must 
also be mindful of the burden of taking medications at various times, with 
need for monitoring, lifestyle restrictions and associated expense. It is 
perhaps not surprising that non-adherence to drug therapy rises with the 
number of drugs prescribed.
Appropriate prescribing and deprescribing
The key to appropriate prescribing is rst to ensure that medications 
are started only for reasons that accord with the patient’s goals and 
wishes. Thoughtless adherence to specialist guidelines quickly leads 
to poly pharmacy that may be inappropriate. Some medications (such 
as chronic use of non-steroidal anti-inammatory medications) are best 
avoided in older people because of the high risk of ADR. Other medica-
tions, such oral bisphosphonates, lack evidence of efcacy in very old 
people, who may not live for long enough to derive benet.
Deprescribing is as important as prescribing in older people. Regular 
review of medications should be undertaken to ensure that medications 
are still required, to establish that they are still working, to check that they 
are not causing side-effects, and to ascertain whether the patient is actu-
ally taking them. The patient or care-giver should be asked to bring all 
34.12 COVID-19 disease and older adults
Non-specic signs and symptoms
 Fever, breathlessness often absent
 Delirium common and sometimes severe
 Non-pulmonary complications common (thrombosis, gastrointestinal  
upset)
Variation in outcomes
 Asymptomatic carriage is common, this has implications for infection  
control
 High morbidity and mortality
 Survivors at risk of functional decline and often require extensive  
rehabilitation
 Frailty is associated with poor outcomes, but even people with advanced 
frailtycan survive disease
 Frailty assessment can inform management decisions but should not  
be the only consideration
34.13 Factors leading to polypharmacy in old age
 Multiple pathology
 Poor patient education
 Lack of routine review of all medications
 Patient expectations of prescribing
 Over-use of drug interventions by doctors
 Attendance at multiple specialist clinics
 Poor communication between specialists
34.14 Common adverse drug reactions in old age
Drug class
Adverse reaction
NSAIDs
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Renal impairment
Diuretics
Renal impairment, electrolyte 
disturbance
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Warfarin
Anticoagulants
Bleeding (any site)
ACE inhibitors
Renal impairment
Hypotension, postural hypotension
β-blockers
Bradycardia, heart block
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Opiates
Vomiting
Urinary retention, constipation
Antidepressants
Hyponatraemia (SSRIs)
Hypotension, postural hypotension
Benzodiazepines
Delirium
Falls
Anticholinergics
Delirium
Urinary retention, constipation
(ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs;  
SSRIs = selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors)

[[p1378]]
1308    AGEING AND DISEASE
34.15 Other presenting problems in old age
 Hypothermia
p. 252
 Dizziness and blackouts
p. 184
 Delirium
p. 213
 Infection
pp. 264 and 272
 COVID-19
p. 296
 Fluid balance problems
p. 627
 Prostatic hypertrophy
p. 609
 Heart failure
p. 406
 Atrial brillation
p. 414
 Hypertension
p. 449
 Valvular heart disease
p. 460
 Under-nutrition
p. 773
 Diabetes mellitus
p. 718
 Thyroid disease
p. 658
 Anaemia
p. 962
 Painful joints
p. 1000
 Bone disease and fracture
pp. 1002 and 1052
 Stroke
p. 1201
 Dementia
p. 1246
Further information
Websites
americangeriatrics.org American Geriatrics Society: education, careers vignettes 
from geriatricians, advocacy and clinical guidelines
bgs.org.uk British Geriatrics Society: useful publications on management of 
common problems in older people and links to other relevant websites
eugms.org European Union Geriatric Medicine Society: research, position papers 
and educational resources
iagg.info International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics: promoting care 
of older people and the science of gerontology globally; research, policy and 
educational resources
cochrane.org Cochrane review CD006211 Comprehensive geriatric assessment 
for older adults admitted to hospital; CD007146 Interventions for preventing 
falls in older people living in the community
profane.co Prevention of Falls Network Earth: focuses on the prevention of falls 
and improvement of postural stability in older people
shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp Fracture risk calculator: can be used to calculate risk in 
several populations. Includes option to calculate with or without measurement 
of hip bone mineral density
Qfracture.org An online calculator to assess risk of osteoporotic fracture 
(developed and validated for use in the UK)
geri-em.com/ and gempodcast.com/ These North American websites contains 
educational resources, training and blogs on the practice of acute geriatric 
medicine.
cgem.ed.ac.uk/research/rheumatological/ORBCalculator/ ORB calculator. 
Calculates the absolute benet of different osteoporosis treatments in 
preventing fractures.
medication for review rather than the doctor relying on previous records. 
Such reviews should take place regularly, not just at a point of crisis such 
as after a fall or on hospital admission. Deprescribing of medications that 
have been taken for years needs to be done in a controlled manner, with 
dose reduction to ensure that rebound symptoms or withdrawal effects 
do not occur.
There are tools to assist with rational prescribing choices in older 
adults. The American Geriatrics Society Beer’s criteria is an expert gen-
erated list of medications that should be avoided or used with caution in 
old age. A similar European initiative is STOPP (Screening Tool of Older 
Person’s Prescriptions) and START (Screening Tool to Alert to Right 
Treatment), which recognises that good prescribing in old age should 
ensure effective treatments are prioritised as well as discontinuing those 
medications that may be of limited benet or potential harm.
Other problems in old age
A vast range of other presenting problems in older people present 
to many medical specialties. End-of-life care is an important facet of 
clinical practice in old age and the general principles of this are dis-
cussed in Chapter 8. Relevant sections in other chapters are shown in 
Box 34.15.
Within each chapter, ‘In Old Age’ boxes highlight the areas in which 
presentation or management differs from that in younger individuals.

[[p1379]]
Multiple Choice Questions
 34.1. An 85-year-old retired professor attends the clinic. His family 
describe 2 years of worsening memory. He repeats stories, is 
no longer able to pay bills and becomes lost when going to the 
shops. On examination he is alert and chatty, with no localising 
neurology. You perform a Montreal Cognitive Assessment and 
he scores 27/30 (normal range 26–30). What is the most likely 
diagnosis?
 
A. Mild cognitive impairment
 
B. Dementia
 
C. Delirium
 
D. Depressive pseudo-dementia
 
E. Subdural haematoma
Answer: B.
There is a clear description of progressive cognitive decline causing 
functional problems, these are the main features of dementia. His ‘nor-
mal’ cognitive score does not alter the likely diagnosis; the test used is 
a screening test and false negatives are often seen in highly educated 
people. Mild cognitive impairment implies cognitive change with no func-
tional consequence. The presentation and symptom duration would not 
be in keeping with delirium or pseudo-dementia. Subdural haematoma is 
unlikely with no neurological signs.
 34.2. A 98-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with pneumonia that 
presents as delirium, falls and new incontinence in the context of 
complex morbidity and polypharmacy. Which of these models of 
care is likely to give the best outcomes?
 
A.  Admission to dedicated geriatric medicine ward with multidis-
ciplinary team
 
B. Admission to critical care ward with multidisciplinary team
 
C.  Admission to respiratory ward with consult from geriatric 
medicine
 
D. Discharge home with outpatient follow-up
 
E. Discharge to care home
Answer: A.
This woman has evidence of frailty and will benet from Comprehensive 
Geriatric Assessment (CGA). Evidence suggests that CGA works best 
when delivered in a dedicated space with a multidisciplinary team. Other 
models of CGA such as peripatetic or outpatient clinic consultations are 
less effective. It is unlikely she would tolerate or benet from organ sup-
port and so critical care is not appropriate. She is too unwell to immedi-
ately discharge home.
 34.3. A 99-year-old woman presents with an acute coronary syndrome 
in the context of frailty. She makes a good recovery and 
echocardiogram suggests preserved left ventricular function, 
but she continues to experience angina symptoms on exertion. 
Random blood glucose is high (11.0  mmol/L, 198  mg/dL) and 
blood pressure is 172/88 mmHg. She wishes to avoid taking 
tablets. Which of these medications would you want to prioritise?
 
A. Insulin
 
B. ACE-inhibitor
 
C. Statin
 
D. Alpha-blocker
 
E. Amlodipine
Answer: E.
In an older adult with frailty, prescribing decisions may not always 
follow guideline recommendations for younger patients. A statin and 
ACE-inhibitor have prognostic benets that may not be realised in this 
patient. She wants to limit her medication burden and amlodipine offers 
antianginal and antihypertensive effects. Alpha-blockers offer only antihy-
pertensive action and are poorly tolerated in older adults. A diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus has not been made and so there is no role for insulin.
 34.4. An 88-year-old man slips on ice and fractures his distal right 
radius. He is right-hand dominant. He is usually mobile with 
a stick. He requires joint immobilisation and is admitted for a 
period of geriatric assessment. On assessment of activity of daily 
living, he struggles to dress due to his fracture. The occupational 
therapist gives him a tool to assist with buttons and zips. At 
which level of the World Health Organization International 
Classication of Function (WHO ICF) is this intervention directed?
 
A. Activity
 
B. Disability
 
C. Handicap
 
D. Impairment
 
E. Quality of life
Answer: A.
In the WHO ICF, Activity (A) describes the execution of a task or action 
by an individual. The term disability (B) is now taken as a general term for 
impairments, activity limitations and participation restrictions. The term 
handicap (C) is no longer used and has been replaced by societal partic-
ipation. Impairment (D) refers to problems in body structure and function. 
Quality of life is not part of the WHO ICF.
 34.5. A usually well 84-year-old man presents with new-onset urinary 
incontinence. He has little past medical history but has been 
taking non-steroidal anti-inammatories for worsening back pains 
over the last weeks. On initial physiotherapy assessment he is 
found to have difculty walking. What is the most appropriate 
management of his incontinence?
 
A. Further physiotherapy to improve back pain and mobility
 
B. Pelvic oor muscle training
 
C.  Prescription of alpha-blockers for presumed prostatic 
hypertrophy
 
D. MRI scanning of spinal cord
 
E. Empirical antibiotics pending urine culture
Answer: D.
New-onset incontinence should not be accepted as a natural con-
sequence of ageing. In this case the backpain and change in mobility 
are suggestive of potential spinal cord compression and demand imme-
diate imaging. Physiotherapy, screening for urinary tract infection and 
assessing for prostatic hypertrophy could all be useful once spinal cord 
compression is excluded. Pelvic oor training has greatest benet in 
women with stress incontinence.

[[p1380]]
Laboratory reference ranges
35
SJ Jenks
Notes on the international system of units (SI units) 1310
Laboratory reference ranges in adults 1310
Urea and electrolytes in venous blood 1310
Analytes in arterial blood 1310
Hormones in venous blood 1311
Other common analytes in venous blood 1312
Common analytes in urine 1313
Analytes in cerebrospinal uid (CSF) 1313
Analytes in faeces 1313
Haematological values 1314
Laboratory reference ranges in childhood and adolescence 1315
Laboratory reference ranges in pregnancy 1316

[[p1381]]
1310    Laboratory reference ranges
Notes on the international system of  
units (SI units)
Système International (SI) units are a specic subset of the metre–
kilogram–second system of units and were agreed on as the everyday 
currency for commercial and scientic work in 1960, following a series 
of international conferences organised by the International Bureau of 
Weights and Measures. SI units have been adopted widely in clinical 
laboratories but non-SI units are still used in many countries. For that rea-
son, values in both units are given for common measurements through-
out this textbook and commonly used non-SI units are shown in this 
chapter. The SI unit system is, however, recommended.
Examples of basic SI units
Length
metre (m)
Mass
kilogram (kg)
Amount of substance
mole (mol)
Energy
joule (J)
Pressure
pascal (Pa)
Volume
The basic SI unit of volume is the cubic metre (1000 litres). 
For convenience, however, the litre (L) is used as the unit of 
volume in laboratory work.
Examples of decimal multiples and submultiples of SI units
Factor
Name
Prex
106
mega-
M
103
kilo-
k
10 1
deci-
d
10 2
centi-
c
10 3
milli-
m
10 6
micro-
µ
10 9
nano-
n
10 12
pico-
p
10 15
femto-
f
Exceptions to the use of SI units
By convention, blood pressure is excluded from the SI unit system and is 
measured in mmHg (millimetres of mercury) rather than pascals.
Mass concentrations such as g/L and µg/L are used in preference to 
molar concentrations for all protein measurements and for substances 
that do not have a sufciently well dened composition.
Some enzymes and hormones are measured by ‘bioassay’, in which 
the activity in the sample is compared with the activity (rather than the 
mass) of a standard sample that is provided from a central source. For 
these assays, results are given in standardised ‘units’ (U/L), or ‘interna-
tional units’ (IU/L), which depend on the activity in the standard sample 
and may not be readily converted to mass units.
Laboratory reference ranges in adults
Reference ranges are largely those used in the Departments of Clinical 
Biochemistry and Haematology, Lothian Health University Hospitals 
Division, Edinburgh, UK. Values are shown in both SI units and, where 
appropriate, non-SI units. Many reference ranges vary between labo-
ratories, depending on the assay method used and on other factors; 
this is especially the case for enzyme assays. Wherever possible an 
internationally agreed standard reference material is used to calibrate 
assays and reference ranges and assay nomenclature are standardised 
between laboratories. The origin of reference ranges and the interpreta-
tion of ‘abnormal’ results are discussed on page 3. No details are given 
here of the collection requirements, which may be critical to obtaining 
a meaningful result. Unless otherwise stated, reference ranges shown 
apply to adults; values in children may be different.
Many analytes can be measured in either serum (the supernatant of 
clotted blood) or plasma (the supernatant of anticoagulated blood). A 
specic requirement for one or the other may depend on a kit manufact-
urer’s recommendations. In other instances, the distinction is critical. 
An example is brinogen, where plasma is required, since brinogen is 
largely absent from serum. In contrast, serum is required for electrophor-
esis to detect paraproteins because brinogen migrates as a discrete 
band in the zone of interest.
35.1 Urea and electrolytes in venous blood
Analysis
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Sodium
135–145 mmol/L
135–145 mEq/L
Potassium*
3.6–5.0 mmol/L
3.6–5.0 mEq/L
Chloride
95–107 mmol/L
95–107 mEq/L
Urea
2.5–6.6 mmol/L
15–40 mg/dL
Creatinine
Male
64–111 µmol/L
0.72–1.26 mg/dL
Female
50–98 µmol/L
0.57–1.11 mg/dL
*Serum values are, on average, 0.3 mmol/L higher than plasma values.
35.2 Analytes in arterial blood
Analysis
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Bicarbonate
21–29 mmol/L
21–29 mEq/L
Hydrogen ion
37–45 nmol/L
pH 7.35–7.43
PaCO2
4.5–6.0 kPa
34–45 mmHg
PaO2
12–15 kPa
90–113 mmHg
Oxygen saturation
> 97%

[[p1382]]
35
L   i dul     1311
35.3 Hormones in venous blood
Hormone
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) (plasma)
1.5–13.9 pmol/L (0700–1000 hrs)
63 ng/L
Aldosterone
Supine (at least 30 mins)
30–440 pmol/L
1.09–15.9 ng/dL
Erect (at least 1 hr)
110–860 pmol/L
3.97–31.0 ng/dL
Cortisol
Dynamic tests are required – see Box 20.51
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)
< 100 RU/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Male
1.0–10.0 IU/L
–
Female
3.0–10.0 IU/L (early follicular)
–
> 30 IU/L (post-menopausal)
Gastrin (plasma, fasting)
< 40 pmol/L
< 83 pg/mL
Growth hormone (GH)
Dynamic tests are usually required – see Box 20.54
< 0.5 µg/L excludes acromegaly (if insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in 
reference range)
> 6 µg/L excludes GH deciency
< 2 mIU/L
> 18 mIU/L
Insulin
Highly variable and interpretable only in relation to plasma glucose and body habitus
Luteinising hormone (LH)
Male
1.0–9.0 IU/L
–
Female
2.0–9.0 IU/L (early follicular)
–
> 20 IU/L (post-menopausal)
17β-Oestradiol
Male
< 160 pmol/L
< 43 pg/mL
Female
75–140 pmol/L (early follicular)
20–38 pg/mL
< 150 pmol/L (post-menopausal)
< 41 pg/mL
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
1.6–6.9 pmol/L
16–69 pg/mL
Progesterone (in luteal phase in women)
Consistent with ovulation
> 30 nmol/L
> 9.3 ng/mL
Probable ovulatory cycle
15–30 nmol/L
4.7–9.3 ng/mL
Anovulatory cycle
< 10 nmol/L
< 3 ng/mL
Prolactin (PRL)
60–500 mIU/L
2.8–23.5 ng/mL
Renin concentration
Supine (at least 30 mins)
5–40 mIU/L
–
Sitting (at least 15 mins)
5–45 mIU/L
–
Erect (at least 1 hr)
16–63 mIU/L
–
Testosterone
Male
10–38 nmol/L
290–1090 ng/dL
Female
0.3–1.9 nmol/L
10–90 ng/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
0.2–4.5 mIU/L
–
Thyroxine (free), (free T4)
9–21 pmol/L
0.7–1.63 ng/dL
Triiodothyronine (free), (free T3)
2.6–6.2 pmol/L
0.16–0.4 ng/dL
Vitamin D (25(OH)D)
Normal
> 50 nmol/L
> 20 ng/mL
Insufciency
25–50 nmol/L
10–20 ng/ml
Deciency
< 25 nmol/L
< 10 ng/mL
Notes
 
1. A number of hormones are unstable and collection details are critical to obtaining a meaningful result. Refer to local laboratory handbook.
 
2.  Values in the table are only a guideline; hormone levels can often be meaningfully understood only in relation to factors such as gender, age, time of day, pubertal status, 
stage of the menstrual cycle, pregnancy and menopausal status.
 
3. Vitamin D levels vary seasonally in many parts of the world, with levels being higher in the summer months in most people due to increased exposure to solar UV-B rays.
 
4.  Reference ranges are usually dependent on the method used for analysis and frequently differ between laboratories. Non-SI units also differ; those shown here are 
amongst those most widely used. Readers are encouraged to consult their local laboratory for non-SI units for individual analytes and their respective reference ranges.
(RU = relative units. Relative units are used since at the present time there is no agreed international standard for the measurement of FGF-23.)

[[p1383]]
1312    Laboratory reference ranges
35.4 Other common analytes in venous blood
Analyte
Reference range
α1-antitrypsin
1.1–2.1 g/L
110–210 mg/dL
Alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT)
10–50 U/L
–
Albumin
35–50 g/L
3.5–5.0 g/dL
Alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP)
40–125 U/L
–
Amylase
< 100 U/L
Aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST)
10–45 U/L
–
Bile acids (fasting)
< 14 µmol/L
Bilirubin (total)
3–21 µmol/L
0.18–1.23 mg/dL
Caeruloplasmin
0.2–0.47 g/L
20–47 mg/dL
Calcium (total)
2.1–2.6 mmol/L
4.2–5.2 mEq/L
or 8.5–10.5 mg/dL
Carboxyhaemoglobin
0.1–3.0%
Levels of up to 8% may be 
found in heavy smokers
Cholesterol (total)
Ideal level varies according to cardiovascular risk 
(see p. 637)
High-density lipoprotein 
(HDL)-cholesterol
Ideal level varies according to cardiovascular risk, so 
reference ranges can be misleading. According to 
the National Cholesterol Education Programme Adult 
Treatment Panel III (ATPIII), a low HDL-cholesterol is 
< 1.0 mmol/L (< 40 mg/dL)
Complement
C3
C4
Total haemolytic 
complement
0.81–1.57 g/L
0.13–1.39 g/L
0.086–0.410 g/L
Copper
10–22 µmol/L
64–140 µg/dL
C-reactive protein (CRP) < 5 mg/L
Highly sensitive CRP assays also exist that measure 
lower values and may be useful in estimating 
cardiovascular risk
Creatine kinase (CK; 
total)*
Male
Female
55–170 U/L
30–135 U/L
Creatine kinase MB 
isoenzyme
< 6% of total CK
Ethanol
Not normally  
detectable
Marked intoxication
Stupor
Coma
65–87 mmol/L
87–109 mmol/L
> 109 mmol/L
300–400 mg/dL
400–500 mg/dL
> 500 mg/dL
γ-glutamyl transferase 
(GGT)
Male 10–55 U/L
Female 5–35 U/L
Glucose (fasting)
3.6–5.8 mmol/L
65–104 mg/dL
See Box 21.2 for denitions of impaired glucose 
tolerance and diabetes mellitus, and Box 21.14 for 
denition of hypoglycaemia
Analyte
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Glycated haemoglobin 
(HbA1)
4.0–6.0%
20–42 mmol/mol Hb
See Box 21.2 for diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
Immunoglobulins (Ig)
IgA
0.8–4.5 g/L
–
IgE
0–250 kU/L
–
IgG
6.0–15.0 g/L
–
IgM
0.35–2.90 g/L
–
Lactate
0.6–2.4 mmol/L
5.4–21.6 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH; total)
125–220 U/L
–
Lead
< 0.5 µmol/L
< 10 µg/dL
Magnesium
0.75–1.0 mmol/L
1.5–2.0 mEq/L
or 1.82–2.43 mg/dL
Osmolality
280–296 mOsmol/kg
–
Osmolarity
280–296 mOsmol/L
–
Phosphate (fasting)
0.8–1.4 mmol/L
2.48–4.34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
< 0.1 ug/L (indicates 
absence of bacterial 
infection)
< 0.24 (bacterial infection 
unlikely)
0.25–0.49 (bacterial 
infection is possible)
≥0.5 (suggestive of the 
presence of bacterial 
infection)
Protein (total)
60–80 g/L
6–8 g/dL
Triglycerides (fasting)
0.6–1.7 mmol/L
53–150 mg/dL
Troponins
Values consistent with myocardial infarction are 
crucially dependent on which troponin is measured 
(I or T) and on the method employed. Interpret in 
context of clinical presentation. See Box 16.47
Tryptase
0–135 mg/L
–
Urate
Male
Female
120–420 µmol/L
120–360 µmol/L
2.0–7.0 mg/dL
2.0–6.0 mg/dL
Zinc
10–18 µmol/L
65–118 µg/dL
*CK levels vary according to ethnicity such that people of African and Caribbean origin typically 
have CK levels 1.5 to 2 times higher than people of European descent.

[[p1384]]
35
L   i dul    1313
35.5 Common analytes in urine
Analyte
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Albumin
Denitions of albuminuria are given in Box 18.11
Calcium (normal diet)
Up to 7.5 mmol/24 hrs
Up to 15 mEq/24 hrs
or 300 mg/24 hrs
Copper
< 0.6 µmol/24 hrs
< 38 µg/24 hrs
Cortisol
20–180 nmol/24 hrs
7.2–65 µg/24 hrs
Creatinine
Male
Female
6.3–23 mmol/24 hrs
4.1–15 mmol/24 hrs
712–2600 mg/24 hrs
463–1695 mg/24 hrs
5-Hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (5-HIAA)
10–42 µmol/24 hrs
1.9–8.1 mg/24 hrs
Metadrenalines
Normetadrenaline
Metadrenaline
0.4–3.4 µmol/24 hrs
0.3–1.7 µmol/24 hrs
73–620 µg/24 hrs
59–335 µg/24 hrs
Oxalate
0.04–0.49 mmol/24 hrs
3.6–44 mg/24 hrs
Phosphate
15–50 mmol/24 hrs
465–1548 mg/24 hrs
Potassium*
25–100 mmol/24 hrs
25–100 mEq/24 hrs
Protein
Denitions of proteinuria are given in Box 18.11
Denitions of proteinuria are given in Box 18.11
Sodium*
100–200 mmol/24 hrs
100–200 mEq/24 hrs
Urate
1.2–3.0 mmol/24 hrs
202–504 mg/24 hrs
Urea
170–600 mmol/24 hrs
10.2–36.0 g/24 hrs
Zinc
3–21 µmol/24 hrs
195–1365 µg/24 hrs
*The urinary output of electrolytes such as sodium and potassium is normally a reection of dietary intake. This can vary widely. The values quoted are appropriate to a ‘Western’ diet.
35.6 Analytes in cerebrospinal uid (CSF)
Analysis
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Cells
< 5×106 cells/L (all 
mononuclear)
< 5 cells/mm3
Glucose1
2.3–4.5 mmol/L
41–81 mg/dL
IgG index2
< 0.65
Total protein
0.14–0.45 g/L
0.014–0.045 g/dL
1Interpret in relation to plasma glucose. Values in CSF are typically approximately two-thirds of 
plasma levels. 2A crude index of increase in IgG attributable to intrathecal synthesis.
(IgG = immunoglobulin G)
35.7 Analytes in faeces
Analyte
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Calprotectin
< 50 µg/g
Elastase
> 200 µg/g

[[p1385]]
1314    Laboratory reference ranges
35.8 Haematological values
Analysis
Reference range
SI units
Non-SI units
Bleeding time (Ivy)
< 8 mins
Blood volume
Male
Female
65–85 mL/kg
60–80 mL/kg
Coagulation screen
Prothrombin time (PT)
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
10.5–13.5 secs
26–36 secs
D-dimers
Interpret in relation to clinical presentation
< 500 ng/mL
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Higher values in older patients are not necessarily abnormal
Adult male
Adult female
0–10 mm/hr
3–15 mm/hr
Ferritin
Male (and post-menopausal female)
Female (pre-menopausal)
20–300 µg/L
15–200 µg/L
20–300 ng/mL
15–200 ng/mL
Fibrinogen
1.5–4.0 g/L
0.15–0.4 g/dL
Folate
Serum
Red cell
2.8–20 µg/L
120–500 µg/L
2.8–20 ng/mL
120–500 ng/mL
Haemoglobin
Male
Female
130–180 g/L
115–165 g/L
13–18 g/dL
11.5–16.5 g/dL
Haptoglobin
0.4–2.4 g/L
0.04–0.24 g/dL
Iron
Male
Female
14–32 µmol/L
10–28 µmol/L
78–178 µg/dL
56–157 µg/dL
Leucocytes (adults)
4.0–11.0 × 109/L
4.0–11.0 × 103/mm3
Differential white cell count
Neutrophil granulocytes
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophil granulocytes
Basophil granulocytes
2.0–7.5 × 109/L
1.5–4.0 × 109/L
0.2–0.8 × 109/L
0.04–0.4 × 109/L
0.01–0.1 × 109/L
2.0–7.5 × 103/mm3
1.5–4.0 × 103/mm3
0.2–0.8 × 103/mm3
0.04–0.4 × 103/mm3
0.01–0.1 × 103/mm3
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH)
27–32 pg
–
Mean cell volume (MCV)
78–98 fL
–
Packed cell volume (PCV) or haematocrit
Male
Female
0.40–0.54
0.37–0.47
Platelets
150–350 × 109/L
150–350 × 103/mm3
Red cell count
Male
Female
4.5–6.5 × 1012/L
3.8–5.8 × 1012/L
4.5–6.5 × 106/mm3
3.8–5.8 × 106/mm3
Red cell lifespan
Mean
Half-life (51Cr)
120 days
25–35 days
Reticulocytes (adults)
25–85 × 109/L
25–85 × 103/mm3
Transferrin
2.0–4.0 g/L
0.2–0.4 g/dL
Transferrin saturation
Male
Female
25–50%
14–50%
Vitamin B12
Normal
Intermediate
Low
> 210 ng/L
180–200 ng/L
< 180 ng/L

[[p1386]]
35
35.9  Analytes that may be signicantly affected by growth and puberty*
Analyte
Age/Pubertal 
stage
Gender
Reference range
Alkaline 
< 1 year
M, F
80–580 U/L
phosphatase (ALP)
1–16 years
M, F
100–400 U/L
16–20 years
M
50–250 U/L
F
40–200 U/L
Creatinine
< 1 year
M, F
12–39 µmol/L
(0.14–0.44 mg/dL)
1–4 years
M, F
13–42 µmol/L
(0.15–0.48 mg/dL)
4–12 years
M, F
20–57 µmol/L
(0.23–0.64 mg/dL)
12–15 years
M, F
31–67 µmol/L
(0.35–0.76 mg/dL)
15–18 years
M
39–92 µmol/L
(0.44–1.04 mg/dL)
F
34–72 µmol/L
(0.38–0.81 mg/dL)
Follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH)
Prepubertal
M
< 3.0 IU/L
(< 0.6 µg/L)
F
< 3.2 IU/L
(< 0.64 µg/L)
Pubertal stage 2
M
< 6.6 IU/L
(< 1.32 µg/L)
F
< 4.1 IU/L
(< 0.82 µg/L)
Pubertal stage 3
M
0.7–5.0 IU/L
(0.14–1 µg/L)
Pubertal stages 
4–5
M
1.5–6.0 IU/L
(0.3–1.2 µg/L)
Pubertal stages 
3–5
F
2.5–13.5 IU/L
(0.5–2.7 µg/L)
Insulin-like growth 
factor 1
< 7 years
M
15–349 µg/L
F
17–272 µg/L
8–16 years
M
67–510 µg/L
F
59–502 µg/L
Luteinising hormone 
(LH)
Prepubertal
M
< 1.0 IU/L
(< 0.1 µg/L)
Pubertal stage 2
M
< 3.0 IU/L
(< 0.3 µg/L)
Prepubertal and 
pubertal stage 2
F
< 1.0 IU/L
(< 0.1 µg/L)
Pubertal stage 3
M
1.0–4.0 IU/L
(0.1–0.4 µg/L)
Pubertal stages 
4–5
M
1.0–5.0 IU/L
(0.1–0.6 µg/L)
Pubertal stages 
3–5
F
1.0–8.0 IU/L
(0.1–0.9 µg/L)
17β-Oestradiol
Prepubertal and 
pubertal stages 
2–3
M
< 75 pmol/L
(< 20 pg/mL)
Prepubertal and 
pubertal stage 2
F
< 100 pmol/L
(< 27 pg/mL)
Pubertal stages 
4–5
M
< 130 pmol/L
(< 35 pg/mL)
Pubertal stages 
3–5
F
< 150 pmol/L
(< 41 pg/mL)
Testosterone
Prepubertal
M
< 0.5 nmol/L
(< 10 ng/dL)
Pubertal stage 2
F
< 0.6 nmol/L
(< 20 ng/dL)
Pubertal stage 3
M
< 10.6 nmol/L
(< 310 ng/dL)
Pubertal stage 4
F
< 1.4 nmol/L
(< 40 ng/dL)
Pubertal stage 5
M
0.4–30 nmol/L
(10–870 ng/dL)
Pubertal stages 
3–5
M
5.6–30 nmol/L
(160–870 ng/dL)
M
10–30 nmol/L
(290–870 ng/dL)
F
0.4–1.9 nmol/L
(10–50 ng/dL)
Laboratory reference ranges in childhood and adolescence
The levels of many analytes in blood vary due to the physiological 
changes that occur during growth and adolescence. Hospital labora-
tories may provide reference ranges that are age-adjusted or based on 
pubertal stage but this is not always the case. It is therefore important 
for the doctor requesting these tests to understand the impact of age 
and puberty on interpretation of the results. For example, a creatinine of 
70 µmol/L (0.79 mg/dL) is perfectly normal for the majority of adults but 
may indicate signicant renal impairment in a child. Reference ranges for 
hormone results are described according to the Tanner stages of puberty 
(see Fig. 33.5).
Analyte
Age/Pubertal 
stage
Gender
Reference range
*Non-SI equivalents are given in brackets where appropriate.
L   i hildhd d dl    1315

[[p1387]]
1316    Laboratory reference ranges
35.10  Analytes that may be signicantly affected by pregnancy*
Analyte
Reference range
First trimester
Second trimester
Third trimester
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
17–88 U/L
25–126 U/L
38–229 U/L
Packed cell volume (PCV) or haematocrit
0.31–0.41
0.30–0.39
0.28–0.40
Haemoglobin
116–139 g/L
97–148 g/L
95–150 g/L
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
4 weeks: 16–156 IU/L
4–9 weeks: 101–233 000 IU/L
9–13 weeks: 20 900–291 000IU/L
4270–103 000 IU/L
2700–78 300 IU/L
17β-Oestradiol
690–9166 pmol/L
(188–2497 pg/mL)
4691–26 401 pmol/L
(1278–7192 pg/mL)
12 701–22 528 pmol/L
(3460–6137 pg/mL)
Progesterone
25–153 nmol/L
(8–48 ng/mL)
Not available
314–1088 nmol/L
(99–342 ng/mL)
Prolactin
765–4532 mIU/L
(36–213 ng/mL)
2340–7021 mIU/L
(110–330 ng/mL)
2914–7914 mIU/L
(137–372 ng/mL)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
0.60–3.40 mIU/L
0.37–3.60 mIU/L
0.38–4.04 mIU/L
Thyroxine (free), (free T4)
10–18 pmol/L
0.77–1.40 ng/dL
9–16 pmol/L
0.70–1.24 ng/dL
8–14 pmol/L
0.62–1.09 ng/dL
*Non-SI equivalents are given in brackets where appropriate.
Further information
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Greer LG, Cunningham FG. Pregnancy and laboratory 
studies: a reference table for clinicians. Obstet Gynecol 2009;114:1326–1331.
Neal RC, Ferdinand KC, Ycas J, Miller E. Relationship of ethnic origin, gender and 
age to blood creatine kinase levels. Am J Med 2009;122:73–78.
Tanner JM, Whitehouse RH. Clinical longitudinal standards for height, weight, 
height velocity, weight velocity, and stages of puberty. Arch Dis Child 
1976;51:170–179.
Woitge HW, Scheidt-Nave C, Kissling C, etal. Seasonal variation of biochemical 
indexes of bone turnover: results of a population-based study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metabol 1998;83:68–75.
Laboratory reference ranges in pregnancy
The levels of many analytes in blood vary during pregnancy, when many 
hormonal and metabolic changes occur. The standard adult reference 
ranges may therefore not be appropriate and it is important for the 
clinician reviewing the results to be aware of this to enable appropriate 
interpretation and patient management.

[[p1388]]
Index
A
AA. See Atomic absorption
AAAs. See Abdominal aortic aneurysms
Abacavir, 366b
for HIV/AIDS, 366b
Abaloparatide, for osteoporosis, 1051b,  
1052
Abatacept, for musculoskeletal disease, 1013, 
1013b
Abciximab, platelet inhibition, 438, 927
Abdomen
acute, 189–191
examination of
blood disease, 922f
cancer, 128
cardiovascular disease, 386
gastrointestinal disease, 782f
liver and biliary disease, 861–862, 861b
renal and urinary tract disease, 
558–559, 559f
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs), 442–443, 
444b
Abdominal colic, 168b
Abdominal compartment syndrome, diagnosis 
and management of, 198
Abdominal examination, 783b
Abdominal pain, 567, 804–805
assessment of, 804b
chronic or recurrent, 804–805, 804b
constant, 805
irritable bowel syndrome and, 847
in lower abdomen, 375
pancreatitis
acute, 850–852, 850b
chronic, 852–854
Abducens (6th cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Abetalipoproteinaemia, 824, 1169b
Abnormal movements, 1141–1143, 1142b
Abnormal perceptions, 1143, 1237
ABO blood groups, 940, 941b
ABO-incompatible red cell transfusion, 
940–942
ABPA. See Allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis
Abscess
anorectal, 835
cerebral, 1178, 1178b, 1179f
‘collar-stud,’ 519–520
infective endocarditis and, 463
liver, 891–892, 904
amoebic, 892
in old age, 915b
pyogenic, 891–892, 891b
lung, 265f, 300f
pancreatic, 265f
perinephric, 602
pulmonary, 516–517, 517b
spinal epidural, 1175
Absence seizures, 1154
Absolute erythrocytosis, 935b
Absorption, 16–17
gastrointestinal tract, 16
interactions, 24
parenteral, 17
topical, 17
Acamprosate, 1250
Acanthosis nigricans, 138b, 1115
Accelerated hypertension, 451
Accessory (11th cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Acclimatisation, to heat, 256
Accommodation, 1252–1253
ACE. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACE inhibitors
for acute coronary syndrome prevention, 
438b
adverse reactions of, 22b, 1307b
cough, 489
hyperkalemia, 629
for chronic kidney disease, 590–591
contraindication to, cirrhosis, 905b
effect on renal function, 598, 599b
for heart failure, 406, 407f
dosages, 407b
for hypertension, 448
for mitral regurgitation, 457
for myocardial infarction, 439
during pregnancy, 32b
Acetazolamide, 622
for altitude illness, 257
for epilepsy, 1157b
for idiopathic intracranial hypertension, 
1186
Acetylcysteine, 224
Achalasia of oesophagus, 811, 813f
Achlorhydria, 822b
Aciclovir
for herpes virus infection, 122, 123b
bone marrow transplant patients, 946b
chickenpox/shingles, 283b
genital, 381
HIV/AIDS, 357
viral encephalitis, 1175
nephrotoxicity, 599b
in pregnancy, 117
Acid-base balance
chronic kidney disease and, 591
disorders
mixed, 633
presenting problems of, 631–633
homeostasis, 630–633
principal patterns of disturbances, 631b
renal control of, 630–631
Acid maltase deciency, 1197b
Acidosis
lactic, 631–632
poisoning, 236b
metabolic, 631–632
acute kidney injury and, 587
chronic kidney disease, 588
critically ill patients and, 182
differential diagnosis, 491b
malaria, 322b
poisoning and, 223b
renal tubular, 632b
respiratory, 633
Acids, poisoning, 224b
Acinus, 482, 483f, 862f
Acitretin, for psoriasis, 1080
Acne, 1094–1096, 1094f
in adolescence, 1094b
conglobata, 1094–1095
cystic, 1094f
excoriée, 1094–1095
fulminans, 1094–1095
secondary, 1094–1095
vulgaris, 1094–1095
Acne vulgaris, ophthalmic features of,  
1220b
Acneiform eruptions, 1116b
Acoustic neuroma, 1185
ACPAs. See Anti-citrullinated peptide 
antibodies
Acquired C1 inhibitor deciency, 84
Acrochordon, 1088
Acrocyanosis, 80b
Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, 304
Acromegaly, 648f, 698–699, 698f
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
Actinic dermatitis, chronic, 1074b, 1075f
Actinic keratosis, 1083b, 1084–1085, 1084f
Actinic prurigo, 1074b
Actinomadura spp., 344
Actinomyces israelii, 309
Actinomyces spp., 101f
Actinomycete infections, 309
Actinomycetes, 99
Actinomycetoma, 344
Action potential, 1123
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 
930
reference range of, 1314b
Activities of daily living (ADL), 1297b
Barthel Index, 1301, 1301b
Acupuncture, for pain management, 165,  
165f
Acute abdominal pain
causes of, 189b
management of, 190f
Acute benign asbestos pleurisy, 545
Acute cholinergic syndrome, 232–233, 233b
Acute circulatory failure, 202
Acute colonic ischaemia, 850
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction, 834, 834b
‘Acute confusional states,’ in older people, 
1138
Acute coronary syndrome, 431–439, 432b, 
433f
chest pain and, 398
clinical features of, 433–435, 434b
complications of, 433–434
management of, 437–439, 437f, 438b
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, 
1163–1164
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia, 539
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 1277, 1277b
Acute high altitude illness, 256–257
Acute inammation, 67–69, 69f
acute phase response in, 67–69
resolution of, 68–69
septic shock and, 68
Acute inammatory arthritis, 1023
Acute intermittent porphyria, 645b
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN), 576–577, 
576b
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP), 535b
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 584–588
causes of, 585f
clinical features of, 585
dialysis for, indications for, 595b
haemodialysis in, 593–594
interstitial, 576–577, 576b
investigations of, 586b
malaria, 322b
management of, 585–588, 587b
non-oliguric, 576
in old age, 584b
pathophysiology of, 584–588
post-renal, 585, 586b
pregnancy and, 1276, 1277b
pre-renal, 585, 586b
recovery from, 588, 588f
renal, 585, 586b
renal replacement therapy, 587–588
Acute leukaemia, 964–967
investigations of, 964, 964f
management of, 964–967
haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, 967
specic therapy, 964–966, 965b
supportive therapy, 966–967
outcome of, 967b
prognosis of, 967
WHO classication of, 963b
Acute limb ischaemia, 441, 441b, 441f
Acute liver failure, 872–875
adverse prognostic criteria in, 874b
causes of, 869f, 874f
classication of, 873b
clinical assessment of, 873–874
complications of, 875b
hepatic encephalopathy and, 874b
investigations for, 874, 874b
management of, 874b, 875
pathophysiology of, 873–875
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), 964f, 
965–966, 966f
Acute medicine, 175
ambulatory care, 178, 178b
decision to admit to hospital, 178
problems in, 178–191
Acute mountain sickness (AMS), 257
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), 964–965, 
964f, 965f, 967b
‘Acute on chronic’ type II respiratory failure, 
498–499, 499b
Acute pancreatitis, 850–852, 850b
causes of, 851b
complications of, 851b
management of, 852
pathophysiology of, 850–852, 851f
Acute pericarditis, 476–478, 476b, 477f
Acute phase proteins, 70
Acute phase response, 102
retroperitoneal brosis, 606
Acute Physiology Assessment and Chronic 
Health Evaluation (APACHE II), 218, 
218b
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APML),  
965
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 
201–202
aetiology of, 201–202, 201b
Berlin denition of, 201b
diagnosis of, 201–202, 201f
drug-induced, 540b
management of, 201–202
mechanical ventilation in, 202
pathogenesis of, 201–202
severity of, 202b
Acute rheumatic fever, 451–453, 452f
investigations in, 453b
Jones criteria for, 452b
Acute severe breathlessness, 491
Acute skin failure, 1077–1078
Acute small bowel ischaemia, 849–850
Acute transmural anterior myocardial 
infarction, 436f
Acute transmural inferolateral myocardial 
infarction, 436f
Acute kidney injury (AKI) (Continued)

[[p1389]]
1318     INDEX
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN), 577f
drug-induced, 599b
Adalimumab
for inammatory bowel disease, 842,  
843b
for inammatory rheumatic disease, 1013b
for psoriasis, 1102
Adapalene, 1095
Adaptive immune system, 65–67
ADCC. See Antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination- 3rd 
edition (ACE-III), 1237
Addison’s disease, 685b
Adductor tendinitis, 1006b
Adenine, 38–39
Adenocarcinoma, 825
ampullary/periampullary, 856
of oesophagus, 810f, 811f
of pancreas, 855–856, 856f
of prostate, 610
of unknown primary, 139b
Adenoma
adrenal, 681b
Conn syndrome, 688f
Cushing’s syndrome, 681b, 684
bronchial gland, 532b
familial adenomatous polyposis, 831–832, 
831f
hepatic, 904
parathyroid, 677
toxic, 656f, 665
Adenomyomatosis, of gallbladder, 919
Adenosine, 420b, 421, 421b
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 390f
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), myocardial 
contraction and, 389–390
Adenosquamous carcinoma of lung, 532b
Adenoviruses, diarrhoea, 292
ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone
Adherence
factors affecting, 1288b
SIMPLE strategies for, 1288b
Adhesion molecules, 72
ADHR. See Autosomal dominant 
hypophosphataemic rickets
Adjustment disorders, 1242, 1255–1256
prevalence of, 1236b
ADL. See Activities of daily living
Adolescence
allergy in, 184b
medical ophthalmology in, 1230b
Adolescents, 1283
congenital heart disease in, 472b
cystic brosis in, 512b
epilepsy in, 1158b
haematological malignancy in, 963b
infections in, 278, 279b
inammatory bowel disease in, 846b
juvenile idiopathic arthritis in, 1032b
laboratory reference range of, 1315–1316
renal impairment in, 1292b
ADP. See Adenosine diphosphate
Adrenal crisis, 686b
Adrenal disease, 1274
Adrenal glands, 679–689
disease
classication of, 681b
presenting problems of, 679–687
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
679, 680f
incidental adrenal mass, 687
older people, 686b
Adrenal hyperplasia, congenital, 689
Adrenal insufciency, 685–687, 685b, 686b
Adrenal tumours, Cushing’s syndrome, 684
Adrenalectomy, 688
for Cushing’s disease, 684
Adrenaline
for allergy, 82
anaphylaxis, 72
circulatory effects of, 210b
for urticaria, 1104–1105
Adrenarche, 679
β-Adrenoceptor antagonist, 1245b
for thyrotoxicosis, in pregnancy, 1273
for variceal bleeding, 882
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
Cushing’s syndrome and, 681b
ectopic, 681b
ectopic ACTH syndrome, 684
ectopic hormone production, 143b
excess, 685b
hypopituitarism, 685b
reference range of, venous blood, 1311b
stimulation test, 686b
Adrenoleukodystrophy, 1169b
ADRs. See Adverse drug reactions
Adult advanced life support, 204–205
algorithm for, 204f, 205f
Adult-onset Still’s disease, 1044
Adult polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 
579–580, 579b
Advance directives, 1302
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs), 19–23
classication of, 21–22, 22b
interactions, 23–24
in older people, 1307–1308, 1307b
pharmacovigilance, 22–23
prevalence of, 20–22, 21b, 22b
risk factors for, 21b
TREND analysis of, 22b
Aedes aegypti
Chikungunya virus, 299
dengue, 286
yellow fever, 288
AF. See Atrial brillation
AFE. See Amniotic uid embolism
Affective mood disorders, bipolar, 1253
Afnity, 14–16
Afuence, health consequences of, 90
AFLD. See Alcoholic fatty liver disease
AFP. See Alpha-fetoprotein
African tick bite fever, 317, 317b
African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness), 
324–325, 324f
Afterload
heart failure, 402
reduction, 405
Age/ageing, 1295
atherosclerosis risk, 425
biology of, 1298
chronological, 1298
physiological changes of, 1298, 1299f
prescribing and deprescribing, 1307–1308
Age-related macular degeneration, 1233
Agglutination, cold, 959
Agglutination test, 105–106
for leishmaniasis, 328
for leptospirosis, 306
microscopic, 306
trypanosomiasis, 324
for tularaemia, 308
Aggregatibacter aphrophilus-Aggregatibacter 
actinomycetemcomitans, 463
Aggressive behaviour, 1243–1245, 1244f
Agitation, in palliative care, 171–172
Agnosia, 1143
Agonists, 14
Agoraphobia, 1255
Agranulocytosis, 661
AHR. See Airway hyper-reactivity
AIN. See Acute interstitial nephritis
AIP. See Acute interstitial pneumonia
Air embolism, during dialysis, 597b
Airow obstruction, 488f
assessment in COPD, 506
Airway complications, 215
Airway hyper-reactivity (AHR), 499, 500f
Airway pressure release ventilation (APRV), 208
Airways, 482, 482f
assessment of, in deteriorating patient, 191
in asthma, 500f
defences, 483–484, 484f
of envenomed patient, 240
obstruction of, 487–488
Akathisia, 1160, 1252
AKI. See Acute kidney injury
ALA dehydratase deciency, 645b
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 866, 1312b
Albendazole
for cysticercosis, 342
for helminthic infections, 125
lariasis, 336
for hydatid cysts, 342
Albinism, oculocutaneous, 1108–1109
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy, 679, 1023b
Albumin
in AKI, 589b
liver blood biochemistry, 866
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
urinary, 1313b
Albuminuria, moderately elevated, 569–570
Alcohol, 90
abstinence from, 1249b
amount in average drink, 892b
coronary artery disease and, 426
dependence, 1249–1250, 1249b
drug interactions, 23b
liver disease and, 892–895
pharmacokinetics, 19b
poisoning, 222b, 233–234
smoking and, diabetes mellitus and, 732
Alcohol misuse, 1240, 1240b, 1249–1250
chronic, presentation and consequences 
of, 1249b
clinical assessment of, 1240
clinical features of, 1249–1250
diagnosis of, 1250
effects of, 1249b, 1250
investigations of, 1240
management of, 1250
maternal, 1249b
in pancreatitis, 853–854
pathogenesis of, 1249–1250
prevalence of, 1236b
prognosis of, 1250
Alcohol withdrawal syndrome, 1249, 1249b
management of, 1250
Alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD), 893
Alcoholic liver disease, 892–895
clinical features of, 893–894, 894b
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 869b
in old age, 870b
pathophysiology of, 892–895, 893f, 894b
Aldosterone, 679
deciency, 629
plasma potassium and, 627
reference range of, 1311b
resistance, 629
Alemtuzumab, 1163b
Alendronate
for osteoporosis, 1051b
timing of, 31b
Alfacalcidol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol), 
679
Alfentanil, 213b
Alginates, sodium content of, 877b
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
liver function tests and, 866
placental, 136b
reference values of, venous blood, 1312b
in skeletal disease, 998b
Alkalinisation, urinary, 224
Alkalis, poisoning, 224b
Alkalosis
hypokalaemic, Cushing’s syndrome, 681
metabolic, 632–633, 633f
respiratory, 633
Alkylating agents, 946b
ALL. See Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Allele, 46
Allergen, 80
asthma, 500f
avoidance of, 82
contact eczema, 1098
supervised exposure to, 82
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 
(ABPA), 525–526, 526b, 526f
Allergic contact eczema, 1098, 1099b, 1099f
Allergic rhinitis, 550
Allergy, 80–82
clinical features of, 81
clinical manifestations of, 81b
diagnosis of, 81
food, 825
hygiene hypothesis, 80
to insect venom, 81
investigations of, 81–82
challenge tests, 82
eosinophilia, 82
mast cell tryptase, 82
serum total IgE, 82
skin-prick tests, 81
specic IgE tests, 82
management of, 82
pathophysiology of, 80–82, 81f
to peanut, 81
in pregnancy, 84b
Allodynia, 1141
Allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, 945
complications of, 945, 946b
indications for, 946b
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia, 959
Allopurinol
for acute leukaemia patients, 965b
drug interactions of, 23b
hepatotoxicity, 32b
pharmacodynamics, 20b
renal stone prevention, 604, 605b
for toxic epidermal necrolysis, 1105
Alopecia, 1109–1110, 1109b
androgenetic, 1109
scarring inammatory, 1113f
Alopecia areata
hair in, 1109, 1110f
nails in, 1111
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
ALP. See Alkaline phosphatase
Alpha heavy chain disease, 825
Alpha1-antitrypsin deciency, 46b, 47b, 908, 
908f
inheritance, 46b
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), as tumour markers, 
136b, 137
Alpha-thalassaemia, 962
Alport syndrome, 577–578, 578f
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase
Alternative therapies
for cancer pain, 170
for pain, 165
Altitude, illnesses, 256–257
Aluminium, poisoning from, 234
Aluminium hydroxide, for renal bone disease, 
591–592
Alveolar macrophages, 346, 542
Alveolar microlithiasis, 541b
Alveolar proteinosis, 541b
Alveolitis
brosing, 491b
non-eosinophilic, drug-induced, 540b
Alzheimer’s disease, 1247–1248, 1247b, 
1248f
familial, 1247–1248
Amanita phalloides poisoning, 237b
Amantadine, 123b
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Amastigotes, leishmaniasis, 327f
AmBisome, 328
Amblyopia, in adolescents, 1230b
Amenorrhoea, 669–670, 670b
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease), 
325
Amikacin
for actinomycetoma, 344
for nocardiosis, 309
Amiloride, 627
for diabetes insipidus, 700
Amino acids, metabolism, 864
disorders of, 642–643
Aminoglycosides, 113b, 118–119
adverse effects of, 119
for brucellosis, 303
dosing of, 119f
mechanism of action, 113b
nephrotoxicity, 32b
pharmacokinetics of, 118–119
in pregnancy, 117
Aminopenicillins, 117, 117b
Aminophylline, for asthma, 504, 504f
Aminosalicylates, 841
Aminotransferases
elevated, common causes of, 870b
reference range of, 1312b
Amiodarone
adverse reactions, pulmonary brosis, 
540–541
for arrhythmias, 419b, 420b, 421
atrial brillation, 414
atrial utter, 413
tachycardia, 417
causing thyroid dysfunction, 654b, 656f, 
664, 664f
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
for heart failure, 407–408
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
structure of, 664f
thyrotoxicosis, 664
Amitriptyline, 1253b
for headache, 1150
for herpes zoster, 283
for irritable bowel syndrome, 848
for migraine prevention, 1150
for neuropathic pain, 168b, 170b
for pain management, 168b
for post-herpetic neuralgia, 283
for psychiatric disorder, 1253b
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) 
(Continued)

[[p1390]]
INDEX    1319
AML. See Acute myeloid leukaemia
Amlodipine
for angina, 430b
unstable, 438–439
for hypertension, 448
Ammonia, 560
Ammonium chloride, 632
Amnesia, 1138
persistent, 1138
post-ictal, 1138
transient global, 1138
Amniocentesis, 53–55
Amniotic uid embolism (AFE), pregnancy 
and, 1269
Amodiaquine, for malaria, 322
Amoebiasis, 330–332, 331f
incubation period of, 108b
Amoebic dysentery, 331
Amoebic liver abscess, 331–332, 892
Amoeboma, 331, 331f
Amoxicillin, 114b
for diphtheria, 313
for Helicobacter pylori eradication, 814–815
for listeriosis, 307
for Lyme disease, 304
for pneumonia, 516b
for skin reactions, infectious 
mononucleosis, 286
for urinary tract infection, 600–601
Amphetamines, misuse of, 230
Amphotericin/amphotericin B, 122, 122b
for aspergillosis, 527
for blastomycosis, 347
for candidiasis, 345
for coccidioidomycosis, 347
for cryptococcal meningitis, HIV-related, 
363
for fusariosis, 345
for histoplasmosis, 347
for leishmaniasis, 328
lipid formulations of, 122
for mucormycosis, 346
for mycetoma, 344
nephrotoxicity, 599b, 632b
for neutropenic fever, 141–142
for Penicillium (Talaromyces) marneffei
infection, 346
for sporotrichosis, 344
Ampicillin, 114b, 117b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
drug interactions of, 117
for listeriosis, 307
for meningitis, 1173b
for paratyphoid fever, 308
skin reactions, 1116b
infectious mononucleosis, 286, 286f
Ampulla of Vater, carcinoma of, 918–919
AMS. See Acute mountain sickness
Amsacrine, for acute leukemia, 965b
Amsler chart, 1222, 1222f
Amygdala, 1124
Amylase, 786, 788b
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
salivary, 60
serum, pancreatitis, 497b, 851–852
Amyloid A, serum, 68
Amyloid angiopathy, 1247b
Amyloid in plaques, in Alzheimer’s disease, 
1247–1248, 1248f
Amyloidosis, 77–78, 1114
causes of, 77b
heart disease, 475
multiple myeloma, 583b
ANA. See Antinuclear antibody
Anaemia(s), 923–924, 923b, 932–933, 
950–959, 951f
after peptic ulcer surgery, 816
aplastic, 978–979
autoimmune haemolytic, 958–959
causes of, 933b
of chronic disease (ACD), 951f, 952, 953b
chronic kidney disease and, 592, 592b
clinical assessment of, 933
haemolytic, 955–959
alloimmune, 959
autoimmune, 958–959
causes of, 955f, 956
non-immune, 959
HIV-related, 364
investigations of, 933, 934f
iron deciency, 950–952
alimentary tract disorders, 808
blood loss in, 950–952
conrmation of, 952, 953b
investigations in, 952
malabsorption in, 950, 951f
management of, 952
physiological demands in, 950, 952b
pregnancy and, 1278
megaloblastic, 952–955
clinical features of, 953b
investigations in, 953b
management of, 954–955
microangiopathic haemolytic, 582
in old age, 962b
pernicious, 954
pregnancy and, 1278, 1278b
primary idiopathic acquired aplastic, 
978–979, 979b
secondary aplastic, 979, 979b
severe, ophthalmic features of, 1218b
sickle-cell, 960–962
clinical features of, 960, 961f
epidemiology of, 960–962, 960f
investigations of, 960–961
management of, 961
pathogenesis of, 960
in pregnancy, 961b
prognosis of, 962
Anakinra, for musculoskeletal disease, 1014
Anal canal, 789f
Anal ssure, 835
Analgesia
for acute coronary syndrome, 438
in intensive care, 212–213, 213b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1009
myocardial infarction, 438
for palliative care, 168
for pleural pain, 514
for post-herpetic neuralgia, 283
for renal colic, 603
Analgesic ladder (WHO), 168f
Analgesics
adjuvant
for cancer pain, 169, 170b
for pain, 163
poisoning from, 224–226
Anaphase, 41
Anaphylactic shock, 210b
Anaphylaxis, 72, 183–184, 379
clinical manifestations of, 183f
differential diagnosis of, 183b
emergency management of, 184b
Anaplastic carcinoma, 666
ANCAs. See Antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies
Ancylostoma caninum, 338
Ancylostoma duodenale, 333, 333f
Ancylostomiasis (hookworm), 333, 333f
Androgen receptor antagonism, 674b
Androgen replacement therapy
for adrenal insufciency, 687
options for, 671b
Androgenetic alopecia, 1109
Androgens
adrenal, 679
in older women, 671b
Anergy, 78
Aneuploidy, 50
Aneurysm
aortic, 442–444
abdominal, 444b
saccular, 445
ventricular, 435
Angelman syndrome, 44b, 49b
Angina, 426b
clinical features of, 427, 427b
investigations for, 427, 428f, 429f
management of, 427–428
drug therapy, 428–430, 429b
non-pharmacological treatments, 
430–431, 430f, 431f, 432b
in old age, 432b
prognosis of, 431
recurrent, in acute coronary syndrome, 434
stable
advice to patients with, 429b
risk stratication in, 429b
Angina equivalent, 181–182
Angina pectoris, 426–431
Angiodysplasia, 800
Angioedema, 82–84, 83f
drug-induced, 1116b
hereditary, 83–84
types of, 83b
Angiogenesis, 132, 132f
Angiography
coronary, 230
CT, 395, 396f
of nervous system, 1130
Angiomatosis, bacillary, 318
Angioplasty, for renal artery stenosis, 581
Angiosarcoma, 134b
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 338
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 619
Angiotensin II, 679
Angiotensin II receptor blockers
effect on renal function, 581b
renal failure, 590–591
Angiotensin receptor blockers
for heart failure, 406–407, 407b
for hypertension, 448
Angular cheilitis, HIV/AIDS, 359
Anhedonia, 1237
Anion gap
acidosis, 631–632
poisoning, 223b
Anisakiasis, 338
Anismus, 833
Ankle pain, 1007
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS), 1033b
Annular erythemas, 1115
Annulus brosus, 388
Anogenital warts, 382
Anorectal abscesses, 835
Anorectal disorders, 834–835
Anorectal manometry, 791
Anorectal motility, 795
Anorexia nervosa, 1257–1258, 1258b
in cancer patients, 138b
Anosmia, 669
Anosognosia, 1248
ANP. See Atrial natriuretic peptide
Anserine bursitis, 1007b
Antacids
drug interactions of, 24
sodium content of, 877b
Antagonists, 14
Antalgic gait, 1143, 1303b
Anterior pituitary hormone deciency, 694b
Anterior tibial compartment syndrome, 
1060–1063
Anthracyclines, 946b
Anthrax, 313–314
bioterrorism, 108
clinical features of, 313–314
cutaneous, 313
gastrointestinal, 313
immunisation for, 112b
incubation period of, 108b
inhalational, 314
management of, 314
skin, 1090
Anti-α4β7 integrin, for inammatory bowel 
disease, 842, 843b
Anti-androgen therapy, for polycystic ovarian 
syndrome, 674b
Anti-anginal therapy, for acute coronary 
syndrome, 438–439
Anti-anxiety drugs, 1245b
Anti-arrhythmic drugs, 419–421
adverse reactions of, 936b
classication of, 419b
by site of action, 419f
dosages of, 420b
principal uses of, 420b, 421b
side-effects of, 420b
Antibacterial agents, 116–121
aminoglycosides, 113b
beta-lactam, 113b, 117–118
folate antagonists, 120
glycopeptides, 119–120
lincosamides, 118
macrolide, 113b, 118
nitroimidazoles, 120
quinolones, 119, 119b
target and mechanism of action of, 113b
therapeutic drug monitoring, 116–121
Antibiotic therapy
adverse reactions of, 22b, 936b
for bronchiectasis, 510
for cerebral abscess, 1178
for community-acquired pneumonia, 514, 
516b
for cystic brosis, 511
diarrhoea associated with, 102b
for gastroenteritis/acute diarrhoea, 274
for Helicobacter pylori eradication, 814–815
hepatotoxicity and, 877b
for infective endocarditis, 464, 464b
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
for meningitis, 1171
for pneumonia
community-acquired, 513
hospital-acquired, 515
suppurative/aspirational, 517
for respiratory tract infections
COPD, 509
cystic brosis, 511
for rheumatic fever, 453
for sepsis, 200, 200b
for septic arthritis, 1025b
for skin disease, 1080
sodium content of, 877b
for urinary tract infection, 600–601
Antibody/antibodies
classes and properties of, 67b
in coeliac disease, 819–820
deciency in, 71b
primary, 73–75, 74b, 74f
detection of, 105–106, 105f
specic deciency, 74
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity 
(ADCC), 65
Anti-CCP antibodies, 497b, 535
Anti-centromere antibody, 999b
Anticholinergics
adverse reactions of, 1307b
for COPD, 509
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Anticholinesterases
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1248
non-antivenom, 248
α1-Antichymotrypsin, 68
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs), 
998
Anticoagulants/anticoagulation, 947–950, 949f
adverse reactions of, 22b
for atrial brillation, stroke prevention, 414b
coagulation screening, 1314b
direct oral, 950
indications for, 948b
modes of action of, 948b
monitoring, 930
for obliterative cardiomyopathy, 475
poisoning, 235b
in pregnancy, 952b
prosthetic heart valves and, 462b
for pulmonary embolism, 548
risk assessment of, 950b
rodenticides, 235b
Anticodon, 40
Anticonvulsants
for pain management, 170b
poisoning, 229b
skin reactions, 1116b
Antidepressants, 1245b, 1253b, 1254
adverse reactions of, 936b, 1307b
for alcohol withdrawal, 1250
for anxiety disorders, 1255
in older people, 1307b
poisoning from, 226–227
tricyclic, 1253–1254, 1253b
poisoning from, 226–227, 226b, 227f
Antidiabetic agents, poisoning from, 228
Antidiarrhoeal agents, 274
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 619
ectopic hormone production, 143b
inappropriate secretion, 624b
Antiemetic drugs, receptor site activity of, 
171b
Antiepileptic drugs, for epilepsy, 1156, 1157b
choice of drug, 1157b
withdrawing, 1157
Antifreeze poisoning, 234
Antifungal agents, 121–122, 122b
Antigen processing and presentation, 66
Antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 957f
Anti-glomerular basement membrane disease, 
573b–574b, 576
Anti-herpesvirus agents, 122–123, 123b
Antihistamines
for allergy, 82
for pruritus, 1073
for skin disease, 1080
for urticaria, 1104–1105
Anti-histone antibody, 999b
Antihypertensive drugs, 450, 450b, 451f
adverse reactions of, 936b
for chronic kidney disease, 590
Anaemia(s) (Continued)
Antibiotic therapy (Continued)

[[p1391]]
1320     INDEX
Anti-infective agents, 1079
Anti-inammatory cascade, 199–200
Anti-inammatory therapy, for osteoarthritis, 
1017b
Anti-inuenza agents, 123–124
Anti-Jo-1 (anti-histidyl-tRNA synthase), 999b
Anti-La antibody (anti-SS-B), 999b
Antimalarials, 124, 1103
adverse reactions of, 936b
poisoning, 229b
prophylactic, 116b
Antimetabolites, 146f, 946b
Antimicrobial agents
combination therapy, 113
for infective gastroenteritis, 274
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
of, 115–116, 116b, 116f
in pregnancy, 117
resistance to, 113–115, 115f
selection, 114b
susceptibility testing, 106, 107f
target and mechanism of action of, 113b
therapeutic drug monitoring, 116
Antimicrobial stewardship, 112, 113f
Antimicrobial therapy, 114b
action and spectrum, 113, 114b
duration of, 115, 116b
empiric versus targeted therapy, 113, 114f
in old age, 117b
principles of, 113–116
prophylactic, 116, 116b
Antimonials, for leishmaniasis, 328
Antimotility agents, 274
Antimycobacterial agents, 121
Anti-neuropathic agents, for pain, 163
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
(ANCAs), 563–564, 999
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-
associated vasculitis (AAV), 
1044–1047, 1045f
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
in autoimmune hepatitis, 898b
in musculoskeletal disease, 998–999, 999b
Antioxidants, 484
Anti-p40 antibodies, for inammatory bowel 
disease, 842, 843b
Antiparasitic agents, 124–125
Antiphospholipid antibodies, 999
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), 987–988, 
987b, 1275
Antiplatelet drugs, 948b
for myocardial infarction, 438b
for obliterative cardiomyopathy, 475
Antiproteinases, 484
Antipsychotic drugs, 1245b
adverse reactions of, 22b, 1252b
for agitation, 171–172
poisoning from, 228
for schizophrenia, 1252b
Antiretroviral therapy, 123b, 366–368, 366b
complications of, 367
monitoring efcacy of, 367
in pregnancy, 367–368
resistance to, 367
selection of, 366
Antirheumatic drugs, during pregnancy and 
breastfeeding, 1274b
Anti-ribonucleoprotein antibody (anti-RNP), 
999b
Anti-RNA polymerase, 999b
Anti-RO antibody (anti-SS-A), 999b
Anti-Scl-70 (anti-topoisomerase I antibody), 
999b
Antisecretory agents, 274
Antiseptics, 516, 1078–1079
Anti-Smith antibody, 999b
Anti-smooth muscle antibodies, 898b
Antithrombin deciency, 987
Antithrombotic drugs, 799
Antithrombotic therapy, 947–950, 948b, 949f
for acute coronary syndrome, 438
prophylaxis, for venous thromboembolism, 
986, 987b
Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG), 85b
Antithyroid drugs
adverse reactions of, 936b
for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 661, 661b
in pregnancy, 1273
Anti-TNF therapy
for inammatory bowel disease, 842, 843b, 
845b
for rheumatoid arthritis, 1013
Anti-topoisomerase I antibody, 999b
α1-Antitrypsin
liver disease, 867b
liver histology in, 908f
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Antivenom, 247–248, 248b, 248f
Antiviral agents, 122–124, 123b
Anuria, 566–567, 566b
Anxiety/anxiety disorders, 1242, 1254–1255
alcohol and, 1249
classication of, 1255b
clinical features of, 1255
diagnosis of, 1255
differential diagnosis of, 1242b
generalised, 1255
investigations of, 1242
management of, 1242, 1255
in palliative care, 171
panic disorder, 1255
phobic, 1255
prevalence of, 1236b
symptoms of, 1242b
Aorta
ascending
dilatation of, 394f
syphilis and, 377
coarctation of, 446, 469, 469f
diseases of, 442–451
Aortic aneurysm, 442–444
abdominal, 444b
Aortic dissection, 443f, 444–445, 444b, 444f, 
445f
pregnancy and, 1276, 1276b
Aortic regurgitation, 387b, 458–460, 460b
clinical features of, 459–460, 460b, 461f
investigations of, 460, 461b
chest X-ray for, 394f
Aortic stenosis, 387b, 457–458, 458b, 459f
causes of, 458b
Doppler echocardiography for, 395f
investigations of, 458, 459b, 459f
in old age, 460b
Aortic valve, disease, 457–460
Aortitis, 445
APACHE II. See Acute Physiology Assessment 
and Chronic Health Evaluation
APD. See Automated peritoneal dialysis
Aphonia, psychogenic, 552
Aphthous ulceration, 805–806, 805b
Apixaban, 948b
Aplastic anaemias, 978–979
Aplastic crisis, 960
APML. See Acute promyelocytic leukaemia
Apo A1 deciency, 639, 639b
Apo A1 Milano, 639, 639b
Apolipoproteins, 635
Apoptosis, 41, 130
Apoptotic bodies, 41
Appearance, in psychiatric interview, 1237
Apraxia, 1143
gait, 1144
Apremilast, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1011b, 1012
APRV. See Airway pressure release ventilation
APS. See Antiphospholipid syndrome
APTT. See Activated partial thromboplastin 
time
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome
Argyll Robertson pupil, 1148b
Arms, assessment of, 991–992
Aromatase inhibitors
for cancer treatment, 150
osteoporosis and, 1048b
Arrhythmias, 408–419, 409f
in acute coronary syndrome, 434, 434b
during dialysis, 597b
electrophysiology of, 397
management of, 419–424
drugs, 419–421, 419b, 419f, 420b, 
421b, 422b
non-pharmacological treatments, 
421–424
Arrhythmogenic ventricular cardiomyopathy, 
475
Arsenic
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
poisoning, 236, 236b
Arsenism, 236, 236b
Artemisinin (qinghaosu) derivatives, 124
Arterial blood
analysis of, 1310b
critically ill patients, 181
respiratory failure, 203b
Arterial disease
hepatic, 909
leg ulcers due to, 1077
Arterial gas embolism, 259
Arterial pressure waveform, 210
Arterial pulse, examination of, 387b
Arterialisation, 594
Arteriography, renal, 565
Arteriosclerosis, ophthalmic features of, 1219b
Artesunate, for malaria, 322
Arthritis, 452
acute inammatory, 1023
crystal-induced, 1018–1023
HIV-related, 364
juvenile idiopathic, 1032
in adolescence, 1032b
clinical features of, 1032b
oligoarticular, 1293
transition medicine and, 1293
monoarthritis, 1000, 1000b
mutilans, 1037
osteoarthritis, 1014–1018
psoriatic, 1036–1038
CASPAR criteria for, 1036b
clinical features of, 1036–1038, 1037f
investigations for, 1038
management for, 1038
pathophysiology of, 1036–1038
reactive, 1035–1036
rheumatoid, 1027–1032
algorithm for, 1031f
cardiac involvement in, 1029
clinical features of, 1027–1030,  
1029f
criteria for diagnosis of, 1028b
extra-articular, 1029b
investigations in, 1030, 1030b, 1031f
management of, 1030–1032
nodules in, 1029, 1029f
non-pharmacological therapy for, 1031
ocular involvement in, 1029
pathophysiology of, 1027–1032, 1028f
peripheral neuropathy in, 1030
in pregnancy, 1031b, 1274
pulmonary involvement in, 1029
serositis in, 1029
spinal cord compression in, 1030,  
1030f
surgery for, 1031
systemic, 1028–1029
vasculitis in, 1029
septic, 1025–1027
systemic lupus erythematosus and, 1038
viral, 1026
Arthrodesis, 1009b
Arthropathy
in parvovirus B19 infection, 281b
psoriasis and, 1101
reactive, sexually acquired, 380
Arthroplasty, 1009b
Articial nutrition at the end of life, 772, 773b
AS. See Ankylosing spondylitis
Asbestosis, 545–546
Asbestos-related lung and pleural diseases, 
545–546
Ascariasis, 278b
Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm), 334
Ascending and descending pain pathways, 
157f
Ascites, 138b, 861b, 875–878
appearance and analysis of, 876b
causes of, 875b
hepatorenal syndrome and, 877
management of, 876–877
oedema, 567–568
pathophysiology of, 875–878, 876f
prognosis of, 877
renal failure and, 877
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and,  
877
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 866
Aspergillosis, 344
bronchopulmonary classication of, 526b
Aspergillus clavatus, 544b
Aspergillus avus, 134b
Aspergillus nodule, 526
Aspergillus spp., in immunocompromised 
patients, 269
Asphyxia/asphyxiation
laryngeal obstruction, 552
self-harm, 1243
Aspiration, pleural, 494
Aspiration pneumonia, 516–517, 517b
Aspirin
for acute coronary syndrome prevention, 
438b
adverse reactions of, 22b
for angina, 431
asthma association, 500–501
atrial brillation, stroke prevention, 415
coronary artery bypass grafting, 431
drug interactions, 23b
for hypertension, 450
for myocardial infarction, 438
poisoning, 225–226
for rheumatic fever, 453
timing of, 31b
AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase
Asteatotic eczema, 1099
Asthma, 499–505, 500f
clinical features of, 500–501
control, levels of, 502b
diagnosis of, 501, 501b, 501f, 502f
exacerbations of, 503–505, 504b, 504f, 505b
gastro-oesophageal reux disease and, 
806–807
management of, 501–502, 503f
occupational, 541–542, 541b, 542f
pathophysiology of, 499–505, 500f
in pregnancy, 502b, 1271
prognosis of, 505
Astrocytes, 1122–1123
Astrocytoma, 1132f
Astrovirus, 292
Asymmetrical inammatory mono-/
oligoarthritis, 1036
Asymptomatic bacteriuria, 601–602
Ataxia(s), 1169
acquired, 1168b
inherited, 1169b
Ataxia telangiectasia, 135b, 1169b
Ataxic gait, 1143, 1303b
Atazanavir, 366b
Atenolol
for angina, 438–439
drug interactions of, 23b
for hypertension, 448–449
ATG. See Anti-thymocyte globulin
Atheroembolism, 441, 565b
Atherosclerosis
in old age, 442b
renal artery stenosis and, 580
six stages of, 425f
Athetosis, 1142
Athlete’s foot, 1092
Atmospheric pollution, 90
ATN. See Acute tubular necrosis
Atomic absorption (AA), 616b
Atonic seizures, 1154
Atopic eczema, 1096–1098
clinical features of, 1097, 1097f
complications of, 1098b
investigations of, 1097, 1098b
management of, 1097–1098
pathogenesis of, 1096–1097
rash in, 1071b, 1098b
Atopy, 80, 82
Atorvastatin, 439
Atovaquone, for malaria, 124
ATP synthase, 49b
Atria, 388, 388f
Atrial ectopic beats, 411–412, 412f
Atrial brillation (AF), 413–415, 413f
causes of, 414b
management of, 414–415
mechanisms of, 413f
in old age, 414b
paroxysmal, 414
persistent, 414–415
Atrial utter, 412–413, 412f, 413f
Atrial myxoma, 476
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 619
Atrial septal defect, 469–470, 470f
Atrial tachycardia, 412
Atrioventricular (AV) block, 410–411, 410f, 
411b, 411f
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 389, 389f
re-entrant tachycardia, 415, 416f
Atrophy, denition of, 1078–1079, 1079f
Atropine
for acute cholinergic syndrome, 233
for AV block, 410–411
for carbamate poisoning, 233
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 227
for organophosphorus poisoning, 233
for sinus bradycardia, 409

[[p1392]]
INDEX    1321
Atropine sulphate, for arrhythmias, 421
Auerbach’s plexus, 789
Auscultation
examination of, respiratory system, 480
of heart, 387b
Austin Flint murmur, 459–460
Australian tick typhus, 317b
Autoantibodies
autoimmune disease and, 79, 79f
autoimmune hepatitis and, 898b
thyroid, 655b
Autouorescence, investigation of visual 
disorders, 1222
Autoimmune connective tissue disease, 1023, 
1038–1044
Autoimmune disease, 78–80
clinical features of, 78–79
gene polymorphisms associated with, 78b
investigations of, 79–80
autoantibodies in, 79, 79f
complement in, 79–80
cryoglobulins in, 80, 80b
of liver, 897–898
management of, 80
pathophysiology of, 78–80
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, 958–959
Autoimmune hepatitis, 897–898
conditions associated with, 898b
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
primary biliary cholangitis and, 899
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 75
Autoimmune pancreatitis, 854
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes, 701, 
701b
Autoimmune thyroid disease, 657b, 660–663
Autologous haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, 945–946
Automated peritoneal dialysis (APD), 595–596
Automated threshold perimetry, 1222
Autonomic conict, 258
Autonomic dysfunction, somatoform, 1256
Autonomic neuropathy, diabetes mellitus 
and, 747b
‘Autonomic storm,’ 243
Autonomic system, 1126
Autonomy, patients, 1284
Autophagy, 130
Autopsy, 217
Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic 
rickets (ADHR), 1053b
Autosomal dominant inheritance, 46, 46b
Autosomal recessive inheritance, 46–47, 46b
Autosomes, 38
Avid sodium retention, nephrotic syndrome 
and, 572b
Axial spondyloarthritis, 1033–1035, 1033b, 
1034f
clinical features of, 1033, 1034b
investigations of, 1033–1034, 1035f
management of, 1034–1035
prognosis of, 1035
Axial spondyloarthropathy, 1034f
Axons, peripheral nerve, 1122–1123
Azathioprine
adverse reactions of, 21
drug interactions of, 23b
for eczema, 1098
hepatotoxicity, 905b
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
for musculoskeletal disease, 1011, 1011b
for myasthenia gravis, 1196b
for rheumatoid arthritis, 1031b
transplant patients, 85b, 596–597
Azelaic acid, 1095
Azithromycin, 114b
for bacillary angiomatosis, HIV/AIDS 
patients, 358
for cystic brosis, 512b
for Mycobacterium avium complex, 359b
for STIs
chlamydial infection, 380b
syphilis, 378
for trachoma, 319
Azole antifungals, 121–122
Aztreonam, 114b, 117b, 118
B
B lymphocytes (B cells), 65–66, 927
Babesia microti, 271b
Babesiosis, 323–324
Bacillary angiomatosis, 318
HIV-related, 358
Bacillary dysentery, 312
Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG)
for leprosy, 316
for tuberculosis, 523
Bacillus anthracis, 313
Bacillus cereus, food poisoning, 309, 309f
Bacillus spp., 100f
Back, examination of, cardiology, 386
Back pain, 1003–1005
red ags for, 1004b
triage assessment of, 1004f
Background retinopathy, diabetes mellitus, 
clinical examination of people with, 
705f
Bacteraemia, 104–105
Staphylococcus aureus, 270
Bacteraemic leptospirosis, 305
Bacteria, 99, 99b, 100f
endogenous commensal, 61
exotoxin, disease caused by, 102b
identication of, 100f
Bacterial cultures, for gastrointestinal infection, 
793
Bacterial infections, 299–319
after HSCT, 946b
cancer and, 134b
chlamydial, 319, 319b
gastrointestinal, 309–312
with neurological involvement, 314
respiratory, 312–314
rickettsial, 316–319, 317b
of skin, 1088–1091
soft tissues and bones, 299–303
systemic, 303–309
Bacterial meningitis, 1172–1174
causes of, 1172b
clinical features of, 1172, 1172b
headache and, 187, 187b
investigations of, 1172–1173, 1173b, 
1173f
management of, 1173, 1174b
pathophysiology of, 1172
Bacterial pneumonia, 361–362
Bacteriology
inammatory bowel disease, 840
skin, 1069
Bacteriophage, 99
Bacteriuria
asymptomatic, 601–602
catheter-related, 602
Bacteroides fragilis, 516
Bacteroides spp., 101f, 114b
Bad news, 1241
Baker’s (popliteal) cyst, 1007b
Balance, altered, 1143
Balanitis, 373–374
anaerobic, 373b
circinate, 373b
plasma cell (of Zoon), 373b
Balanoposthitis, 373–374
Balkan nephropathy, 577
Ballism, 1142
Balloon dilatation, 605
Balloon tamponade, for variceal bleeding, 
883, 884f
Balloon valvuloplasty
for aortic valve, 458
for mitral valve, 455, 455b, 455f
Balsam of Peru, 1099b
‘Bamboo’ spine, 1035f
Barbiturates, 229b
misuse of, 1250
skin reactions of, 1116b
withdrawal effects of, 16b
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 579b
Bare lymphocyte syndromes, 75
‘Bariatric’ surgery, 766, 767f
Baricitinib, for musculoskeletal disease,  
1011b
Baritosis, 542
Barium enema, for pharyngeal pouch, 811
Barrett’s (columnar lined) oesophagus, 
807–808, 808f
Barthel Index of Activities of Daily Living, 1301, 
1301b
Bartonella henselae, 318, 358
Bartonella quintana, 318, 358
Bartonellosis, 318–319, 318b
Bartter syndrome, 627–628
Basal cell carcinoma, 1083–1084, 1083b, 
1083f
Basal cell papilloma, 1087, 1087f
Basal ganglia, 1126
Basement membrane, 1066, 1067f
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) deposition 
disease, 1022–1023, 1023b
Basophil granulocytes, 1314b
Basophilia, 936b
Basophilic stippling, 931f
Basophils, 65, 927, 936b, 936f
count, 1314b
Bayes’ theorem, 5
B-cell receptor, 65–66, 66f
BCG. See Bacille Calmette-Guérin
Beau’s lines, 1111, 1111f
Becker muscular dystrophy, 46b
Becker’s disease, 1198b
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 49b
Beclometasone, 17
Bedside procedures, for safe transfusion, 
942–943, 943f, 944f
Behaviour
assessment of, in psychiatric interview, 
1237
disturbed and aggressive, 1243–1245, 
1244f
in old age, 1240b
high-risk, transition medicine and, 
1288–1289
history-taking in, 1289b
personality and, 1289
protective factors in, 1289
theories in, 1288–1289
psychiatric disorders and, 1239–1240
Behaviour therapy, 1246
Behavioural rating scales, for pain, 160
Behçet’s disease, 1047, 1047b, 1047f
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Bejel, 302, 302b
Beliefs, abnormal, 1237
Belimumab, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1013, 1013b
Bell’s palsy, 1140
Bence Jones protein, 570
Bendroumethiazide, 22b
Benign asbestos-related pleural effusion, 545
Benign oesophageal stricture, 808–809, 810b
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, 1158, 
1159f
Benign prostatic enlargement (BPE), 609–610
treatment for, 610b
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 609
Benserazide, 1167
Benzamides, substituted, 1252b
Benzathine benzylpenicillin, for syphilis, 378
Benzene, 134b
Benzimidazoles, for helminthic infections, 125
Benzisoxazole, 1252b
Benznidazole, for trypanosomiasis, 125
Benzocaine, allergy, 1099b
Benzodiazepines, 1245b
adverse reactions of, 22b, 1307b
alcohol withdrawal, 1250
for anxiety disorders, 1245b, 1255
delirium, 1307b
misuse of, 229
overdose, 229
respiratory depression and, 1245
stress reactions, 1256
withdrawal, 1242b
Benzoyl peroxide, 1095
Benzylpenicillin, 117b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
for meningitis, 1174b
for neurosyphilis, 1179
Bereavement, 1240
Beri-beri, 776
Bernoulli equation, modied, 394
Berylliosis, 543
Beta-adrenoceptor blockers, for heart failure, 
407
Beta-blockers
adverse reactions of, 22b, 1307b
for anxiety disorder, 1255
for essential tremor, 1169
for hypertension, 448–449
poisoning from, 227
for thyrotoxicosis, 654
Beta-lactam antibiotics, 113b, 117–118
adverse reactions of, 117
drug interactions of, 117
mechanism of action, 113b
pharmacokinetics of, 117
Beta-thalassaemia, 962
diagnostic features of, 962b
management and prevention of, 962,  
962b
Beta-2-microglobulin, as tumour markers, 
136b
Bevacizumab, 147
Bicarbonate, 617b
arterial blood of, 1310b
Bicarbonate system, 630, 630f
Bilateral diaphragmatic weakness, 555
Bile, 864–865
reux, 816
Bile acid diarrhoea, 823, 823b
Bile acid-sequestering resins, 641
Bile duct, tumours of, 917–918
Bile salts, 786f
Bi-level ventilation, 207
Biliary disease, 912–919
autoimmune, 897–901
clinical examination of, 860
extrahepatic, 913
intrahepatic, 913
inammatory and immune disease 
and, 913
investigation of, 865–869, 865b
Biliary sludge, 914
Biliary system, functional anatomy of,  
863–864
Biliary transporter proteins, 865f
Bilirubin
excretion of, 864f
liver blood biochemistry and, 866
metabolism of, 864–865
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Bioactive dietary compounds, 777–778
Bioavailability, 16
Biochemical disorders, clinical examination of, 
614–616, 614f
Biochemical investigations, 616, 616b
Biochemical markers, cancer, 135
Biochemical tests, for liver disease, 866–867
Biochemistry, 563
of bone disease, 998
of coeliac disease, 820
Biologic agents, for inammatory bowel 
disease, 842
Biological therapies
for musculoskeletal disease, 1012f, 
1013–1014
for psychiatric disorders, 1245
for skin disease, 1080–1081
Biopsy, 793
liver, 869b, 896
for hepatocellular carcinoma, 902–903
for lung cancer, 530
pleural, 494
renal, 566–571, 566b
skin, 1068
tissue, in musculoskeletal disease, 
999–1000
Bioterrorism, 108
Biotin, 777
2,3-Biphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG),  
926
Bipolar disorder, 1254
prevalence of, 1236b
Birch oral allergy syndrome, 81
Bird fancier’s lung, 544b
Bismuth, 274, 814–815
Bisoprolol, 407b
for angina, 429
for arrhythmias, 420
for hypertension, 448–449
Bisphosphonates
adverse effects of, 1052b
for bone metastases, 144
for multiple myeloma, 977
for osteoporosis, 1051–1052, 1052b, 
1052f
Bites
snake, 246b
spider, 249
Bithionol, 125
Blackouts, 1137
alcoholic, 1249–1250
Bladder, 560–561
disturbance, 1148–1149
dysfunction, 1147–1149
accid, 1148
health, in older people, 1305–1306
multiple sclerosis and, 1163
ultrasound of, 564
Bladder neck, obstruction, 608
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 347
Blastomycosis, 347
Blatchford score, 797, 798b

[[p1393]]
1322     INDEX
Bleeding, 923–924, 923b, 937–938
clinical assessment of, 937–938
gastrointestinal, 797–800
investigation of, 938
supportive therapy for, 966
Bleeding disorders, 930, 980–985
acquired, 984–985
rare inherited, 984
Bleeding time, 1314b
Bleomycin, pigmentation from, 1109b
‘Blind loop syndrome,’ 822
Blisters, 1065, 1071–1072
acquired, 1072b
clinical assessment of, 1072, 1072f
investigations and management of, 1072
α-Blockers
for hypertension, 449, 450b
for phaeochromocytoma, 689
Blood
arterial, analytes in, 1310b
components of, 939–940, 940b
culture, 104–105, 104f, 270–271, 270f
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
924–930
Blood-brain barrier, 1122–1123
Blood cells, 924–927
Blood count
for acute kidney injury, 589b
for gastrointestinal bleeding, 793
for hepatobiliary disease, 867
Blood diseases
clinical examination of, 922–924, 922f
investigation of, 930–932
pregnancy and, 1278–1279
anaemia as, 1278, 1278b
Rhesus disease as, 1278
thrombocytopenia as, 1278–1279, 
1278b
venous thromboembolism as, 1279, 
1279b–1281b
presenting problems in, 932–939
principles of management of, 939–950
pruritus and, 1073b
rheumatological manifestations of, 1060
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 1039
Blood donation, 939–940, 941f
Blood lm examination, 930, 931b, 931f
Blood ow
Doppler echocardiography for, 394, 395f
respiration and, 391
through heart, 388f
resistance to, 390–391
Blood loss, 950–952
Blood pool imaging, for cardiovascular 
system, 397
Blood pressure
effects of respiration on, 391b
in endocrine disease, 648f
examination of, respiratory system, 480
optimal target, 449b
Blood-stream infection, 270, 270f
Blood supply, to liver, 862–863, 862f
Blood tests
for hepatobiliary disease, 867
for musculoskeletal disease, 997–999
for neurological disease, 1134
older people, 933b
for pain, 159–160, 160b
for pneumonia, 515b
for renal disease, 563–564
for skin disease, 1069
Blood transfusion, 939–943
adverse effects of, 940–942
exchange, for malaria, 323
in intensive care, 214
in major haemorrhage, 943
other immunological complications of, 942
safe transfusion procedures in, 942–943
Blood vessels, imaging of, 1131
Blood volume, reference range of, 1314b
Bloom’s syndrome, 135b
Blue naevi, 1088
Blurred vision, 1224
BMI. See Body mass index
BNP. See Brain natriuretic peptide
Body composition and nutritional status, 757b
Body dysmorphic disorder, 1257
Body fat, in endocrine disease, 648f
Body lice, 1093
Body mass index (BMI), 757b
of older people, 1296
Body packers/stuffers, 231–232, 231f
Boerhaave’s syndrome, 811
Bohr effect, 194
Bone
anatomy of, 992–994
cortical, 992f
in endocrine disease, 648f
infection, 1025–1027
in old age, 1025b
matrix, 993
metabolism, pregnancy and, 1266–1267
mineral, 993
pain, 138b
remodelling, 993–994, 993f, 994b
resorption, 993f
trabecular, 992f
tumours, 1059
metastatic, 144
Bone disease, 989, 1047–1059
biochemical abnormalities in, 998b
chronic kidney disease and, 591–592
metabolic, after gastric resection, 816
metastatic, 1059
in pregnancy, 1275
in tuberculosis, 520–521
Bone marrow, 924, 924f
examination of, 932f
Bone pain, 168b
Borrelia burgdorferi, 303
Borrelia infections, 303–305, 304b
Boty, 279f
Botulinum toxin, 102b, 1180–1181, 1181b
for dystonia, 1170
for hemifacial spasm, 1170–1171
Bouchard nodes, 990–992
Bouginage, 793f, 808
Boutonneuse fever, 317b
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), 
1181
Bowel
disturbance, 1147–1149
health, in older people, 1306
whole bowel irrigation, 224
Bowen’s disease, 1083b, 1085, 1085f
Boyle’s law, 258, 258f
BPE. See Benign prostatic enlargement
BPH. See Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Brachial plexopathy, 1194
Brachial plexus lesions, 1194b
Brachytherapy, 145
Bradykinesia, 1126
Brain
alcohol-related damage, 1249–1250
cerebral hemispheres, 1123–1124, 1124b, 
1125f
damage due to alcohol, 1249–1250
lesions, 1129, 1145b
schizophrenia, 1251
structure and function of, psychiatric 
disorders and, 1239
tumours, 1183–1185, 1183b, 1183f
clinical features of, 1183–1185
investigations of, 1183, 1184f
management of, 1184–1185
metastatic, 144
prognosis of, 1185
Brain death
classication of, 216b
organ donation after, 217
UK criteria for diagnosis of, 215b
Brain injury, from critical illness, 215, 215b, 
216b
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 393, 619
Brainstem, 1124, 1125f
death, 212
encephalitis, 1176
lesions, 1140
Breast cancer, 149–150
clinical features of, 149
investigations of, 149–150
management of, 150
in older people, 137b
pathogenesis of, 149–150
screening, 137b
staging, 149b
survival rates for, 149, 149b
Breastfeeding
HIV infection/AIDS and, 368
safety of antirheumatic drugs during, 1274b
Breasts, in endocrine disease, 648f
Breath tests, gastroenterology, 793
Breathing
assessment of, in deteriorating patient, 191
control of, 483
Kussmaul, 588
Breathlessness, 398, 489–492
acute, 181–183, 491b
clinical assessment of, 181–182
clinical features in, 182b
initial investigations of, 182–183
presentation of, 181–183, 181f
severe, 491
chronic exertional, 491, 491b
in COPD, 505
differential diagnosis of, 491, 491b
in lung cancer, 529
in palliative care, 170
pathophysiology of, 489–491, 490f
in pregnancy, 1268, 1269b
psychogenic, 492b
Briquet’s syndrome, 1256
Bristol stool chart, 273, 274f
British National Formulary, 28
Broca’s area, 1128
Bromocriptine
for brain tumours, 1184
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 1252
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167b
for prolactinoma, 697, 697b
Bronchial artery, 483f
angiography, 493f
embolisation, 526
Bronchial gland adenoma, 532b
Bronchial gland carcinoma, 532b
Bronchial obstruction
in lung cancer, 529, 529f, 530b
radiological features of, 486f
Bronchiectasis, 509–510, 509b, 510f
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma, 532b
Bronchodilators
for acute exacerbations of COPD, 509
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
507
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, classication 
of, 526b
Bronchopulmonary segments, 482f
Bronchoscopy, 486–487
in haemoptysis, 492
in lung cancer, 530, 530f
in mediastinal tumours, 533
Bronchus, tumours of, 528–533
Brown-Séquard syndrome, 1140, 1189
Bruce Protocol, for exercise ECG, 393
Brucella abortus, 303
Brucella canis, 303
Brucella melitensis, 303
Brucella suis, 303
Brucellosis, 303
clinical features of, 303, 303f
diagnosis of, 303
incubation period of, 108b
management of, 303, 304b
in pregnancy, 280b
Brudzinski’s sign, 1171
Brugada syndrome, 418
Brugia malayi infection, 278b, 335, 335f
BSE. See Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
BTK gene, X-linked agammaglobulinaemia 
and, 74
Bubonic plague, 307
Buccal administration, 17
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 909–910
Buerger’s disease, 442
Bulbar palsy, 1146–1147, 1148b
Bulimia nervosa, 1258, 1258b
Bullae, in lungs, 486b, 506
Bullous disease, 1105–1108
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Bullous eruptions, drug-induced, 1116b
Bullous impetigo, 1072b
Bullous lupus erythematosus, 1106b
Bullous pemphigoid, 1106, 1106b, 1107f
Bumetanide, for hypertension, 448
Bundle branch block, 411, 412b, 412f
Bundle of His, 389
Bupropion, 226b
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 309
Burkitt’s lymphoma, 134b
Burns, sunburn, 1074f
Bursae, 995
Bursitis
anserine, 1006b
deep infrapatellar, 1006b
ischiogluteal, 1006b
olecranon, 1006b
pre-patellar, 1006b
supercial, 1006b
trochanteric, 1006b, 1006f
Buruli ulcer, 302–303
Buschke-Löwenstein tumour, 382
Buspirone, 226b
Busulfan
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
Buttery rash, 990–992
Butyrophenones, 1245b
for schizophrenia, 1252b
Byssinosis, 542, 544b
C
C1 inhibitor deciency (hereditary 
angioedema), 82
acquired, 84
C4d staining, 85
CA-19.9, as tumour markers, 136b
Cabergoline
for brain tumours, 1184
nephrotoxicity, 599b
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167b
for prolactinoma, 697b
CABG. See Coronary artery bypass  
grafting
Cabozantinib, for medullary carcinoma, 666
CADASIL, 1150
Cadmium, lung cancer, 546
Caeruloplasmin, 1312b
Café au lait spot, 1185f
Calabar swelling, 336
Calcic periarthritis, 1022–1023, 1023f
Calcication
artery, 395
metastatic, 635
Calcimimetic agents, 591–592
Calcineurin inhibitors, 1079
Calcinosis
crystal-associated arthritis and deposition 
in connective tissue, 1018b
nephrocalcinosis, 599b, 602
Calcipotriol, 1102
Calcitonin
for Paget’s disease, 1057b
as tumor markers, 136b
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), 789
Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol), for 
hypoparathyroidism, 679
Calcium, 778, 779b
acute kidney injury and, 589b
channelopathies, 1198b
homeostasis, 633
in myocardial contraction, 390
for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1052
pregnancy and, 1266
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
in skeletal disease, 998b
stone, prevention of, 605b
supplements, osteoporosis prophylaxis, 
1052b
Calcium antagonists (channel blockers)
adverse reactions of, 22b
for angina, 430b
for arrhythmias, 414
for hypertension, 448
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 474–475
for mitral stenosis, 455
poisoning from, 227
for pulmonary hypertension, 549
Calcium carbonate, 591–592
Calcium gluconate, 634
cardiotoxic drug poisoning, 227
drug interactions, 23b
for hypermagnesaemia, 634
Calcium oxalate
crystal, 234
stones, 602b
Calcium phosphate, stones, 602b
Calcium pyrophosphate crystals, 678
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) 
crystal deposition disease, 
1021–1022
Calcium therapy
for hypoparathyroidism, 679
tetany, 677
Calculi (stones)
renal, 602, 602b
staghorn, 602, 603f
urinary, 602
Calicivirus, 885b
Calprotectin, faecal, 795b, 1313b
‘Cameron lesions,’ 808

[[p1394]]
INDEX    1323
Campbell de Morgan spots, 1087, 1087f
Campylobacter jejuni
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1192–1193
infection, 310
Canakinumab, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1013b, 1014
Canalicular system, 927
Cancer, 130f
aetiology, environmental, 134b
biochemical markers, 135
breast, 149–150
clinical features of, 149
investigations of, 149–150
management of, 150
pathogenesis of, 149–150
staging, 149b
survival rates for, 149, 149b
cervical, 150–151
investigations in, 150–151
management of, 151
pathogenesis of, 150–151
childhood, 1291
clinical examination of, 128–130
clinical trials, 148–149
colorectal, 827–832
clinical features of, 828–829
familial adenomatous polyposis, 
831–832, 831b, 831f
investigations of, 829, 830f
management of, 829–830
pathophysiology of, 827–830, 828f, 
829f
prevention and screening of, 844
determinants of, 133
environmental, 133, 134b
genetic, 133, 135b
ectopic hormone production, 143, 143b
emergency complications of, 138
endometrial, 150
investigations of, 150
management of, 150
pathogenesis of, 150
evaluation of treatment, 148
hallmarks of, 130–133
activating invasion and metastasis, 
132–133
angiogenesis, 132, 132f
enabling replicative immortality, 131
evading growth suppressors, 131
evading immune destruction, 133
genome instability/mutation, 130
reprogramming energy metabolism, 133
resisting cell death, 130–131
sustaining proliferative signalling, 131
tumour-promoting inammation, 133
histology of
cytogenetic analysis, 137
molecular pathology, 137
HIV-related, 365, 365b
imaging for, 134
inheritance, 135b
investigations of, 133–138, 135b
late toxicity of therapy, 148
lung, 528–532, 528f
burden of, 528b
cell types in, 528b
clinical features of, 528–530
investigations of, 530–531
management of, 531–532
non-metastatic extrapulmonary 
manifestations of, 529–530, 530b
occupational, 546
pathology of, 528, 529f
prognosis for, 532, 532b
metastatic disease, 143
neurological paraneoplastic syndromes, 
143
in older people, 137b
oral, 805, 805b
ovarian, 150
investigations of, 150
management of, 150
pathogenesis of, 150
predisposition syndromes, 135b
presenting problems of, 139b
renal cell, 606, 607f
screening, breast cancer, 137b
specic, 149–151, 149b
staging, TNM classication, 135b
survivorship, 151
therapeutics for, 145–149
adjuvant, 145
chemotherapy, 146–147, 146f
curative, 145
hormonal, 147
hormone, 147
immunotherapy, 147–148, 148f
neoadjuvant, 145
palliative, 145
radiation therapy, 145–146
surgical, 145
targeted, 147, 147f
type of, 135–137, 137b
histopathology, 136
immunohistochemistry, 137
light microscopy, 136–137
of unknown primary, 139b
Cancer antigen 19.9 (CA-19.9), 136b
Cancer antigen 125 (CA-125), 136b
Cancer immunotherapy, endocrine effects 
of, 701
Candesartan
for heart failure, 407b
for myocardial infarction, 439
Candida albicans, 343–344
Candida dubliniensis, 345
Candida glabrata, 345
Candida krusei, 345
Candida parapsilosis, 345
Candida spp., 101f
endocarditis, 463
Candida tropicalis, 345
Candidiasis, 373b, 374b
acute disseminated, 345
chronic disseminated, 345
oesophageal, 809
oral, 805
skin, 1093
supercial, 343–344
systemic, 345
Cannabis, 230
CAPD. See Continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis
Capillary blood glucose testing, 710
Caplan syndrome, 539
Capnocytophaga canimorsus, 271b
Capnography, 177f
CAPS. See Cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndrome
Capsaicin
for herpes zoster, 283
patch, for pain, 163b
topical, 357–358
Capsule endoscopy, 792, 793f
wireless, 794b, 794f
Carbamate insecticides, 233
Carbamazepine
for epilepsy, 1157b
hyponatraemia, 1158b
pharmacodynamics, 20b
poisoning, 229b
for status epilepticus, 1138b
for trigeminal neuralgia, 1151
Carbapenems, 117b, 118
Carbenoxolone, 627
sodium content of, 877b
Carbidopa, 1167
Carbimazole
for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 661
for thyrotoxicosis, in pregnancy, 1273
Carbohydrate (glycogen) metabolism,  
1197b
Carbohydrates, 760–761, 761b
digestion of, 786
metabolism, 864
disorders of, 643
Carbon dioxide
arterial blood (PaCO2), 1310b
removal of, extracorporeal, 210
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 222b, 231–232
Carbonic acid/bicarbonate buffer system,  
630
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, for 
hypervolaemia, 622
Carboplatin, 150
Carboxyhaemoglobin, reference range of, 
1312b
Carboxypenicillins, 117
Carbuncles, 1089–1090, 1089f
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 136b
Carcinoid syndrome, valvular heart disease, 
461
Carcinoid tumours
gastric, 819
lung, 532b
Carcinoma
at ampulla of Vater, 918–919
anaplastic, 666
basal cell, 138b, 1083–1084, 1083b, 1083f
bronchial gland, 532b
bronchoalveolar, 532b
brolamellar hepatocellular, 904
follicular, 666
of gallbladder, 917
gastric, 817–818, 818f
hepatocellular, 901–904, 902f
brolamellar, 904
hepatic resection for, 902
liver biopsy for, 902–903
liver transplantation for, 902
management of, 903f
in old age, 870b
screening for, 902
transarterial chemoembolisation for, 903
medullary, 666
of oesophagus, 809–810
of pancreas, 855f
papillary, 665–666
squamous, 810b
skin, 1084, 1084f
of unknown primary, 138–139, 139b, 139f
Carcinoma in situ, 1083b
Card agglutination trypanosomiasis test 
(CATT), 324
Cardiac arrest, 202–205, 253, 253b, 399, 
399b, 399f
chain of survival in, 204f
post, 205–206
acute management of, 205–206, 206b
prognosis of, 205–206, 206b
Cardiac arrhythmias, 1252
Cardiac biomarkers, 393–394
for acute coronary syndrome, 436f
Cardiac catheterisation, 396, 397f
aortic regurgitation, 461b
aortic stenosis, 459b
mitral valve disease, 455, 457b
Cardiac death, organ donation after, 217
Cardiac disease, 910
HIV-related, 365
in pregnancy, 1275–1276
aortic dissection, 1276, 1276b
congenital, 1275–1276
dilated cardiomyopathy, 1276
myocardial infarction, 1276
peripartum cardiomyopathy, 1276
valvular, 1275
Cardiac output, 391
heart failure, 402
Cardiac pacemakers
code, 423b
permanent, 409–410, 422–423, 422f, 423b
rate-responsive, 422–423
temporary, 422, 422f
Cardiac peptides, 390
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy, for 
arrhythmias, 423
Cardiac tamponade, 391, 478, 478b
Cardiac transplantation, 408
Cardiac tumours, 476
Cardiobacterium hominis, 463
Cardiogenic shock, 202, 210b
causes of, 203f
downward spiral of, 202, 203f
Cardiology, 385
Cardiomegaly, 394
Cardiomyopathy, 473–476, 473f, 476b
arrhythmogenic ventricular, 475
dilated, 1276
HIV-associated, 365
hypertrophic obstructive, 1291
obliterative, 475
peripartum, pregnancy and, 1276
restrictive, 475
septic, 201
types of, 473f
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 217b
anterior chest wall injuries, 217f
Cardiothoracic ratio, 394
Cardiotoxicity, venom and, 243
Cardiovascular disease
chronic kidney disease and, 592
congenital, 465–472
investigation of, 391–397
New Heart Association (NYHA) functional 
classication of, 397, 398b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
presenting problems in, 397–408
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1029
syphilis, 377
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 1039
transition medicine and, 1291
congenital heart disease, 1291
hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy, 1291
Cardiovascular medications, poisoning from, 
227–228
Cardiovascular support, in intensive care, 
210–212
advanced haemodynamic monitoring, 
210–211, 211b, 211f
uid and vasopressor use, 210, 210b
initial resuscitation, 210, 210b
mechanical, 211–212
Cardiovascular system
clinical examination of, 386–388
cold environment and, 252
high altitude and, 256
pregnancy and, 1266
Cardioversion, 421
atrial brillation, 413
direct current (DC), 413
ventricular tachycardia, 417
Carditis, 452
Carey Coombs murmur, 452
Carnitine-palmitoyl transferase (CPT) 
deciency, 1197b
Caroli’s disease, 913
Carotid pulse, 191
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 1060–1061
Carrion’s disease, 318
Cartilage, articular, 994–995, 995f
Carvedilol
for arrhythmias, 420
for hypertension, 449
Caspases, 41
Caspofungin, 122, 122b
for aspergillosis, 527
Castleman’s disease, 266b, 291
Cat scratch disease, 318
Cataplexy, 1159
Cataract, 1229–1230, 1229f, 1230b
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
Catatonia, 1251
Catecholamines, 679
drug interactions, 23b
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) 
inhibitors, for Parkinson’s disease, 
1167
Catephen, for anogenital warts, 382
Catheter ablation therapy, 423–424, 423f
for arrhythmias, 412
Catheters/catheterisation
bacteriuria, 602
cardiac, 396, 397f
aortic regurgitation, 461b
aortic stenosis, 459b
mitral valve disease, 455, 457b
pulmonary artery, critically ill patients, 
210–211, 211f
Cathinones, 230
CATT. See Card agglutination trypanosomiasis 
test
Cauda equina syndrome, 1004b
Caudal regression syndrome, 1272
Caval lters, for pulmonary embolism,  
548
CBT. See Cognitive behaviour therapy
CCK. See Cholecystokinin
CD4 cells, in HIV infection/AIDS, 353–354
CD4+ T lymphocytes, 67
CD8+ T lymphocytes, 66–67
CDKs. See Cyclin-dependent kinases
CEA. See Carcinoembryonic antigen
Cefaclor, 118b
Cefalexin, 118b
for urinary tract infection, 600–601
Cefazolin, 118b
Cefepime, 114b, 118b
Cexime, 118b
Cefotaxime, 114b, 118b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
for meningitis, 1174b
Cefoxitin, 118b
Cefradine, 118b
Ceftaroline, 118b
Ceftazidime, 114b, 118b
for bronchiectasis, 510
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
for melioidosis, 309
Cancer (Continued)
Cardiovascular disease (Continued)

[[p1395]]
1324     INDEX
Ceftobiprole, 118b
Ceftriaxone, 114b, 118b
for leptospirosis, 306
for meningitis, 1174b
for nocardiosis, 309
for pneumonia, 361–362
for STIs
congenital syphilis, 378–379
gonorrhoea, 380b
for Whipple’s disease, 822
Cefuroxime, 114b, 118b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
for empyema, 496
for meningitis, 1174b
for pneumonia, 516b
prophylactic, 116b
Cefuroxime axetil, 304
Celecoxib, 1010b
Cell adhesion molecules, 132f
Cell body, 156
Cell cycle, 131, 131f
stimulation, 131
Cell differentiation, 40–41
Cell migration, 40–41
Cell surface antigens, 927
Cells
cerebrospinal uid analysis of, 1135, 1313b
death of, 41, 130–131
programmed (apoptosis), 130
division of, 40–41
of nervous system, 1122–1123, 1122f
senescence of, 41
Cellular immunity, 66–67, 67f
Cellulitis, 1090, 1090f
anaerobic, 272
clinical assessment of, 188
investigation of, 188
Central core disease, 1198b
Central cyanosis, 467
Central nervous system (CNS)
HIV infection/AIDS, 353–354
tuberculosis, 520
Central sensitisation, 158, 159f
Central sleep apnoea, 551–552
Central termination, 156
Central venous catheter infections, 271
Central venous pressure, monitoring of,  
177f
Cephalosporin, 114b, 118, 118b
for pneumonia, 517
in pregnancy, 117
renal or hepatic disease, 32b
for variceal bleeding, 883b
Cephamycins, 118
Cerebellar degeneration, cancer-related, 
138b, 143
Cerebellar dysfunction, 1187
Cerebellum, 1126
Cerebral abscess, 1178, 1178b, 1179f
Cerebral circulation, diabetes mellitus and, 
747b
Cerebral cortex
anatomy of, 1125f
lobar functions of, 1124b
Cerebral hemispheres, 1123–1124, 1124b, 
1125f
Cerebral ischaemia, 977f
Cerebral ischaemic stroke, 1208
Cerebral oedema, high-altitude, 257
Cerebral palsy, transition medicine and, 
 1290
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 212
Cerebral toxoplasmosis, HIV-related, 359b, 
362–363, 363f
Cerebral venous disease, 1216–1217,  
1216b
clinical features, 1216, 1216b
investigations and management, 1216
Cerebrospinal uid (CSF), 1124
analysis, 1134–1135, 1313b
circulation, 1182b
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1193
meningitis, 1171, 1173
multiple sclerosis, 1162
result of, interpretation of, 1134–1135
in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 
1175
syphilis and, 377
in viral encephalitis, 1176
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, 639b
Certolizumab
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
for musculoskeletal disease, 1013b
Cervical cancer, 150–151
HIV-related, 365
investigations of, 150–151
management of, 151
pathogenesis of, 150–151
Cervical cord compression, 1188f
in cervical spondylosis, 1188f
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1029b
Cervical spine
myelopathy, 1188
radiculopathy, 1187–1188, 1188f
spondylosis, 1187–1188, 1188f
subluxation of, 1030f
Cestode infections, 278b, 340–342
Cetirizine, 1080
CETP. See Cholesterol ester transfer protein
Cetuximab, 151, 829–830
CFT. See Complement xation test
CFTR modulator therapies, for cystic brosis, 
511–512
CFU-E. See Colony-forming unit erythroid
CFU-GM. See Colony-forming unit-
granulocyte, monocyte
CFU-Meg. See Colony-forming unit-
megakaryocyte
CGRP. See Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Chagas’ disease. See American 
trypanosomiasis
Chain of infection, 98f
Chancre, 374
trypanosomal, 324
Chancroid, 381b
Channelopathies, 1197, 1198b
Charcoal, activated, 223, 224b
antidiabetic overdose, 228
digoxin/oleander poisoning, 228
NSAID overdose, 226
salicylate poisoning, 226
tricyclic antidepressant poisoning, 226
Charcot joints, 1061f
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), 1193
Charcot neuroarthropathy, 752–753
Charles Bonnet’s syndrome, 1145
Cheese worker’s lung, 544b
Chemical cholestasis, 912
Chemical poisoning, 231–236
Chemical warfare agents, poisoning from, 
235, 236b
Chemicals, in haemolysis, 959
Chemoembolisation, hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 903
Chemoprophylaxis, 109b
for malaria, 323, 323b
Chemotherapy, 146–147, 146f, 943, 946b
adjuvant, 145
breast cancer, 150
for brain tumours, 1184–1185
leukaemia, acute, 965b
for lung cancer, 531
for multiple myeloma, 976, 977f
palliative, 145
platinum-based, 531
for prostate cancer, 610–611
for tuberculosis, 522–523
Chest pain, 179–181, 398
associated features of, 179–180, 180f
cardiac disease, aortic dissection, 444
characteristics of, 179
clinical assessment of, 180
differential diagnosis of, 179b
initial investigations of, 180–181, 181b
ischaemic, 398f
onset of, 179
pregnancy and, 1269
in respiratory disease, 492
site and radiation of, 179
Chest radiography/X-ray, 394
for bronchiectasis, 510
cardiovascular disorders
for aortic regurgitation, 394f
for chronic constrictive pericarditis, 478f
for heart failure, 405, 405f
for mitral valve, 394f
for myocardial infarction, 436
of cardiovascular system, 394
for COPD, 506
for empyema, 497f
of pacemaker/debrillator, 408f
for pleural effusion, 494
pregnancy and, 1268
for respiratory disease
abnormalities, 486b
ARDS, 201f
aspergillosis, 527f
asthma, 501
bronchial obstruction/lung collapse, 
529f
bronchiectasis, 510
COPD, 506
empyema, 497f
haemoptysis, 492
HIV-related pulmonary disease, 361b, 
361f
interpretation, 485b
interstitial, 534f
lobar collapse, 486f
mediastinal tumours, 533f
pleural effusion, 494
pleural plaques, 545f
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 361f
pneumothorax, 554
pulmonary embolism, 547b, 547f
pulmonary hypertension, 549f
sarcoidosis, 538b
silicosis, 543f
tuberculosis, 520f, 521f
Chest wall deformities, 555–556
Chickenpox, 282
clinical features of, 282, 283f
diagnosis of, 282
incubation period of, 108b
management and prevention of, 282, 283b
periods of infectivity, 108b
rash, 282
varicella zoster immunoglobulin, 284b
Chiclero ulcers, 330
Chief cells, 675
Chikungunya virus, 299, 1176b
Child-bearing potential, cystic brosis and, 
1290
Childbirth, associated psychiatric disorders, 
1260
Childhood absence epilepsy, 1155b
Childhood cancer therapy, late effects of, 701
Child-Pugh classication, cirrhosis prognosis 
and, 881b
Children
important long-term conditions of, adult 
health affected by, 1282b
inammatory bowel disease and, 846, 
1292–1293
laboratory reference range of, 1315–1316
renal impairment in, causes of, 1292b
STI in, 372
Chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) 
therapy, 947, 947f
Chlamydia conjunctivitis, in adolescents, 
1230b
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 319b
Chlamydia psittaci, 319b
Chlamydia spp., 319
Chlamydia trachomatis, 99, 114b, 319
in pregnancy, 280b, 372b
Chlamydial infection, 379–380
treatment of, 380b
urethritis, 372
Chloasma, 1109
Chloramphenicol, 114b, 120
contraindication to, in pregnancy, 117
mechanism of action, 113b
for meningitis, 1174b
for plague, 307
in pregnancy, 117
for pyogenic meningitis, 1173b
in renal/hepatic disease, 32b
for rickettsial fevers, 318
Chloride, 617b
channelopathies, 1198b
reference range of, venous blood, 1310b
Chloroquine
adverse reactions of, 21
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
leprosy reactions, 315
for malaria, 124, 323b
myopathy, 1060b
poisoning, 229b
resistance to, 322–323
Chlorphenamine, 35b
diphtheria, 552
pruritus, 944f
Chlorpromazine
for acute diarrhoea, 274
for alcohol withdrawal, 1250
hepatotoxicity, 905b
long QT syndrome, 418b
poisoning, 228–229
for rabies, 1177
for schizophrenia, 1252
Chlorpropamide, neutropenia, 936b
Cholangiocarcinoma, 917, 917f
Cholangiography, for hepatobiliary disease, 
868
Cholangiopathy, HIV-related, 360
Cholangitis
acute, 916
liver ukes, 340, 341b
primary
biliary, 898–899
IgG4-associated, 901, 901b, 919
primary sclerosing, 899–901
recurrent pyogenic, 917
Cholecystectomy
in old age, 915b
for pancreatitis, 852
post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 918b
Cholecystitis, 915–916
acute, 915–916
in old age, 915b
chronic, 916
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 786, 786f, 790b
Choledochal cysts, 913, 915f
Choledochojejunostomy, 856
Choledocholithiasis, 916–917
endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography for, 916f
endoscopic ultrasound for, 916f
Cholera, 102b, 312
clinical features of, 312
diagnosis and management of, 312
uid loss, 312
incubation period of, 108b
prevention of, 312
‘Cholera sicca,’ 312
Cholestasis, 906
benign recurrent intrahepatic, 912
chemical, 912
obstetric (of pregnancy), 1073b, 1277
pruritus, 1073b
Cholestatic jaundice, 870b, 872, 872b
Cholesterol, 637
atheroembolism, 565b
gallstones, 913–915, 914b
low-density lipoproteins, 636–637
metabolism of, 76
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
transport of, 637
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 636
Cholesterol emboli, 583, 583f
Cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP), 637
Cholesterol gallstones, 913–915, 914b
Cholesterolosis of gallbladder, 919
Choline salicylate, 805
Cholinergic syndrome, organophosphate 
poisoning, 232–233, 233b
Chondrocalcinosis, 1022b, 1022f
Chondrocytes, tumours, 1059b
Chondroma, 1059b
Chondrosarcoma, 1059, 1059b
Chorea, 1142
causes of, 1142b
in Huntington’s disease, 1142
Chorionic villus sampling, 53–55
Choroid, ciliary body and iris, 1219–1221
Choroid plexus, 1186f
Christmas disease, 984
Chromatin, 38, 38f
Chromatography, 616b
Chromoblastomycosis, 344
Chromosomal disorders, 44b, 44f
Chromosomes, 38–41, 38f, 50, 50f
analysis of, 44f
deletions, 50
duplication, 50f
sex, 38
Chronic allograft failure, 85
Chronic bronchitis, 489b, 505
Chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis, 
526, 527f
Chronic cold agglutinin disease, 959
Chronic constrictive pericarditis, 477–478, 
478b, 478f
Chronic demyelinating polyneuropathy, 1192b, 
1194
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, 539–540
Chronic exertional breathlessness, 491, 491b
Chronic fatigue syndrome, 1256
Chronic brosing pulmonary aspergillosis, 526
Chest radiography/X-ray (Continued)
Chlorpromazine (Continued)

[[p1396]]
INDEX    1325
Chronic uoride poisoning, 780
Chronic granulomatous disease, 72–73
Chronic inammation, 69
Chronic interstitial nephritis, 576–577,  
578b
Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, 
825–826, 826b
Chronic kidney disease, 588–593, 590b
causes of, 588b
haemodialysis in, 594–595
indications for dialysis for, 595b
osteodystrophy and, 592f
physical signs of, 589f
pregnancy and, 1277, 1277f
staging of, in children over 2 years of age, 
1292b
transition medicine and, 1291–1292
Chronic laryngitis, 552, 552b
Chronic liver failure, causes of, 869f, 880b
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), 
969–970, 969f
clinical features of, 969
investigations of, 969
management of, 969–970
prognosis of, 970
staging of, 969b
Chronic meningococcaemia, 1172
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia, 850
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML), 967–969, 
968f
clinical features of, 967
investigations of, 967–968
management of, 968–969
accelerated phase, 968–969
blast crisis, 968–969
chronic phase, 968, 968b
natural history of, 967
Chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis, 1062
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 481, 505–509
BODE index in, 508b
classication of, 507b
clinical features of, 505–506, 507b
chronic exertional breathlessness,  
505, 507b
exacerbations of, 503–505
acute, 508–509
investigations of, 506–507
management of, 507–508, 507f, 508b
occupational, 542
in old age, 508b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pathophysiology of, 505–509, 506f
prognosis of, 508
risk factors for, 505b
Chronic or recurrent abdominal pain, 
804–805, 804b
Chronic pain syndrome, 165–167
Chronic pancreatitis, 852–854
causes of, 853b
complications of, 853b
investigations of, 853, 853b, 854f
management of complications of, 853b
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pathophysiology of, 853f
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), 
526–527
Chronic respiratory failure, 498–499
management of, 498–499, 499b
Chronic rheumatic heart disease, 453
Chronic venous insufciency, 188
Chronic widespread pain, 166
CHRPE. See Congenital hypertrophy of the 
retinal pigment epithelium
Chrysops, loiasis, 336
Churg-Strauss syndrome, 1044
Chvostek’s sign, 633
Chylothorax, 494
Chyluria, lymphatic lariasis, 335
Chymotrypsinogen, 788b
Ciclosporin, 842
adverse reactions of
chronic interstitial nephritis, 599b
musculoskeletal, 1060b
drug interactions, 23b
eczema, 1098
heart transplant patients, 408
immunosuppression, 85b
for lichen planus, 1103
lung transplant patients, 499
for psoriasis, 1102
for pyoderma gangrenosum, 1111
for skin disease, 1080
Ciclosporin A, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1011b
Cidofovir
as antiviral agents, 123b
CMV, 286
for herpesvirus infection, 123, 123b
Cigarette smoke, in lower airway defences, 
484
Ciguatera poisoning, 236
Cilia, 60
Ciliary dysfunction syndromes, 509b, 510
Cilostazol, 442
Cimetidine
drug interactions of, 24
neutropenia, 936b
for urticaria, 1104–1105
Cinacalcet, for primary hyperparathyroidism, 
678
Ciprooxacin, 114b, 119b
for anthrax, 314
for bacillary dysentery, 312
for bronchiectasis, 510
for brucellosis, 304b
for cholera, 312
drug interactions of, 24
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
for intestinal bacterial overgrowth, 822
for meningococcal infection, 1173
for plague, 307
prophylactic, 116b
for Q fever, 318
for STIs
chancroid, 380b
gonorrhoea, 380b
for urinary tract infection, 601b
Circinate balanitis, 373b
Circulation, 390–391
assessment of, in deteriorating patient, 191
coronary, 388–389
enterohepatic, 18
Circulatory collapse, pregnancy and, 1269
Circulatory failure (shock), 195
acute, 202
Circumduction, 1143
Circumex artery (CX)
in coronary circulation, 388, 389f
with stenosis, 397f
Cirrhosis, 879–881, 880f
alcoholic, 894, 894b
biliary, secondary, 913
causes of, 879b
Child-Pugh classication of, 881b
drugs to be avoided in, 905b
hepatic brosis and, 879f
management of, 880
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and, 897f
survival in, 881b, 881f
Cisplatin
for head and neck tumours, 151
hypomagnesaemia and, 634b
nephrotoxicity, 599b
Citalopram, 1253b
Citric acid (Krebs) cycle, 47
Citrobacter freundii, 271
Citrobacter spp., 114b
CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
CK. See Creatine kinase
Cladribine, 1163b
Clarithromycin
drug interactions, 23b
H. pylori eradication, 814–815
for leprosy, 315
for Mycobacterium avium complex, 359b
for pneumonia, 516b
in pregnancy, 117
Clasp-knife phenomenon, 1126
Classical syndromes, 651
Clearance, 18
Climate change, 90
Clindamycin, 114b
for acne vulgaris, 1095
for babesiosis, 323–324
for gas gangrene, 272
for malaria, 323b
for MRSA, 300–301
for necrotising fasciitis, 272
in pregnancy, 117
for septic arthritis, 1025b
Clinical biochemistry, 613
Clinical decision-making, 10–11
in cognitive biases, 11
dealing with uncertainty during, 5
in deciding pre-test probability, 10–11
in evidence-based history and examination, 
10–11
heuristic, 6b
history and physical examination of, 2–3
in human factors, 11
in interpreting results, 11
in post-test probability, 11
problem representation, 5–6
reducing errors in, 9–10
cognitive debiasing strategies, 8f, 9–10
effective team communication, 9, 10b
using clinical prediction rules and other 
decision aids, 9
in treatment threshold, 11
Clinical endpoints, 35
Clinical Frailty Scale, 1300f
Clinical genetics, 37
Clinical immunology, 59
functional anatomy and physiology in, 
60–67, 60f
Clinical pharmacology, 14–19
Clinical reasoning, 2, 3f
Clinical skills, 3f
Clinical therapeutics, 13
Clinical trials, 28, 28f
CLL. See Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Clobazam, 1157b
Clobetasol, 373b, 1079b
Clobetasone butyrate, 1079b
for eczema, 1096
Clofazimine
for leprosy, 315
pigmentation from, 1109b
for tuberculosis, 121
Clomethiazole, effect of old age, 32b
Clomifene, for infertility, 672
Clomipramine, 1253b
for narcolepsy, 1159
Clonal expansion, 65–66, 66f
Clonazepam
for epilepsy, 1157b
for periodic limb movement syndrome, 
1154
Clonic seizures, 1154
Clonidine, opiate withdrawal, 1251
Clonorchiasis, 341b
Clonorchis spp., 125
Clopidogrel
for angina, 431
for myocardial infarction, 438b, 1276
for peripheral arterial disease, 442b
pharmacokinetics, 20b
platelet inhibition, 927
Clostridium botulinum, 102b, 1180
Clostridium difcile, 101f, 102b, 114b, 311, 
311f
Clostridium novyi, in injecting drug-user, 266
Clostridium perfringens
anaerobic cellulitis from, 272
food poisoning, 310
Clostridium spp., 100f, 101f
Clostridium tetani, 102b
Clotrimazole, 122b
Clotting factors, 864, 927
Clozapine, schizophrenia, 1252b
Clubbing, 1111, 1111f
nger, 480, 492, 492b, 492f
asbestosis, 545–546
in lung cancer, 529
Cluster headache, 1150–1151
CML. See Chronic myeloid leukaemia
CMT. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
CNS. See Central nervous system
CNV. See Copy number variations
Coagulation, disseminated intravascular,  
199
Coagulation disorders, 981–985
Coagulation factors, complications of therapy, 
in haemophilia A, 983–984
Coagulation screen, 932b, 1314b
Coagulation system, 927
activation of, 199
investigation of, 930–932
Coagulation tests, for hepatobiliary disease, 
867
Coagulopathy, causes of, 982b
Coal tar, 1102
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP), 542
Co-amoxiclav, 114b
for empyema, 496
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
prophylactic, 116b
for respiratory tract infection, pneumonia, 
516b
for urinary tract infection, 600–601
Co-artemether, 322
Cocaine, misuse of, 230
Coccidioidomycosis, 347
Codeine
cirrhosis and, 905b
diarrhoea, 816
headache, 1150
pharmacokinetics, 20b
Codons, 40
Coeliac disease, 819–821
clinical features of, 819
disease associations of, 820b
investigations of, 819–820
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
pathophysiology of, 819, 820f
Coeliac plexus neurolysis, 856
Coexisting disease, in choosing drugs, 29
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), 1246
for eating disorders, 1258
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 1255
for schizophrenia, 1252
for somatoform disorder, 1256
Cognitive biases, 6–9, 11
in human factors, 7–9, 9f, 11
in medicine, 7, 8f
in type 1 and type 2 thinking, 6–7, 7b, 7f
Cognitive debiasing strategies, 8f, 9–10
history and physical examination in, 9
mnemonics and checklists in, 10
problem lists and differential diagnosis 
in, 10
red ags and ROWS (‘rule out worst case 
scenario’) in, 10
Cognitive function, assessment of, 1237, 
1238f
Cognitive impairment, 1237
chemotherapy and, 1291
HIV-associated, 362
Cognitive screening, for older people, 1297b
Cognitive therapy, 1246
Colchicine, for familial Mediterranean fever, 76
Cold agglutinin disease, 958–959
Cold environment, 252–254
Cold injury, 253–254
Cold shock, 257–258
Colesevelam, 641
Colestipol, 641
Colestyramine, 641
pruritus, 1073b
for radiation enteropathy, 823–824
Colic, renal, 567
Colipase, 788b
Colistin, 114b
Colitis
collagenous, 846–847
microscopic, 846–847
pseudomembranous, 102b
Collagen, 1067f
Collagenase, 61, 68–69
Collapse, older people, 1303
Colon, 788, 789f
acute colonic pseudo-obstruction, 834
Colon cancer, hereditary non-polyposis, 849b
Colonic motility, 795
disorders, 833–834
Colonoscopy, 793, 794b
for abdominal pain, 804
Colony-forming unit erythroid (CFU-E), 924
Colony-forming unit-granulocyte, monocyte 
(CFU-GM), 924
Colony-forming unit-megakaryocyte (CFU-
Meg), 924, 927
Colorado tick fever virus, 1176b
Colorectal cancer, 827–832
clinical features of, 828–829
familial adenomatous polyposis, 135b, 
831–832, 831b, 831f
investigations of, 829, 830f
management of, 829–830
pathophysiology of, 827–830, 828f, 829f
prevention and screening of, 844
Colorectal polyps, 826–827, 826b, 826f, 
827b, 827f
Colorimetric chemical reaction, 616b
Coma, 1138
causes of, 197b
denition of, 197
poisoning, 225b
stroke and, 1206
Clinical decision-making (Continued)
Co-amoxiclav (Continued)

[[p1397]]
1326     INDEX
Combination therapy, for hypertension, 450
Combined inhaled glucocorticoids and 
bronchodilators, for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 507–508
Comedone, denition of, 1094
Common peroneal nerve, entrapment, 1193b
Common variable immune deciency, 74
Community-acquired pneumonia, 513–518, 
513f
clinical features of, 513
discharge and follow-up of, 514
investigations of, 513, 515b
management of, 513
organisms causing, 513b
prognosis for, 514
Comorbidities, in older people, 1302
Compartment syndrome
abdominal, 198
identication of, 188b
in injecting drug-user, 266
Competitive antagonist, 14
Complement, 63–64, 63f
alternate pathway for, 63
autoimmune disease and, 79–80
classical pathway for, 63
deciency in, 71b
lectin pathway for, 63
pathway deciencies in, 73
total haemolytic, 1312b
Complement component antibodies, 999
Complement xation test (CFT), 105
Complementary therapies
for cancer pain, 170
for pain, 165
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), 
166, 167b
type 1, 1058
Computed tomography (CT)
for acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
201f, 202
for aldosterone-producing adenoma, 
688–689, 688f
for cancer, 134, 136f
of cardiovascular system, 395–396
coronary angiography, 395, 396f
for decreased conscious level, 198, 198f
of gastrointestinal tract, 790–791, 791f
for headache, 187
for hepatobiliary disease, 868, 868f
for cirrhosis, 868f
for musculoskeletal disease, 997
for neurological disease, 1130b
cerebral abscess, 1178
for phaeochromocytoma, 689, 689f
for polycystic disease, 905f
for renal disease, 564
for respiratory disease, 484–485, 487f
aspergilloma, 527f
bronchiectasis, 510f
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 544f
interstitial lung disease, 534f
pleural thickening, 546f
pulmonary brosis, 536f
Concentration, 1237
Concordance, 1288
Condyloma, 382
Condylomata lata, 377
Confrontation, for visual elds, 649b
Confusion/confusional states, 1250
Congenital abnormalities, in pancreas, 
854–855
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 689
hirsutism and, 673b
Congenital heart disease, 465–472, 467b, 
468f
in adolescent, 472b
cyanotic, 472b
grown-up, 472
pregnancy and, 1275
transition medicine and, 1291
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment 
epithelium (CHRPE), 831
Congenital thyroid disease, 667
Congestive ’portal hypertensive’ gastropathy, 
884
Coning, 1134–1135
Conjunctivitis, 1228
gonococcal, 379
Conn syndrome, 627
Connective tissue disease, 1112–1119
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
respiratory involvement in, 538–539, 539b
Consanguinity, 45
Conscious level, decreased, 197–198
assessment of, 187f, 197–198, 197b
management of, 198
Conservative treatment, for chronic kidney 
disease, 593
Constipation, 803–804
causes of, 804b
clinical assessment of, 803–804
in old age, 833b
simple, 833
Constitutional delay, of puberty, 669
Contact sports, in adolescents, 1230b
Continence, faecal, 788
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD), 596, 597b
Continuous murmurs, 401
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 
202b, 207
Continuous positive pressure ventilation, 207
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
therapy (insulin pump), 740–742, 741f
Continuous venovenous haemoltration 
(CVVH), 595
Contraception
cystic brosis and, 1290–1291
in epilepsy, 1157
Contrast media, nephrotoxicity and, 565b
Contrast radiology, 791f
Conversion (dissociative) disorder, 1256, 
1256b
Cooling rates, summary of, 256b
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease
Copper, 779b
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
Copper deciency, 1191b
Copper sulphate, poisoning from, 235
Copy number variations (CNV), 42, 44b, 44f
Cor pulmonale, 483
Coronary angiography, for acute coronary 
syndrome, 436
Coronary artery, 388, 389f
angiography of, 396f
calcication, 395
with stenosis, 397f
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
for angina, 431, 431f
vs. PCI, 432b
Coronary artery disease, 424–440, 426b
clinical manifestations of, 424b
Coronary artery dissection, pregnancy and, 
1276
Coronary artery spasm, 426–427
Coronary circulation, 388–389, 389f
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
Coronary revascularisation, 408
Coronaviruses, 108b, 292–293
Corrosives
oesophagitis, 809
poisoning from, 234
Cortical (volitional) inuences, in control of 
breathing, 483
Corticobasal degeneration, 1168
Corticosteroids
biosynthetic enzyme defects, 685b
for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 689
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH), 651f
Cortisol, 679
deciency, hypopituitarism, 695
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1311b
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 102b
Corynebacterium minutissimum, 1090
Corynebacterium spp., 101f
Co-trimoxazole, 114b, 120
for brucellosis, 304b
for cyclosporiasis, 332
for HIV infection/AIDS, 365–366, 366b
for melioidosis, 309
for meningitis, 1174b
for mycetoma, 344
for nocardiosis, 309
for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 361
haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, 946b
prophylactic, 116b
toxoplasmosis, HIV/AIDS patients, 
362–363
for Whipple’s disease, 822
Cough, 489, 490b
aetiology of, 489
in asthma, 500
bovine, 529, 552
in COPD, 505
headache and, 1151b
in laryngeal nerve, paralysing, 486
in lung cancer, 529–530
in palliative care, 170
in pneumonia, 513
upper airway defences and, 483–484
in upper respiratory tract infection, 512
Cough reex, 489
Coumarins, 948b, 949–950
Counselling, dietary
for coeliac disease, 820–821
for hyperlipidaemia, 639
Coupled enzymatic reaction, 616b
COVID-19 diseases
incubation period, 108b
in older people, 1307b
pregnancy and, 1271
Cowden’s syndrome, 135b
Cowpox, 292
Coxiella burnetii, 99, 318
Coxsackie virus infections, 283
CPA. See Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway 
pressure
CPK. See Creatinine phosphokinase
CPP. See Cerebral perfusion pressure
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
‘Crack’ cocaine, 230
Cramps, heat, 254b
Cranial nerves
damage to, 1145b
of envenomed patient, 240
examination of, 1121b
nuclei, 1124
Craniopharyngioma, 699, 699f
C-reactive protein (CRP), 61
abnormal, conditions associated with,  
70b
in acute phase response, 68
inammation and, 69–70
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Creams, 1078b
Creatine kinase (CK)
in muscular dystrophies, 1196
reference range of, venous blood,  
1312b
Creatinine, 617b
in acute kidney injury, 589b
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood and, 1310b
Creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), elevated 
serum, causes of, 998b
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 1181,  
1181b
CRH. See Corticotrophin-releasing hormone
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, 872b
Critical care medicine, decisions around 
intensive care admission in, 206, 
206b
Critical care/critical illness, 175
admission requirement, 178
clinical examination in, 176, 176f
in context of congenital conditions, 206, 
206b
disorders causing, 198–206
acute circulatory failure as, 202
acute respiratory distress syndrome as, 
201–202
post cardiac arrest as, 205–206
sepsis and systemic inammatory 
response as, 198–201
monitoring in, 177–178, 177f
nutrition, 214
outcomes of, 214–219
adverse neurological, 215
discharge from intensive care as, 217
in older patient, 216
withdrawal of active treatment and 
death in intensive care as, 216–217
oxygen therapy in, 194, 195b
referral, 215
renal support, 212
respiratory support, 207–210
scoring systems in, 218, 218b
withdrawal of care, 216–217
Critical illness polyneuropathy, 215
Critical limb ischaemia, 440–441
Crohn’s disease
clinical features of, 838, 839f
cutaneous, 1113
ileal, 838f
management of, 841
pathophysiology of, 837, 838f
small bowel, differential diagnosis of, 839b
treatment strategy for, 1293b
ulcerative colitis versus, 836b
Cross-infection, 101
CRP. See C-reactive protein
CRPS. See Complex regional pain syndrome
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis, 1046
Cryoglobulins
autoimmune disease and, 80
classication of, 80b
Cryoprecipitate, 940b
Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome 
(CAPS), 77
Cryotherapy
for anogenital warts, 382
for granuloma annulare, 1113
for molluscum contagiosum, 382
for sarcoidosis, 1113
for skin disease, 1082
for warts, 382
Cryptococcal meningitis, HIV-related, 363
Cryptococcosis, 345, 345f
HIV-related, 359b
prevention of, 366
Cryptorchidism, in hypogonadism, 669
Cryptosporidia/cryptosporidiosis, 332
HIV-related, 360b, 360f
Crystal formation, 562, 599b, 1019f
drug-induced, 599b
Crystal-induced arthritis, 1018–1023, 1018b, 
1019f
Crystalloids, 852
CSF. See Cerebrospinal uid
CT. See Computed tomography
CTLA4, 67
Cullen’s sign, 850–851
Culture, blood, 104–105, 104f
Cupulolithiasis, 1158
CURB-65, 514f
Curettage, for skin disease, 1081
Cushing’s disease, management of, 684
Cushing’s syndrome, 679–684
aetiology of, 681
classication of, 681b
clinical assessment of, 681, 682f
hirsutism and, 673b
investigations of, 681–684, 683f
management of, 684
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
Cutaneous leishmaniasis, 329–330, 330b, 
330f, 331f
Cutaneous melanoma, ophthalmic features 
of, 1220b
CVVH. See Continuous venovenous 
haemoltration
CWP. See Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
Cyanide poisoning, 223b
Cyclical hormone replacement therapy, for 
amenorrhoea, 670
Cyclical vomiting syndrome, 847
Cyclicity of cortisol secretion, in Cushing’s 
syndrome, 682
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), 131
Cyclo-oxygenase, 1009f
Cyclophosphamide, 134b
glomerulonephritis, 574
for musculoskeletal disease, 1011, 1011b
for rheumatic disease, 1011b
Cyclospora cayetanensis, 332
Cyclosporiasis, 332
Cypermethrin, 235b
Cyproterone acetate, 674b
for prostate cancer, 610
Cystic brosis (CF), 510–512, 511b, 511f, 
512b, 854–855, 913
contraception and, 1290–1291
fertility and child-bearing potential in, 
1290–1291
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
transition medicine and, 1290–1291
Cystic brosis transmembrane conductor 
regulator (CFTR) protein, 1290
Cysticercosis, 341–342, 341f, 342f
Cystinuria, 579
Cystoisospora belli diarrhoea, HIV-related, 
359b
Cystoisosporiasis, HIV-related, 360b

[[p1398]]
INDEX    1327
Cysts
Baker’s (popliteal), 1007b
choledochal, 913, 915f
hydatid, liver and, 892
Cytarabine, for acute leukaemia, 965b
Cytochrome P450, 18
Cytogenetic analysis, 137
Cytokeratin, as tumour markers, 137
Cytokines, 62, 63f, 64b
asthma, 499–500
cancer, 132–133
defects in, 73
immune response regulation, 64b
pro-inammatory, 67–68
Cytology, in respiratory disease, 487
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, 282b, 286
after HSCT, 946b
clinical features of, 286
encephalitis, 362
investigations of, 286
management of, 286
polyradiculitis, 363
in pregnancy, 280b
Cytopathic hypoxia, 199f
Cytosine, 38
D
Dabigatran etexilate, indications for, 948b
Dactylitis, 1037f
Dandruff, 1098
Dantrolene, 1252
Dapsone, 120, 1080
for dermatitis herpetiformis, 821
for erythema nodosum, 1114–1115
for leprosy, 315
neutropenia and, 936b
for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 366
poisoning, 224b
prophylactic, 116b
for pyoderma gangrenosum, 1111
‘Dapsone syndrome,’ 120
Daptomycin, 114b, 120
mechanism of action, 113b
Darunavir, 366b
Daunorubicin, for acute leukaemia, 965b
D-dimer, 189b
pulmonary embolism, 547
reference range of, 1314b
DDT, 235b
de Musset’s sign, 460b
De novo mutation, 46
de Quervain’s thyroiditis, 663
Deafness
Alport syndrome, 577–578
Lassa fever, 289b
Pendred syndrome, 657f
quinine toxicity, 229b
rubella, 281b
salicylate overdose, 225–226
Death and dying, 172–173, 172b
advance directives, 1302
brainstem, 212
capacity and advance directives in, 173
diagnosis of, 172
ethical considerations in, 172–173
intensive care and, 216
management of, 172
planning for, 172–173
Death certicate, completed, 94f
Debrisoquine, 56
DEC. See Diethylcarbamazine
Decompression illness, 258–259, 258f
Decompression sickness, 258
Decontamination, 221f
Deep infrapatellar bursitis, 1007b
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
investigation of, 188, 189f
pregnancy and, 1279
magnetic resonance imaging for, 1268
presentation of, 188
pre-test probability of, 189b
DEET (diethyltoluamide), malaria prevention, 323
Defensins, 60, 787
Debrillation
for arrhythmias, 422
implantable cardiac debrillators, 408
implantable cardiac debrillators, 423, 423b
heart failure, 408, 408f
Dehydration
cerebral, hypernatraemia and, 626
cholera, 312
gastric outlet obstruction, 816
in palliative care, 172
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), 686
Delayed oesophageal clearance, 806
Delayed puberty, 668–669, 669b, 1284
Deletions, 41, 44f
Delirium, 1138, 1240
differential diagnosis of, 1251b
in intensive care, 213
in older people, 1304–1305, 1304b, 
1305b, 1307b
in palliative care, 171–172
prevalence of, 1236b
Delirium tremens, 1249
Delusional disorders, 1251b, 1252
Delusional parasitosis, 1257
Delusional perception, 1251
Delusions, 1237, 1240–1241
differential diagnosis, 1251b
schizophrenia, 1251b
Demeclocycline, 699b
Dementia, 1246–1249
alcoholic, 1249–1250
differential diagnosis of, 1251b
fronto-temporal, 1248–1249, 1248f
HIV-associated, 362
investigations of, 1247, 1247b
Lewy body, 1249
management of, 1247
nutrition and, 772–773, 773b, 773f
in older people, 1304, 1306f
pathogenesis of, 1246–1247
subtypes and causes of, 1247b
vascular, 1247b
Demography, in older people, 1298
Dendritic cells, 62
Dengue, 286–288
clinical features of, 287, 287b
diagnosis of, 287–288
endemic zones of, 287f
management and prevention of, 288
in pregnancy, 280b
Dengue haemorrhagic fever, incubation period 
of, 108b
Dengue viruses, 1176b
Denosumab
for bone metastases, 144
for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1052
Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), 
1169b
11-Deoxycorticosterone-secreting adrenal 
tumour, 687b
Depolarisation, cardiac conduction system, 
389f
Deposition disorders, 1114
Depressants, misuse of, 229–230
Depression, 1253–1254
alcohol and, 1250
diagnosis of, 1253
investigations of, 1253
low mood due to, 1241
management of, 1253–1254
medical illness and, 1253b
negative cognitive triad associated with, 
1246b
in old age, 1240b
in palliative care, 171
pathogenesis of, 1253
post-partum, 1260
prevalence of, 1236b
prognosis of, 1254
symptoms of, 1241b
unipolar, 1253
Dermatitis
chronic actinic, 1074b
exfoliative, 1116b
herpetiformis, 138b, 821, 1106b, 1107
seborrhoeic, HIV-related, 357
Dermatobia hominis, 342
Dermatobroma, 1088
Dermatology, 1063
Dermatomyositis, 1110f, 1112–1113
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Dermatomyositis/polymyositis, 1042–1043, 
1043f
in cancer patients, 138b
Dermatophyte infections, 1092f
Dermatoscopy, 1068, 1070f
Dermatoses, 373b
Dermis, 1066
Des-amino-des-aspartate-arginine 
vasopressin, for diabetes insipidus, 
700
Desensitisation, 16–17
Desmosomes, 1066
Deterioration
early warning scores for, 191, 192f, 193b
immediate assessment of, 191
management for, location for, 191, 194b
medical emergency team and, 191, 196b
presentations of, 191–198
decreased conscious level as, 197–198
decreased urine output/deteriorating 
renal function as, 198
hypertension as, 197
hypotension as, 195–197
hypoxaemia as, 194–195
tachycardia as, 195
tachypnoea as, 193–194
Detrusor muscle, 560
failure of, 608
over-activity, 608b
Detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, 1148
Devic’s disease. See Neuromyelitis optica
Dexamethasone
for altitude illness, 257
for brain tumours, 1184
for Cushing’s syndrome, 682
for gastrointestinal obstruction, 170
for high-altitude cerebral oedema, 257
for meningitis, 1173b
for pain management, 170b
for spinal cord compression, 140b
Dexamfetamine, 1159
Dexmedetomidine, 213b
Dextran, 1116b
Dextropropoxyphene, 229b
poisoning, 229b
Dextrose, 621b
hypoglycaemia, 228
DHEAS. See Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
Di George syndrome, genetics, 44b
Diabetes insipidus, 699–700, 699b
pregnancy and, 1273
Diabetes mellitus, 583–584, 703
adherence and concordance in, 1292
aetiology and pathogenesis of, 713–719, 
713b
β-cell dysfunction, 714, 714b
insulin resistance and the metabolic 
syndrome, 713–714, 714b
atherosclerosis risk, 425
children, adolescents and young adults 
with, 744–745, 744b
clinical examination of people with, 
704–707, 706f
complications of, 747–753, 747b
bone and joint infection, 748
COVID-19, 748–749
diabetic eye disease, 749
diabetic foot disease, 751–753
diabetic kidney disease, 749–750, 
749b, 749f
diabetic neuropathy, 750–751
infections, 748–749
life expectancy/mortality, 747–748
urogenital, skin and soft tissue 
infections, 748
education, diet and lifestyle, 730–733
alcohol and smoking, 732
driving, 732–733, 733b
exercise, 732
principles of healthy eating, 730–732
Ramadan, 733
weight management, 732
establishing the diagnosis of, 713
functional anatomy and physiology, 
707–710
blood glucose homeostasis, 708–709, 
709f
fat embolism, 709–710
glucagon, 708
insulin, 707–708, 707f, 708b, 708f
gestational, 1272, 1272b
diagnosis of, 1272
management of, 1272
screening for, 1272
glomerular ltration rate and, 590f
glucose-lowering agents, 733–738, 733b, 
734f
biguanides, 735
DPP-4 inhibitors, 735–736, 736f
GLP-1 receptor agonists, 736–737
SGLT2 inhibitors, 737–738, 737f
sulphonylureas, 735
thiazolidinediones, 735
in hospital, 745–747
footcare, 747
hyperglycaemia in acute admissions to 
hospital, 745–746, 745f
surgery, 746–747, 746b, 746f
impact of transition planning on,  
1292b
insulin therapy, 738–743
continuous subcutaneous insulin 
infusion therapy (insulin pump), 
740–742, 741f
intermittent subcutaneous insulin 
injection regimens, 739–740, 740b, 
740f
intermittent subcutaneous insulin 
injection therapy, 738–740
intravenous, 742–743, 742b, 743f
manufacture and formulations, 
738–743, 739b, 739f
sensor-augmented CSII therapy, 
741–742, 741f, 742f
investigations, 710–713
blood glucose, 710, 710b
C-peptide, 712
glycated haemoglobin, 711–712,  
712b
interstitial glucose, 710–711, 711f
islet autoantibodies, 712
urine albumin (‘microalbuminuria’), 
712–713
urine and blood ketones, 711, 712b
urine glucose, 710
management of, 727–747, 728b
self-assessment of glycaemic control, 
728–729, 729f, 730f
therapeutic goals, 729–730, 730b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
other forms of, 719
pregnancy and, 744, 1272–1273
presenting problems in, 719–727
diabetic ketoacidosis, 721–723
hyperglycaemia, 719–720, 720f,  
721b
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state, 
723–725
hypoglycaemia, 725–727
skin and rheumatological complications 
of, 753
special situations, management of, 
744–747
transition medicine and, 1292
transplantation, 743–744, 744f
type 1, 715–717
in adults, 717
clinical course of, 716–717, 717f
environmental predisposition, 715–716
genetic predisposition, 715
HbA1c targets, 729
management of, 727–728, 728b
metabolic disturbances in, 716, 716b, 
716f
pathogenesis, 715, 715f
principles of healthy eating, 730–732, 
731f
type 2, 717–719
clinical course and metabolic 
disturbances in, 718–719
HbA1c targets, 729
management of, 727–728
pathogenesis, 717–718, 717f
principles of healthy eating, 731–732, 
732b
risk factors for, 718, 718f
visual loss in people with, other causes 
of, 1232
Diabetic dermopathy, 753
Diabetic eye disease, 749, 1230–1232
Diabetic foot disease, 751–753, 751f
aetiology, 751–753
Charcot neuroarthropathy, 752–753
foot ulceration, 752
management, 751–753, 752b, 753f
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 721–723
assessment of severity, 722, 722b
clinical assessment, 721, 722b
investigations, 722
management, 722–723
uid replacement, 722
insulin replacement, 722
intravenous bicarbonate and phosphate, 
722–723
potassium replacement, 722, 723f
pathogenesis, 721
Diabetic kidney disease, 749–750, 749b, 749f
Diabetes mellitus (Continued)

[[p1399]]
1328     INDEX
Diabetic neuropathy, 750–751, 752b
asymmetrical motor diabetic neuropathy 
(diabetic amyotrophy), 750
autonomic neuropathy, 750–751
gastroparesis, 750–751
mononeuropathy, 750
sexual dysfunction, 751
symmetrical sensory polyneuropathy, 750
Diabetic retinopathy, 1230–1232
in adolescents, 1230b
clinical features of, 1230–1231, 1231f
management of
diabetic macular oedema, 1231–1232
proliferative, 1231
pathogenesis of, 1230
pregnancy and, 1230b
prevention of, 1232
screening of, 1232
Diagnosis, 29
Diagnostic error, problem of, 2–5, 2b
Diagnostic tests, use and interpretation of, 3–5
factors other than disease, 4, 4b
normal values, 3–4, 4f
operating characteristics, 4
prevalence of disease, 5, 6f
sensitivity and specicity, 4–5, 5b, 5f, 6b
Dialyser hypersensitivity, 597b
Dialysis
amyloidosis associated with, 78b
gastrointestinal, 223
hyperkalaemia, 629–630
peritoneal, 595–596
poisoning, 223
renal
AKI, 587–588, 595b
CKD, 592
in old age, 595b
SLE, 584
3,4-Diaminopyridine, for Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome, 1195
Diamorphine
for myocardial infarction, 438
for palliative care, 169, 172
Diaphragm
disorders of, 555
eventration of, 555
Diaphragmatic hernias, 555
Diarrhoea, 800–801
acute, 272–274, 273b, 800
clinical assessment of, 273–274
differential diagnosis of, 273b
investigations of, 273
management of, 273–274
after peptic ulcer surgery, 816
amoebic dysentery, 331
antibiotic-associated, 102b
antimicrobial-associated, 274
bloody, 837
cholera, 312
chronic or relapsing, 801, 801b
HIV-related, 359
irritable bowel syndrome, 848
traveller’s, 277b
tropical, 275–276
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 816–817
Diascopy, 1068
Diastematomyelia, 1191b
Diastolic murmurs, 401
Diathermy, gastrointestinal bleeding, 793f
Diazepam
adverse reactions of, 22b
alcohol withdrawal, 1250
for disturbed behaviour, 1245
drug interactions of, 24
in renal/hepatic disease, 32b
for status epilepticus, 1138b
Diazoxide
for hypertrichosis, 1116b
for neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs), 691
Dibenzodiazepines, 1252b
Dibenzothiazepines, 1252b
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation
Diclofenac, 1010b
for actinic keratosis, 1085
for renal colic, 603
Dieldrin, 235b
Diet(s)
acute coronary syndrome and, 439
atherosclerosis risk, 426
cancer and, 134b
in gastro-oesophageal reux disease, 806
gluten-free, 820–821
modication of, for gestational diabetes, 
1272
for renal failure, acute kidney injury, 587
Diet history, 757b
Dietary deciency, 953
Dietary bre, 761
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC), 125
Dietl’s crisis, 567
Differentiated carcinoma, in thyroid disease, 
665–666, 666f
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH), 
1061, 1061f
Diffuse inltrative lymphocytosis syndrome, 
HIV-related, 364, 364f
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease (DPLD), 
533–538, 534b, 534f, 535b, 536b
Diffuse pleural thickening (DPT), 545, 546f
DiGeorge syndrome, 75
Digital clubbing, 467
Digoxin
adverse reactions of, 22b
for arrhythmias, 409b, 421
atrial brillation, 414
atrial utter, 413
drug interactions of, 23b
effect of old age, 32b
for heart failure, 407
for mitral valve disease, 455, 457b
plasma concentration, 35b
for pulmonary hypertension, 549
toxicity/poisoning, 225b, 227–228
Digoxin-specic antibody fragments, 228
Dihydrocodeine, poisoning, 229b
Dihydropyridines
for angina, 429–430
for hypertension, 450, 450b
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol)
for hypoparathyroidism, 679
pseudohypoparathyroidism, 679
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D, 560
Diiodotyrosine (DIT), 653f
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 474
pregnancy and, 1276
Diloxanide furoate, 124
Diltiazem
for angina, 429–430
for aortic dissection, 445
for arrhythmias, 414, 419f, 421
for atrial brillation, 414
drug eruptions, 1116b
for hypertension, 448
Dimethyl fumarate, 1163b
Diphenoxylate, 274, 822
Diphenylbutylpiperidines, 1252b
Diphtheria, 102b, 312–313, 313b
clinical features of, 313
incubation period of, 108b
management of, 313
prevention of, 313
prophylaxis for, 116b
Diplopia, 1145
in Graves’ disease, 649b, 662f
intracranial hypertension and, 1186
Dipyridamole, platelet inhibition, 927
Direct-acting nucleoside/nucleotide antiviral 
agents
for hepatitis B, 888
for hepatitis C, 890b, 891f
Direct antiglobulin tests, 957f
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), 950
Directly observed therapy, for tuberculosis, 
524
Dirolaria immitis, 337
Disability
in deteriorating patient, 191
International Classication of Functioning, 
Disability and Health, 1299
in older people, 1299
Discharge, from intensive care, 217, 218b
Discitis, 1026
Discoid eczema, 1098
Disease, choosing drugs for
features of, 29
severity of, 29
Disease Activity Score 28 (DAS28), in 
rheumatoid arthritis, 1031f
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs), for musculoskeletal 
disease, 1010–1014, 1011b
Disequilibrium, in older people, 1304
DISH. See Diffuse idiopathic skeletal 
hyperostosis
Disopyramide
for arrhythmias, 418b, 419, 419b
for cardiomyopathy, 474–475
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 
199, 988, 988b
Dissociative conversion disorders, 1256, 
1256b
Dissociative drugs, poisoning from, 231
Distal interphalangeal joint arthritis, 1036, 
1037f
Distortion
red ag symptoms in visual loss,  
1225b
of vision, 1225
Distribution
drug, 17, 29
volume of, 17, 18f
interactions, 24
Disturbed behaviour, 1243–1245, 1244f
Disulram, 1250
Dithranol, 1102
Diuretics
adverse reactions of, 22b, 622, 1307b
for ascites, 876–877
clinical use of, 622–623
drug eruptions, 1116b
drug interactions of, 23b
for heart failure, 406, 406f
for hypertension, 450, 450b
for hypervolaemia, 622
loop-acting, 622
for mitral regurgitation, 457b
for obliterative cardiomyopathy, 475
for oedema, 568
osmotic, 622
potassium-sparing, 622
in pregnancy, 1270
resistance to, 622–623
timing of, 31b
Diverticulosis, 832–833
human colon in, 832f
jejunal, 791f
Dizziness, 1137
in older people, 184b, 1303–1304
DMARDs. See Disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs
DMD. See Duchenne muscular dystrophy
DNA, 38, 38f
analysis, for neurological disease,  
1134
mitochondrial, 48, 1298b
nuclear chromosomal, 1298b
proviral, 353–354
repair of, 41
transcription, 38–39
DOACs. See Direct oral anticoagulants
Dobutamine, 210b
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 641
Dominant negative mutations, 43
Domperidone, 1150
Donepezil, 1248
Donor-recipient cross-matching, 85
Donovanosis, 381b
Dopamine agonists
for acromegaly, 698–699
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167, 1167b
pregnancy, 698
for prolactinoma, 697, 697b
renal dysfunction and, 599b
for restless legs syndrome, 1160
Dopamine antagonists, and prolactin 
concentrations, 696
Dopamine dysregulation syndrome,  
1167
Doppler echocardiography, 394–395,  
395f
for aortic dissection, 444–445, 445f
for atrial septal defect, 470f
colour-ow Doppler, 395f
three-dimensional, 395
for valvular regurgitation, 394
Doppler ultrasound, for venous 
thromboembolism, 188
Doripenem, 117b
Dose-response curves, 14–16, 15f
Dosulepin, 1253b
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21), 44b
Doxapram, 498–499
Doxazosin, 449–450, 689
Doxorubicin
cardiotoxicity, 476b
liposomal, for ovarian cancer, 150
myocarditis and, 472
Doxycycline, 114b
for anthrax, 314
for bacillary angiomatosis, HIV/AIDS 
patients, 358
for brucellosis, 304b
for cholera, 312
for lariasis, 336
for leptospirosis, 306
for louse-borne relapsing fever, 305
for Lyme disease, 304
for malaria, 323b
for melioidosis, 309
for onchocerciasis, 337
for plague, 307
for Q fever, 318
for relapsing fever, 305
for rickettsial fevers, 318
for STIs
chlamydial infection, 380b
granuloma inguinale, 381b
lymphogranuloma venereum, 381b
syphilis, 378
for Whipple’s disease, 822
DPLD. See Diffuse parenchymal lung disease
DPT. See Diffuse pleural thickening
Dracunculiasis, 337
Dracunculus medinensis, 337
DRESS, 1116b
Dressings, 1079, 1079b
Dressler syndrome, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 434
Dribble, post-micturition, 608
Drinking, 1240, 1249
Driving
diabetes mellitus and, 732–733, 733b
restrictions in, epilepsy and, 1290
Dronedarone, 414, 419b, 420b, 421
DRPLA. See Dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian 
atrophy
‘Drug chart,’ 33f–34f
Drug eruptions, 1103, 1115–1119
clinical features of, 1116b, 1117–1119
exanthematous, 1116b
xed, 1116b
investigations and management of, 1117, 
1117b
phototoxicity, 1074b
rash in, 1071b
types of, 1115b
Drug history, 21b
Drug-induced psychosis, differential diagnosis 
of, 1251b
Drug misuse, 89, 1239b, 1240
polydrug misuse, 1250
psychosis, 1250
tetanus and, 1180
Drug rashes, HIV-related, 358
Drug-related disorders
eosinophilia, 120
neutropenia, 936b
phototoxicity, 1074b
renal, 597–598, 599b
Drug resistance, 16
Drug-resistant TB, 524, 525b
Drug sensitivity testing, for tuberculosis, 522
Drug therapy
adverse outcomes of, 19–25
duration of, 30
monitoring of, 35–37
patient adherence to, 29
stopping, 30
Drugs
absorption, 16–17, 17f, 29
adverse reactions of, 19–23, 22b
classication of, 21–22, 22b
dose-related, 16
inter-individual variation in, 19, 19b
in older people, 1307–1308, 1307b
pharmacovigilance, 22–23
prevalence of, 20–22, 21b
risk factors for, 21b
TREND analysis of, 22b
clinical and surrogate endpoints in, 35
controlled, 26, 34
cost of, 29
development, 25–27, 25b, 27f
distribution, 17, 29
dosage regimens of, 29–30
frequency of, 30
repeated, 18–19
timing of, 30, 31b
dose-response curves of, 14–16, 15f
dose titration of, 29–30
Diet(s) (Continued)

[[p1400]]
INDEX    1329
efcacy, 14, 29–30
elimination, 17–18
excretion, 17f, 18, 29
formulation of, 30
hospital discharge, 33
interactions, 23–24
avoiding, 24, 29
mechanisms of, 23–24
pharmaceutical, 23b
pharmacodynamic, 23b
pharmacokinetic, 23b
licensing, 26–27
lung disease due to, 540–541, 540b
management, 25–28
cost-effectiveness evaluation, 28, 28b
evidence evaluation, 28
implementing recommendations, 28
use of, 27–28
marketing, 25–27, 27f
metabolism, 17–18, 29
interactions, 24
of misuse, 228
for oesophagitis, 809
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
plasma concentrations of, 35b
potency of, 16
regulation of, 25–28
route of administration of, 17f, 30, 30b
topical administration of, 17
toxicity, 20
Drusen, in older people, 1230b
Dry drowning, 257
Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
in bone mineral density, 997
for fractures, 1303
indications for, 1049b
for musculoskeletal disease, 997f
Dubin-Johnson syndrome, 872b
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), 46b, 
47b
transition medicine and, 1290
Duloxetine, for pain management, 168b
Dumping syndrome, 815–816
Duodenal biopsy, 819
Duodenal ulcers, 799, 812–816, 815f, 818f
Duodenum, functional anatomy of, 784–785, 
784f
Duplex kidneys, 604
Duplication, 44f, 50
Dupuytren’s contracture, 1061
Dusts, lung disease and, 544–545, 544b
DVT. See Deep vein thrombosis
Dysarthria, 1144, 1146–1147
causes of, 1144b
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia, 639
Dysdiadochokinesis, 1126
Dysentery, bacillary, 108b
Dysexecutive syndrome, 1149
Dysgraphia, 1143
Dyshormonogenesis, 667
Dyslexia, 1143
Dyslipidaemias, 639
in pregnancy, 642b
Dysmetria, 1126
Dyspepsia, 796
alarm features in, 796b
causes of, 796b
functional, 847
investigations of, 797f
Dysphagia, 795–796, 1146–1147
investigations of, 796, 796f
oesophagus, 138b
Dysphasia, 1144–1145
Dysphonia, 1144
Dysthymia, 1253
Dystonia, 1142, 1170
poisoning, 225b
Dystrophia myotonica, 1247b
Dysuria, 567
E
Early-onset osteoarthritis, 1017, 1017b
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance scale, 137, 137b
Eating disorders, 1257–1258, 1257b
Ebola virus disease, 290
EBUS. See Endobronchial ultrasound
EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus
E-cadherin, 132
ECF. See Extracellular uid
ECG. See Electrocardiogram
Echinocandins, 122, 122b
Echinococcus granulosus, 342, 343f
Echocardiography, 394–395
for acute coronary syndrome, 436
for angina, 427
for aortic dissection, 445f
for aortic stenosis, 459f
for atrial septal defect, 470f
for cardiac tamponade, 478
for critically ill patients, 210
Doppler, 394–395, 395f
ventricular septal defect, 471
for endocarditis, 464–465
for ‘four-chamber’ view, 395f
for heart failure, 405
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 474
indications for, 394b
for left ventricular hypertrophy, 474
for mitral regurgitation, 456f
for myocarditis, 473
for papillary muscle rupture, 434
for pericardial effusion, 477f
for pulmonary embolism, 547–548
stress, 395
for tetralogy of Fallot, 471
three-dimensional, 395
transoesophageal, 180–181, 395
transthoracic, 394
two-dimensional, 395
valvular disease
aortic, 458
mitral, 455
tricuspid, 461
for ventricular aneurysm, 435
Echovirus infections, 283
Eclampsia, hypertension and, 1270–1271
ECMO. See Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation
ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology  
Group) performance scale, 137, 
137b
Econazole, 122b
Ecstasy (drug), 230
Ecthyma, 1089
Ectoparasites, 342
Ectopia lentis, 642–643
Ectopic ACTH syndrome, management of, 
684
Ectopic pregnancy, 375
Ectopic ureters, 604
Eculizumab, 64
Eczema, 1096–1099
allergic contact, 1098, 1099b, 1099f
asteatotic, 1099
atopic, 1096–1098
rash in, 1071b
classication of, 1096b
clinical features of, 1096
clinical morphology of, 1096b
discoid, 1098
gravitational, 1099
investigations of, 1096
irritant, 1098
management of, 1096, 1097f
in nails, 1111
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pruritus, 1072b
seborrhoeic, 1098
Edoxaban, 948b
Edrophonium bromide, for myasthenia gravis 
diagnosis, 1195
EDTA. See Ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic  
acid
Education
infection control, 109b
in musculoskeletal disease, 1007–1008
osteoarthritis, 1017
Edwards’ syndrome (trisomy 18), 44b
EEG. See Electroencephalography
Efavirenz, 366b, 367
Efcacy, 14, 29–30
Eornithine (DFMO), for trypanosomiasis, 124
Eornithine cream, 673–674
EHEC. See Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia 
coli
Ehlers-Danlos disease, 980
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 641
Eisenmenger syndrome, congenital heart 
disease and, 467
Ejaculatory failure, 1149
Elastase, 68–69
faecal, 795b, 1313b
Elbow pain, 1005, 1006b
Electrical cardioversion, for arrhythmias, 421
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 391–393, 391f
12-lead, 392–393, 392b, 392f
for acute coronary syndrome, 435–436, 
435f
AKI, 595b
ambulatory, 393
angina, 427
for aortic dissection, 444–445
for aortic regurgitation, 461b
for aortic stenosis, 459f
for atrial ectopic beats, 412f
for atrial brillation, 413f
for atrial utter, 412f
for AV block, 410f, 411f
for AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia, 416f
cardiac cycle, 401f
for cardiac tamponade, 478
for chest pain, 180
for critically ill patients, 180
for endocarditis, 465
exercise, 393, 393b
for hyperkalemia, 629–630
for hypokalaemia, 628
for left ventricular hypertrophy, 459f
for mitral stenosis, 455
for myocardial infarction, 391
for myocardial ischaemia, 391
for pericarditis, 476, 477f
for pulmonary embolism, 546, 547b
reading, 392b
for sinoatrial disease, 410f
for supraventricular tachycardia, 416f
for syncope/presyncope, 180
for torsades de pointes, 418f
in tricyclic antidepressant poisoning, 227f
for ventricular ectopic beats, 417f
for ventricular brillation, 417
for ventricular tachycardia, 417f
for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, 416f
Electroclinical epilepsy syndromes, 1155b
Electroconvulsive therapy, 1245
Electroencephalography (EEG), 1132–1133
for dementia, 1247
for epilepsy, 1132f, 1133
for sleep disorders, 1129
for viral encephalitis, 1176
Electrofulguration, 382
Electrolyte balance, 621b
assessment, in hospitalised patients, 621b
in renal failure, chronic, 591
Electrolyte disturbances, acute kidney injury 
and, 587
Electrolytes
absorption and secretion of, 786, 787f
acute kidney injury and, 589b
basic daily requirements, 620b
cold environment and, 252
distribution of, 617, 617f
homeostasis, 617
interpretation of, 617b
reference range of, venous blood, 1310b
Electromagnetic spectrum, 1075f
Electromyography (EMG), 1133–1134
in musculoskeletal disease, 1000
Electron microscopy (EM), 103
Electrophoresis, 616b
Electrophysiology, 397
Elevated mood, 1242
Elimination
of drugs, 17–18
kinetics, 18, 18f
ELISA, 105, 106f
for Clostridium difcile, 311
for dengue, 287–288
for hydatid cyst, 342
for leishmaniasis, 328
for leptospirosis, 306
for Lyme disease, 304
for lymphatic lariasis, 335
for schistosomiasis, 340
for strongyloidiasis, 334
Elliptocyte, 925–926
Elliptocytosis, hereditary, 956–957
EM. See Electron microscopy
EMA. See Epithelial membrane antigen
Embolism
in acute coronary syndrome, 435
in acute limb ischaemia, 441, 442b
pulmonary, 546–549
acute massive, 202
clinical features of, 546–549, 547b
investigations of, 546–548, 547f, 548f
management of, 548
in pregnancy, 548b
prognosis for, 548–549
EMDR. See Eye movement desensitisation 
and reprocessing
EMG. See Electromyography
Emollients, 1078
for pruritus, 1073
in pregnancy, 1073b
for psoriasis, 1102
for skin disease, 1078
Emphysema, 482–483
computed tomography of, 484–485, 507f
lung transplantation for, 499, 500b
pathology of, 506f
in respiratory function abnormalities, 489b
Employment, 1252–1253
epilepsy and, 1290
Empyema, 495–496, 497b, 497f, 498f
subdural, 1175
Emtricitabine, 116b, 366b
Enalapril
for heart failure, 407b
for hypertension, 448
for myocardial infarction, 439
Encapsulated bacteria infection, after HSCT, 
946b
Encephalitis
brainstem, 1176
viral, 1175–1176, 1176b
Encephalomyelitis
acute disseminated, 1163–1164
cancer-related, 143
Encephalopathy, hepatic, 861, 878–879
clinical grade of, assessment for, 874b
differential diagnosis of, 878b
factors precipitating, 878b
Endemic typhus, 317b, 318
Endoanal ultrasound, 791
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS), 487
Endocarditis
gonococcal, 379
infective, 462–465, 464b, 466b
acute, 464
antimicrobial treatment of, 466b
in old age, 463b
post-operative, 464
prevention of, 465
subacute, 464, 464b, 465f
Endocrine axes, 651f
Endocrine disease
classication of, 650b
clinical examination in, 648–650, 648f, 
649b
investigation of, 650–651, 651b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pathology of, 650
pregnancy and, 1273–1274
presenting problems of, 651, 652b
pruritus and, 1073b
rheumatological manifestations of, 1060
Endocrine glands, functional anatomy and 
physiology of, 650, 650f, 651f
Endocrine pancreas disease
classication of, 690b
presenting problems in, 689–691
Endocrine system, pregnancy and, 1266
Endocrine treatment, for prostate cancer, 
610–611
Endocrinology, 647
of adrenal glands, 679–689
endocrine glands, disorders affecting, 
700–701
of endocrine pancreas and gastrointestinal 
tract, 689–691
of hypothalamus and pituitary gland, 
691–700
reproductive system, 667–675
of thyroid gland, 651–667
Endometrial cancer, 150
investigations of, 150
management of, 150
pathogenesis of, 150
Endometriosis, 856–857
Endomitotic reduplication, 927
Endophthalmitis, 1229, 1229f
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 40
Endoscopic examination, of respiratory 
system, 486–487
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), 
793–795, 794b
for cholangiocarcinoma, 917f
Drugs (Continued)
Embolism (Continued)

[[p1401]]
1330     INDEX
for choledocholithiasis, 916f
for pancreatic cancer, 856
for pancreatitis, acute, 852
Endoscopic ultrasound, 792
for choledocholithiasis, 916f
for hepatobiliary disease, 868
Endoscopy, 791, 793f
for abdominal pain, 804
capsule, 792, 793f
wireless, 794b, 794f
for dysphagia, 796, 796f
for gastric outlet obstruction, 816
for gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 799, 799f
for inammatory bowel disease, 840–841
for obscure bleeding, 800f
for oesophageal cancer, 810, 810f
for oesophageal candidiasis, 360f
for oesophageal varices, 878f
in old age, 792b
for peptic ulcer, 814
of respiratory system, 486–487
upper gastrointestinal, 791
wireless capsule, 794b
Endosulfan, 235b
Endothelial damage, 959
Endothelin 1 (ET1), 391, 863f
Endothelium, 391
Endotoxin, 102
Endotracheal intubation, critically ill patients, 
194b, 212
Entacapone, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Entactogens, 230
Entamoeba histolytica, 330
life cycle of, 331f
liver abscess from, 330
Entecavir, 888
Enteral administration, 16–17
Enteral feeding, under-nutrition in hospital, 
769–770, 770b
Enteric nervous system, 789
Enterobacter spp., 101f, 114b
Enterobacteriaceae, 101f
Enterobius vermicularis (threadworm), 334, 
334f
Enterococcus faecalis, 101f, 114b
Enterococcus faecium, 101f, 114b
Enterocytes, 635–636
Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), 
272–273
Enterohepatic circulation, 18
Enterokinase, 786
Enteropathic (spondylo)arthritis, 1038
Enteropathy
protein-losing, 824, 824b
radiation, 823–824, 823b
Enteroscopy, double balloon, 792–793, 794b
Enthesitis, 1037
Enthesopathy, patella ligament, 1007b
Entrapment neuropathy, 1191–1192, 1193b
Envenomation, 239
diagnosis of, 247
envenomed patient
bedside test in, 241, 241f
evaluation of, 240–241
general approach to, 243–248
treatment, 247–248
follow-up, 248
hospital assessment and management for, 
246–247
evidence of, 246–247, 247b
laboratory investigations, 247
life-threatening problems, 246
local effects, 243, 243b
overview of, 242–243
by specic animals, 248–251
systemic effects, 243, 243b
venom, 242
venomous animals, 242–243, 242b, 244b, 
245b, 246b
Environment, early, psychiatric disorders and, 
1239–1240
Environmental factors
in disease, cancer, 133, 134b
of gastro-oesophageal reux disease, 806
Environmental poisoning, 236, 236b
Enzymes, drugs acting on, 15b
Eosinophil granulocytes, 1314b
Eosinophilia, 276–277, 278b, 935, 936b
allergy and, 82
tropical, 276–277, 278b
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 824
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 
1044
Eosinophilic oesophagitis, 809, 809f
Eosinophils, 927, 936b, 936f
count, 1314b
EPA. See Eicosapentaenoic acid
Ependymal cells, 1122–1123
Ependymoma, 1191b
Epidemic typhus, 317b, 318
Epidemics, management of, 95, 95f
Epidemiology, 91–94, 93b
understanding causes and effect, 91, 
93b, 93f
Epidermal growth factor receptor, 131
Epidermal necrolysis, toxic, 1105, 1105b, 
1105f, 1116b
Epidermis, 1066, 1067f
Epidermolysis bullosa
acquisita, 1106b, 1107
classication of, 1105b
dystrophic, 1105b
Epididymo-orchitis, 284
Epilepsy, 1152–1158
in adolescence, 1158b
classication of, 1153b
clinical features of, 1153–1154
contraception in, 1157
focal, 1152, 1153f
generalised, 1152–1153, 1153f
investigations of, 1155–1156, 1155b
brain imaging, 1156b
EEG, 1132f, 1133
single seizure, 1155
management of, 1156–1157
antiepileptic drugs for, 1149–1150, 
1157b
immediate care, 1156, 1156b
lifestyle advice, 1156, 1156b
monitoring, 1156
surgery, 1157
in old age, 1158b
outcome after 20 years, 1156b
pathophysiology of, 1152–1158
pregnancy and, 1278
in pregnancy and reproduction, 1157, 
1158b
prognosis of, 1157–1158
seizure types, 1153–1154, 1153b
absence, 1154
atonic, 1154
clonic, 1154
focal, 1153, 1154b
generalised, 1154
myoclonic, 1154
tonic, 1154
tonic-clonic, 1154, 1154b
temporal lobe, 1241, 1251b, 1252
transition medicine and, 1290
Epilepsy syndromes, 1154–1155, 1155b
Epileptic spasms, 1154
Epinephrine, for allergy, 82
Episcleritis, 1227
Episodic ataxias, 1169b
Epistaxis
cirrhosis, 880b
dengue, 287
leptospirosis, 305–306
systemic vasculitis, 1044b
Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), as tumour 
markers, 137
Eplerenone
for heart failure, 406
for mineralocorticoid excess, 688
for myocardial infarction, 439
Epley manoeuvre, 1158
EPP. See Erythropoietic protoporphyria
EPs. See Evoked potentials
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
cancer and, 134b
post-transplant lymphoproliferative 
disorders and, 1292
Epstein-Barr virus infection, 282b, 285–286
clinical features of, 285
complications of, 285, 285b
investigations of, 285
management of, 286
Eptibatide, platelet inhibition, 927
ER. See Endoplasmic reticulum
Eradication, for gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 
799
ERCP. See Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
Erectile dysfunction, 611, 611b
Erectile failure, 1149
Ergotamine, 1150
Erlotinib, 147
Erosive osteoarthritis, 1017
Ertapenem, 114b, 117b
Erysipelas, 1090, 1090f
Erythema, palmar, 652–653, 1249b
Erythema infectiosum, 281b
Erythema multiforme, 1074b, 1114–1115, 
1114b, 1116b
Erythema nodosum, 1114–1115, 1115b, 
1116b
Erythrasma, 1090
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
abnormal, conditions associated with, 70b
inammation and, 70
reference range of, 1314b
Erythrocytosis, classication and causes of, 
935b
Erythroderma, 1077
Erythromycin, 116b
for acne, 1095
for diphtheria, 313
for pneumonia, 516b
in pregnancy, 117
prophylactic, 116b
for relapsing fever, 305
for rheumatic fever, 453
for STIs
chancroid, 381b
chlamydial infection, 381b
granuloma inguinale, 381b
lymphogranuloma venereum, 381b
syphilis, 378–379
Erythropoiesis, impaired, 281b
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP), 645b, 
1114
Erythropoietin (Epo), 924–925
chronic renal failure and, 592
ectopic hormone production, 143b
Escherichia coli, 101f, 102b, 310–311
entero-aggregative, 310
enterohaemorrhagic, 310–311
entero-invasive, 310
enteropathogenic, 310
enterotoxigenic, 310–311
verocytotoxigenic, 311f
Escitalopram, 1253b
E-selectin, 391
ESR. See Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Essential thrombocythaemia, 980
Essential tremor, 1169
Etanercept, for musculoskeletal disease, 1013b
Ethambutol, 121
Mycobacterium avium complex, 359b
for tuberculosis, 522, 523b
Ethanol
pharmacokinetics of, 20b
poisoning, 223b
reference range of, 1312b
Ethics, in genomic age, 56–57
Ethosuximide, 1155b
Ethylene glycol poisoning, 223b, 234, 234f
Ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), 
562b
Etoposide
for acute leukaemia, 965b
for testicular tumours, 611
Etoricoxib, 1010b
Euchromatin, 38–39
Eukaryotes, 99–100
Eumycetoma, 344
Euphoria, 1250
Euthanasia, 173
Euvolaemia
with hypernatraemia, 626b
with hyponatraemia, 624
Evidence-based medicine, 9
Evoked potentials (EPs), 1134–1135, 1134f
Evolutionary selection, 45
Ewing’s sarcoma, 1059
Exanthem, enteroviral, 283
Exanthem subitum, 281
Excessive daytime sleepiness, 1159
Exchange transfusion, for malaria, 323
Excision, for cancer, 149
Excision arthroplasty, 1009b
Excision biopsy, for skin disease, 1081
Excitatory neurotoxins, 243
Excretion
of drugs, 17f, 18, 29
interactions, 24
Exemplar medicine sick-day card, 591b
Exercise(s)
acute coronary syndrome and, 439
arrhythmias and, 393b
asthma, 500, 502f
chest pain and, 398
COPD, 505
diabetes mellitus and, 732
heart disease and, 472b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1008
Exercise ECG, 393, 393b
Exercise testing
for angina, 427
for COPD, 506
for myocardial infarction, 393b
for respiratory function testing, 488–489
Exfoliative dermatitis, drug-induced, 1116b
Exogenous androgen administration, hirsutism 
and, 673b
Exons, 39
Exophthalmos, in Graves’ disease, 649b
Expiration, of lungs, 482
Explanation, for somatoform disorders, 1257
Exposure and evidence, assessment of, in 
deteriorating patient, 191
Extracellular uid (ECF), 617
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO)
principles of, 209f
venous-arterial, 211–212
venous-venous, 208–209
Extraocular muscles, 1218, 1220f
Extrapyramidal gait, 1144
Extrapyramidal system, 1126
Extravascular haemolysis, 956
Extubation, in intensive care, 214
Eye disease, HIV-related, 362–364, 362f
Eye movement desensitisation and 
reprocessing (EMDR), 1256
Eye pain, red ag symptoms in visual loss, 
1225b
Eyelid/orbital septum/conjunctiva, 1218
Eyelid retraction, 1225–1226
Eyes, 1218–1221, 1221f
choroid, ciliary body and iris, 1219–1221
diabetes mellitus, clinical examination of 
people with, 705b
of envenomed patient, 240
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
lens, 1221
respiratory system, examination of, 480
retina, 1221
rheumatoid arthritis in, 1029
sclera/cornea, 1219
vitreous, 1221
Ezetimibe, 640–641
F
Fabry disease, 644b
Face
angioedema, 83f
examination of
musculoskeletal system, 990–992
respiratory system, 480
hemifacial spasm in, 1170
numbness of, 1137
superior vena cava obstruction, 141
Facial (7th cranial) nerve
palsy, 1140
tests of, 1121b
Facial pain, 1137
Facial warts, 1091
Facial weakness, 1140
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, 1196b
Factitious disorder, 1259–1260
Factitious fever, 266b
Factor II, 982b
Factor V, 927
Leiden, 932b, 982b, 987
Factor VII, 927
Faecal continence, 788
Faecal impaction, 833
Faecal incontinence, 835, 835b
Faeces analytes, 1313b
Falciparum malaria, 275
Falls, older people, 1303, 1303b, 1304b
Famciclovir, for herpes virus infection, 122, 
123b
Familial adenomatous polyposis, 135b, 
831–832, 831b, 831f
Familial hypercholesterolaemia, 638, 639b
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia, 678
pregnancy and, 1274
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
(Continued)

[[p1402]]
INDEX    1331
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), 76–77
Family behaviour therapy (FBT), for eating 
disorders, 1258
Family history, 53–55
of allergic disease, 81
genetic disease, 45
ovarian cancer and, 150
psychiatric disorders and, 1237b
Fanconi anaemia, 135b
Fanconi syndrome, 579, 632
multiple myeloma and, 583b
Farmer’s lung, 544b
Fasciculations, 235b, 246b, 1121b
Fascioliasis, 341b
Fatal familial insomnia, 1181b
Fatigue
in cancer patients, 138b
chronic fatigue syndrome, 1256
primary biliary cholangitis and, 899
Fat-pad syndrome, 1007b
Fats, 761–762, 761f
digestion and absorption of, 785–786
Fatty acids, n-3, 641
Fatty liver
alcoholic, 893–894, 894b
non-alcoholic, 895–897, 897f
FBC. See Full blood count
FBT. See Family behaviour therapy
Feeding, enteral (tube), 852
Feet, diabetes mellitus, clinical examination of 
people with, 705b
Felty syndrome, 1030b
Female, reproductive system of, 667–668, 668f
Ferritin
in acute phase response, 68
iron deciency anaemia, 953b
megaloblastic anaemia, 953b
in old age, 962b
reference range of, 1314b
Fertility
cystic brosis and, 1290–1291
renal replacement therapy and, 1277
Festination, 1144, 1303b
Fever(s), 263b, 264–270
accompanying features of, 263b
acute rheumatic, 451–453, 452f
investigations in, 453b
Jones criteria for, 452b
African tick bite, 317, 317b
boutonneuse, 317b
clinical assessment of, 264, 264b
factitious, 266b
febrile response, 102
HIV-related, 356–357, 357f
in immunocompromised host, 268–269
inhalation (‘humidier’), 545
in injection drug-user, 265, 268f, 269f
intermittent, 71–72
investigations of, 264
with localising symptoms or signs, 264, 265f
louse-borne relapsing, 304b, 305, 305f
management of, 264
neutropenic, 141–142, 141b, 269
in cancer patients, 141–142
post-transplantation, 269–270, 270b
recurrent, 263b
rickettsial, 316–318
Rocky mountain spotted, 317, 317b
scrub typhus, 317–318, 317b
streptococcal scarlet, 301, 302f
tick-borne relapsing, 304b, 305
trench, 318
tropical, 275
causes of, 276b
clinical assessment of, 275, 276b
history taking in, 275b
investigations of, 275, 277b
management of, 275, 277f
typhoid, 308, 308b
viral haemorrhagic, 288–290, 289b
yellow, 287f, 288
incubation period of, 289b
Fexofenadine, 1080
F-uorodeoxyglucose (FDG), 485
FGF. See Fibroblast growth factor
Fibrates, 641
hyperlipidaemia management, 642
muscle pain, 1003b
Fibrin, 132f
Fibrinogen
in acute phase response, 68
concentration of, 932b
reference range of, 1314b
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 143b
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), in skeletal 
disease, 998b
Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma,  
904
Fibromuscular dysplasia, renal artery stenosis 
and, 580
Fibromyalgia (FM), 1023–1025, 1023f, 1024f
investigations of, 1024b
spectrum of symptoms in, 1024b
Fibrosis
cystic, 510–512, 511b, 511f, 512b, 
854–855, 913
contraception and, 1290–1291
fertility and child-bearing potential in, 
1290–1291
transition medicine and, 1290–1291
hepatic, 906
cirrhosis and, 879f
congenital, 881f, 913
non-invasive markers of, 868
pathogenic mechanisms in, 863f
idiopathic pulmonary, 534–537, 536f
of liver, 906
cirrhosis and, 879f
congenital, 882f, 913
non-invasive markers of, 868
pathogenic mechanisms in, 863f
nephrogenic sclerosing, 565b
pulmonary, 481
in dermatomyositis, 539b
idiopathic, 534–537, 536f
in respiratory function abnormalities, 
489b
in rheumatoid arthritis, 539b
in sarcoidosis, 538b
in sclerosis, 539b
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 539b
retroperitoneal, 606
drug-induced, 599b
Fibrous and brocartilaginous joints, 994
Fibrous dysplasia, 1058, 1058f
Fidaxomicin, 121
Fifth disease, 281b
Filaggrin, 1066
Filariases, 278b
Finasteride, 674b
Fine needle aspiration cytology, 660
Fingers
clubbing, 480, 492, 492b, 492f
asbestosis, 545–546
in lung cancer, 529
trigger, 1062
Fingolimod, 1163b
First aid, for envenomed patient, 243–246
First-pass metabolism, 17
Fish, venom, 242b
Fish eye disease, 639, 639b
Fissure, anal, 835
Fistulae, 835
inammatory bowel disease and, 845
tracheo-oesophageal, 553
Fleas, 276b
bartonellosis, 318b
plague, 307
typhus, 317b, 318
Flecainide, 413–415, 418b
for arrhythmias, 419
Flora, normal microbial, 100–101, 101f
Flow cytometry, 103
Flucloxacillin, 114b, 117b
for infective endocarditis, 268
for pneumonia, 516b
for septic arthritis, 1025b
for staphylococcal infections, 299–300
Fluconazole, 122, 122b
candidiasis, HIV/AIDS patients, 359
cryptococcal meningitis, HIV-related, 
359b, 363
for cutaneous leishmaniasis, 330
for paracoccidioidomycosis, 347
in pregnancy, 117
prophylaxis, 359b
Flucytosine, as antifungal agents, 122
Fludrocortisone, for adrenal insufciency, 
686–687, 686b
Fluid, cold environment and, 252
Fluid balance
for community-acquired pneumonia,  
514
for renal failure, chronic kidney disease, 
591
Fluid overload, in hypertension, 197
Fluid replacement
for acute diarrhoea, 273–274, 274b
for cholera, 312
for food poisoning, 237
intensive care unit, 212
Fluid therapy
assessment, in hospitalised patients, 621b
intravenous, for hypovolaemia, 620
for shocked patients, 210
Fluke, liver, 134b
Flumazenil, 229
Fluocinolone acetonide, 1079b
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) 
techniques, 137
Fluoride, 779–780, 779b
Fluorimetry, 616b
5-Fluorocytosine, 122, 122b
Fluoroquinolones, 119, 119b
for leprosy, 315
for plague, 307
tuberculosis, 523
Fluorosis, 236
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), for basal cell carcinoma, 
1083b
Fluoxetine, 1253b
for bulimia nervosa, 1258
Flupentixol, 1252b
Flutamide, 674b
Fluvoxamine, 227
FM. See Fibromyalgia
FMF. See Familial Mediterranean fever
Foamy macrophages, 602
Focal hypermelanosis, 1109
Focal nodular hyperplasia, 904
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), 
572–574
Focal seizures, 1153, 1154b
Folate (folic acid), 777, 954
absorption, 954
deciency, 954
causes of, 954b
investigation of, 954b
management of, 954–955
reference range of, 1314b
Folate antagonists, 120
Folate synthesis inhibitors, 124
Folinic acid, for toxoplasmosis, 326
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
puberty and, 1284
reference range of, 1311b
Follicular carcinoma, 654b, 666
Folliculitis, 1089–1090
deep, 1089f
pruritic, 1073b
supercial, 1089
Fomepizole, 234
Fondaparinux, 948b
Fonsecaea compacta, 344
Fonsecaea pedrosoi, 344
Food allergy, 825
Food hygiene, 365
Food intolerance, 825
Food poisoning
Bacillus cereus, 309, 309f
Clostridium perfringens, 310
non-infectious causes of, 274
staphylococcal, 309
Food-related poisoning, 236–237
Foot drop, 1143, 1303b
Foot/feet, examination of, musculoskeletal 
system, 990–992
Foot pain, 1007
Foot ulceration, 752
Forced expiratory volume (FEV1), 488f
in COPD, 505b
in old age, 484b
Forced vital capacity (FVC), 484b
Foreign body, inhaled, 181, 181f
Fortication spectra, 1145
Foscarnet
for CMV infection, 286
for herpesvirus infection, 121, 123b
Fosfomycin, 121
Fournier’s gangrene, 272
Fractures, 1001
associated with osteoporosis, 1048f
bone mineral density and, 1049f
fragility, 1002b
high-energy, 1002b
investigation of, 1001, 1002b
pathological, 1002b
prevention of, 1304b
repair, 1009b
stress, 1002b
vertebral, 1002b
Fragile site mental retardation 2 (FRAXE), 43b
Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome, 1169b
Fragility fracture, 1002b
Frailty, 1298–1299, 1300b, 1300f
Francisella tularensis, 308
FRC. See Functional residual capacity
Freckle, 1087
Free intravascular haemoglobin, 926–927
Freezing cold injury, 253–254, 254f
Frequency, 567
of micturition, 567
Fresh frozen plasma, 940b
Fried Frailty score, 1300b
Friedreich’s ataxia, 1169b
Froin syndrome, 1189–1190
Frontal lobes, 1123
functions of, 1124b
Frontostriatal reward circuits, high-risk 
behaviour and, 1288–1289
Fronto-temporal dementia, 1248–1249, 1248f
Frostbite, 253–254, 254f
Fructose H2 breath test, 795b
FSGS. See Focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone
Full blood count (FBC), 930
Functional bowel disorders, 847–848
‘Functional’ gonadotrophin deciency, 669
Functional neurological disorder, 1152, 1152b
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 482–483
Functional somatic syndromes, 1243, 1243b
Fundal examination, diabetes mellitus, clinical 
examination of people with, 705b
Fundus angiography, investigation of visual 
disorders, 1222–1223
Fungal infections, 342–347, 343f
after HSCT, 946b
antifungal agents, 121–122, 122b
skin, 1092–1093, 1092f
subcutaneous, 344
supercial, 343–344
systemic, 344–347
Fungal meningitis, 1175
Fungi, 99–100
respiratory diseases caused by, 525–528, 
525b
‘Funny turns,’ 1137
Furosemide
adverse reactions of, 22b
for heart failure, 406
for hyperkalaemia, 630b
for hypertension, 448
route of administration, 30b
for skin disease, 1074b
Furuncles, 1089–1090
Fusariosis, 345, 346f
Fusidic acid, 121
Fusobacterium necrophorum, 516
Fusobacterium spp., 101f, 114b
Fusobacterium ulcerans, 278b
Futility, 216
FVC. See Forced vital capacity
G
Gabapentin
adjuvant analgesics, 170b
for chronic pain, 163b
for epilepsy, 1157b
for neuropathic pain, 168b, 1141
for post-herpetic neuralgia, 283
for somatoform pain disorder, 1256
Gain-of-function mutations, 43
Gait
abnormal, 1143–1144
assessment of, 991–992
examination of, 1121b
in older people, 1303b
stamping, 1143
waddling, 1121b
Galactorrhoea, 696–697
Galactosaemia, 643
Galactose, 643, 786
Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase 
gene (GALT), 643
Gallbladder, 863–864
adenomyomatosis of, 919
cancer of, in old age, 915b
carcinoma of, 917
cholesterolosis of, 919
disease of, in old age, 915b
Fractures (Continued)

[[p1403]]
1332     INDEX
tumours of, 917–918
benign, 919
Gallstones, 913–915, 915f
biliary sludge and, 914
cholesterol, 913–915, 914b
clinical features of, 914–915, 914b
in old age, 915b
pigment stones and, 914, 914b
treatment of, 915b
ultrasound for, 866f
GALS. See General assessment of locomotor 
system
GALT, 643
Gambiense infections, 324
Gametogenesis, 40f
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), liver 
blood biochemistry test and, 866b
Gamma hydroxybutyrate, misuse of, 230
Gamma ray-emitting radiopharmaceuticals, 
565
Ganciclovir
for CMV infection, 269–270
HIV-related, 364
transplant patients, 85, 946b
for herpesvirus infection, 123, 123b
GAS. See Group A streptococci
Gas exchange, in lungs, 483f
Gas gangrene, 272
prophylaxis for, 116b
Gastric acid, 806
Gastric aspiration, 223–224
Gastric carcinogenesis, 817f
Gastric carcinoma, risk factors for, 817b
Gastric emptying, defective, 806
Gastric emptying study, 795b
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), 790b
Gastric lavage, 223–224, 224b
Gastric motility disorders, 819
Gastric outlet obstruction, 816, 816b
Gastric secretion, 785, 785f
Gastric ulcer, 812–816
Gastric varices, 878f
Gastric volvulus, 808
Gastrin, 785, 790b
reference range of, 1311b
Gastritis, 812
acute, 812
causes of, 813b
chronic
autoimmune, 812
due to Helicobacter pylori infection, 
812, 813f
Gastroenteritis
eosinophilic, 824
infective
causes of, 272b
foods associated with, 273b
in old age, 273b
Gastroenterology, 781
functional anatomy of, 792
histology of, 793, 794b
Gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine 
tumours, 691, 691b, 692f
Gastroenterostomy, 816
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 797–800
acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage 
in, 797–800
lower gastrointestinal tract, 800, 800b
severe, 800
subacute or chronic, 800
occult, 800
of unknown cause, 800, 800f
upper, risk stratication in, 798b
Gastrointestinal decontamination, in poisoning, 
223–224, 224b
Gastrointestinal disease, 801–802
contrast radiology in, 791b
HIV-related, 359–360
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
during pregnancy, 1271–1272
transition medicine and, 1292–1293
inammatory bowel disease in, 
1292–1293
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage, upper, causes 
of, 798f
Gastrointestinal obstruction, in palliative care, 
171
Gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes, 831b
Gastrointestinal radiology, haemorrhage, 799
Gastrointestinal stromal cell tumours (GISTs), 
819
Gastrointestinal system, pregnancy and, 1266
Gastrointestinal tract
absorption from, 16
clinical examination of, 782–784, 782f, 
783b
diseases/disorders, 847–848
classication of, 690b
gut hormones, 789
investigation of, 789–795
presenting problems in, 795–805
function, control of, 788–789
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis, 520, 521f
Gastro-oesophageal reux disease, 806–809, 
806f, 809f
in old age, 807b
Gastroparesis, 819
Gastropathy, congestive, ‘portal  
hypertensive,’ 884
Gastrostomy feeding, under-nutrition in 
hospital, 770, 770b, 770f
Gaucher disease, 644b
GBD. See Global burden of disease
GCA. See Giant cell arteritis
GCS. See Glasgow Coma Scale
G-CSF. See Granulocyte-colony-stimulating 
factor
Getinib, 147
Gegenhalten, 1149
Gels, 1078b
Gemcitabine, for pancreatic cancer, 856
Gene panels, 53b
Gene promoter, 39
Gene sequencing, 50–52, 52f
challenges of NGS technologies in, 51–52
methods for, 54b
NGS capture in, 51
third-generation, 52
uses of, 52–57
Gene therapy, for genetic disease, 56
General anaesthetics, 14–16
General assessment of locomotor system 
(GALS), 991–992
General sales list (GSL), 26
Generalised anxiety disorder, 1255
Generalised musculoskeletal pain, 1001–1002
Generalised pain, causes of, 1002b
Generalised seizures, 1154
Generic virus life cycle, 99f
Genes
amplication of, 50, 51f
packaging of, 38, 38f
Genetic disease(s)
constitutional, 45–49
inheritance patterns of, 46–49
renal, 577–580
skin, 1114
somatic, 49
treatment of, 56
Genetic factors
adverse drug reactions and, 29
of ageing, 1298
alcoholic liver disease and, 894f
of Parkinson’s disease, 1165–1166
psychiatric disorders and, 1238–1239
Genetic testing, 1134
for Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 832
Genetic variant
classes of, 41–42, 42b
consequences of, 42–45
in evolutionary selection, 45
normal, 45
Genetics, atherosclerosis risk, 425
Genital herpes, 373b
Genital itch/rash, 373–374, 373b
Genital lumps, 375
Genital ulceration, 374–375, 380
Genital warts, 1091
Genitalia, in endocrine disease, 648f
Genitourinary disease, in tuberculosis, 521
Genitourinary system, pregnancy and, 1266
Genome editing, for genetic disease, 56
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS), 45
Genomics
common disease and, 52–53
ethics and, 56–57
fundamental principles of, 38–41
health and disease, 41–50
health care and, 52–55
in infectious disease, 55
obstetrics and, 53–55
oncology and, 55
in rare neurodevelopmental disorders, 
52–55
technologies for, 52
Gentamicin, 601
for brucellosis, 304b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
dosing of, 118–119, 119f
drug concentration, 35b
for meningitis, 1174b
for plague, 307
prophylactic, 116b
renal or hepatic disease, 32b
for tularemia, 308
for urinary tract infection, 601b
Geriatric medicine
assessment, 1301–1302, 1302f
presenting problems in, 1302–1306
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome, 
1181b
Gestational diabetes, 1272, 1272b
diagnosis of, 1272
management of, 1272
screening for, 1272
Get up and go test, 1301b
GFR. See Glomerular ltration rate
GH. See Growth hormone
Ghrelin, 785, 790b
GHRH. See Growth hormone-releasing 
hormone
Giant cell arteritis (GCA), 1045–1046
emergency management of, 1046b
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Giardia lamblia, 332
Giardiasis, 332
clinical features and investigations of, 332
management of, 332
Gilbert syndrome, 872b, 908
Gingivitis, 359
GIP. See Gastric inhibitory polypeptide
GISTs. See Gastrointestinal stromal cell 
tumours
Gitelman syndrome, 627–628
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 187, 187f, 197, 
197b, 222
Glasgow criteria, for prognosis in acute 
pancreatitis, 850b
Glasgow score, for alcoholic liver disease, 
895b
Glatiramer acetate, 1163b
Glaucoma, in older people, 1230b
Glioblastoma multiforme, 1183
Glioma, 1184, 1191b
Global burden of disease (GBD)
causes of death and disability, 88, 88b
underlying risk factors of, 89b
Global warming, 90
Glomerular diseases, 571–576, 572b
histopathology of, 574f
inherited, 577–578
pregnancy and, 1276–1277
Glomerular ltration rate (GFR), 562, 563f
diabetes mellitus and, 590f
estimation of, 562b
limitations of, 563b
pregnancy and, 1266
renal failure, chronic, 588
renal haemodynamics and, 587f
Glomerulonephritis, 571–576
antibody production, associated with, 572f
categorised, 573b–574b
causes of, 576b
drug-induced, 599b
infection-related, 573b–574b, 576
mesangiocapillary, 573b–574b, 575
nephrotic syndrome, 569b, 571b
rapidly progressive, 571
terminology used in, 575b
Glomerulus, 560
Glossopharyngeal (9th cranial), tests of, 1121b
Gloves and socks syndrome, 281b
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), 790b
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, 1049
Glucocorticoids, 679, 841–842
for adrenal insufciency, 686
adverse effects of, 684
advice to patients on, 684b
for allergy, 82
in bone remodelling, 994b
for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 1292
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 662–663
growth retardation and, 1284, 1290
for inammatory bowel disease, 
1292–1293
for musculoskeletal disease, 1012
for neuropathic pain, 170b
in old age, 686b
osteoporosis induced by, transition 
medicine, 1293
for pain, 163b
pruritus, 1073b
for rheumatic fever, 453
sodium content of, 877b
therapeutic use of, 684–685, 684b
topical, 1078–1079, 1079b, 1079f
for tuberculosis, 523
for ulcerative colitis, 1293
withdrawal of, management of, 684–685, 
684b
Glucose
acute kidney injury and, 589b
cerebrospinal uid, 1313b
control of, in intensive care, 214
impaired tolerance, 638, 1312b
metabolism of, pregnancy and, 1266
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
values of, in gestational diabetes, 1272
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deciency, 957–958, 958b
Glucose-lowering agents, 733–738, 733b, 
734f
biguanides, 735
DPP-4 inhibitors, 735–736, 736f
GLP-1 receptor agonists, 736–737
SGLT2 inhibitors, 737–738, 737f
sulphonylureas, 735
thiazolidinediones, 735
Glue snifng, 1250
Glutaminase, 630
γ-Glutamyl transferase (GGT)
in alcohol misuse, 1240
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Gluten-free diet, 820–821
Gluteus medius enthesitis, 1006b
Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1C), 1312b
Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN)
for anal ssure, 835
angina, 428–429, 429b
duration of action, 429b
intravenous, accelerated hypertension, 451
for pulmonary oedema, 405b
route of administration, 30b
sublingual, 428–429, 438–439
Glycogen storage diseases (GSDs), 643, 644b
Glycols, poisoning, 233–234
Glycopeptide-resistant enterococci (GRE), 
114b
Glycopeptides, 119–120
mechanism of action, 113b
in pregnancy, 117
Glycoprotein intrinsic factor, 785
Glycosuria
Fanconi syndrome, 583b
hypernatraemia and, 626b
‘lag storage,’ 656b
pregnancy and, 1266
renal, 578–579
Glycylcyclines, 117, 120
GM2-gangliosidosis, 644b
Gnathostomiasis, 338
Goitre
multinodular, 664f, 665, 665f
simple diffuse, 664
thyrotoxicosis, 652–653, 654b
Gold (myocrisin)
adverse effects on kidney, 599b
adverse reactions of, 936b
Golgi apparatus, 40
Golimumab
for inammatory bowel disease, 842, 843b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1013b
Gonadal function, in old age, 671b
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 
651f
for infertility, 672
puberty and, 1284
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues, 
644
Gonococcal infection, disseminated (DGI), 379
Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum, 379f
Gonococcal urethritis, 372, 373f
Gonorrhoea, 379
complications of delayed therapy in, 379b
incubation period, 108b, 379
pharyngeal, 379
treatment of uncomplicated, 380b
urethritis, 372
Goodpasture’s disease, 540
Gorlin’s syndrome, 54b–55b
Gallbladder (Continued)
Glucocorticoids (Continued)

[[p1404]]
INDEX    1333
Goserelin, 147
Got transition, 1283
Gout, 1018–1023
causes of, 1019b
clinical features of, 1020, 1020f
epidemiology of, 1018–1019
investigations for, 1020
management of, 1020–1021
in old age, 1020b
pathophysiology of, 1019–1020, 1019f
tophaceous, 1021f
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), 945, 1103
Graham Steell murmur, 462
Granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), 141–142
Granulocytes, 927
count, 1314b
Granuloma annulare, 1113
Granuloma inguinale, 381b
Granulomas, 69
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 540, 1044
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Granulomatous disease, 1113
Granzymes, 65
Graves’ disease, 660–663
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
ophthalmopathy, 649b, 662–663, 662f
thyrotoxicosis and, 652–653, 654b, 
660–663, 661f
management of, 661–662, 661b
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 660–662, 661f
Gravitational eczema, 1099
GRE. See Glycopeptide-resistant enterococci
Grenz (Bucky) ray therapy, for skin disease, 
1082
‘Grey baby’ syndrome, 117
Grey Turner’s sign, 850–851
Grief reactions, 1255
Griseofulvin, as antifungal agents, 122
Group A streptococci (GAS), 301
Group B streptococcal infection, in pregnancy, 
280b
Growth, analytes affected by, 1315b
Growth factors, 924, 925f
asthma, 499–500
cancer, 131, 131f
haematopoiesis, 924
Growth hormone (GH), 650–651, 651f
reference range of, 1311b
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), 
651f
Growth hormone replacement, for 
hypopituitarism, 695
Growth hormone secretion, tests of, 694b
Growth retardation
congenital heart disease and, 467
eating disorders, 1258b
GSDs. See Glycogen storage diseases
GSL. See General sales list
GTN. See Glyceryl trinitrate
Guanine, 38
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1192–1193
Guinea worm (dracunculiasis), 337
Gumma, 377–378
Gums, Kaposi’s sarcoma, 359f
Gut hormones, 789, 790b
testing, 795
GVHD. See Graft-versus-host disease
GWAS. See Genome-wide association studies
Gynaecomastia, 672, 672b
in hypogonadism, 669
H
HACE. See High-altitude cerebral oedema
HACEK group bacteria, endocarditis, 463, 
464b
HAE. See Hereditary angioedema
Haemagglutination testing, 309
Haemagogus spp., yellow fever and, 288
Haemangiomas, 1087
liver, 904
Haematemesis, 797
Haematocrit (Hct), 930, 1314b
Haematological abnormalities, HIV-related, 
364
Haematological disease, ophthalmic features 
of, 1218b
Haematological investigations, in older people, 
933b
Haematological malignancies, 962–978, 963b
in old age, 978b
Haematological practice, treatments for 
emergencies in, 949b
Haematological system
cold environment and, 252
high altitude and, 256
pregnancy and, 1266–1267
Haematological tests, for hepatobiliary 
disease, 867
Haematological values, 1314b
Haematology, 563
in coeliac disease, 820
in musculoskeletal disease, 997–998
transfusion medicine and, 921
Haematoma
extradural, 1187
intracerebral, 1187
muscle, haemophilia, 983f
subdural, 1187
subungual, 1110–1111, 1111f
Haematopoiesis, 924, 924f
Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT), 945–947
for acute leukaemia, 967
allogeneic, 945, 946b
autologous, 945–946
for beta-thalassaemia, 962b
fever after, 270
infections during recovery from, 946b
for myeloma, 976, 977f
Haematuria, 568–569, 568f
investigation of, 569f
loin pain, 567
non-visible, 568b
Haemochromatosis, 906–907, 907f
hereditary, 906–907, 907f
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
secondary, 907
Haemodialtration, 595
Haemodialysis, 224, 593–595
access, 596f
in acute kidney injury, 593–594
in CKD, 594–595
peritoneal dialysis vs., 593b
problems with, 597b
Haemoltration, 595
continuous venovenous, 595
Haemoglobin, 926, 926f
abnormal, 959–960
glycated, 1312b
mean cell (MCH), 1314b
pregnancy and, 1266–1267
reference range of, 1314b
Haemoglobin A, 926
Haemoglobin C (HbC) disease, 962
Haemoglobin F, 926
Haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve, 
194, 195f
Haemoglobinopathies, 959–962, 960f
Haemoglobinuria, 377–378, 568b
paroxysmal nocturnal, 959
Haemolysis
active, investigation results indicating, 955b
causes and classication of, 955f
extravascular, 956
intravascular, 955b, 956
Haemolytic anaemias, 955–959
alloimmune, 959
autoimmune, 958–959
causes of, 955f, 956
non-immune, 959
Haemolytic disease of newborn (HDN), 942, 942b
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS), 102b, 
563, 582–583
pregnancy and, 1279
Haemophilia A, 981–984
clinical features of, 981–982, 982b, 983f
coagulation factor therapy for, 
complications of, 983–984
genetics in, 981
management of, 982–983, 983f
Haemophilia B, 984
Haemophilus ducreyi, 381b
Haemophilus inuenzae, 114b
bacterial meningitis, 1172b, 1174b
immunisation for, 112b
pneumonia, 361–362, 513
Haemophilus spp., 101f
Haemoptysis
in lung cancer, 529
in respiratory disease, 492–493, 493b, 493f
Haemorrhage
during dialysis, 597b
major, transfusion in, 940b, 943b
obstetric, circulatory collapse and, 1269
splinter, 1001b, 1110–1111
Haemorrhagic fevers, viral, 288–290, 289b
Haemorrhagic toxins, 243
Haemorrhoids, 834
Haemosiderosis, idiopathic pulmonary, 541b
Haemostasis, 927–930, 928f
in old age, 982b
system toxins, 243, 244f
Hair
abnormalities, 1077
disorders, 1109–1110
follicles, 1066
loss, 1116b
Hairy cell leukaemia, 970
Hairy leucoplakia, 359
Hallpike manoeuvre, 1158, 1159f
Hallucinations, 1237, 1240–1241
in alcohol misuse, 1249
hypnagogic, 1241
hypnopompic, 1241
in schizophrenia, 1251
Hallucinogens, misuse of, 230–231, 1250
Hallucinosis, alcoholic, 1249
Haloperidol
adverse reactions of, 22b
agitation, 171–172
for delirium, 213
for disturbed behaviour, 1245
poisoning, 228–229
schizophrenia, 1252b
Halothane, 78, 874f
Hamartoma, 532b
small intestine and, 825
Hands
diabetes mellitus, clinical examination of 
people with, 705b
in endocrine disease, 648f
examination of
blood disease, 922f
cancer, 128
cardiology, 386
endocrine disease, 648f
gastrointestinal disease, 782f
liver and biliary disease, 860
musculoskeletal system, 990–992
renal/urinary tract disease, 558–559
respiratory system, 480
skin disease, 1064–1066
foot and mouth disease, 291
gastrointestinal disease, 782f
hygiene, infection control, 109, 110f
liver and biliary disease and, 860
osteoarthritis, 1016f
pain, 1005–1006
rheumatoid arthritis in, 1029f
washing, 110f
Hantavirus infection, 306
Haploinsufciency, 674
Haptoglobin, 1314b
in acute phase response, 68
Hard metal disease, 543–544
Hartmann’s solution, 621b
Hasenclever index, in Hodgkin lymphoma, 
973b
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 663
HAV. See Hepatitis A virus
Haversian system, 992f
Hay fever, 81, 550
Hayick limit, 41
HBV. See Hepatitis B virus
HCV. See Hepatitis C virus
HDL. See High-density lipoproteins
HDN. See Haemolytic disease of newborn
Head and neck
examination of
endocrine disease, 648f
gastrointestinal disease, 782f
imaging of, 1131, 1131f
injury, 1187
tumours in, 151, 151b
investigations of, 151
management of, 151
pathogenesis of, 151
Head lice, 1093
Head-up tilt-table testing, 186
Headache, 186–188, 1137, 1149–1152
analgesic for, 1150
associated with specic activities, 1151
brain tumours causing, 1183
clinical assessment of, 187, 187f
cluster, 1150–1151
fever and, 263b
initial investigations of, 187–188
medication overuse, 1150
migraine and, 1150
morning, 491
paroxysmal, 1151, 1151b
pregnancy and, 1269
presentation of, 186–188, 187b
raised ICP, 1182b
red ag symptoms in, 187b
visual loss, 1225b
sexual activity and, 1151
stroke and, 1206
tension-type, 1149–1152
Health, social determinants of, 89–90
Health care, genomics and, 52–55
Health care-associated infection, 109, 109f, 
110f
MRSA, 98
predisposing factors, 109f
Health data/informatics, 94–95
Healthy eating, diabetes mellitus and, 
730–732
Hearing disturbance, 1146
Heart
anatomy of, 388–389, 388f, 389f
auscultation of, 387b
blood ow through, 388f
catheterisation, 396, 397f
chamber, 389f
dilation of, 394
conduction system, 389, 389f
coronary circulation in, 388–389
endothelium and, 391
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
nerve supply of, 389
physiology of, 389–391
Starling’s law, 402, 402f
Heart beats, ectopic
atrial, 411–412, 412f
ventricular, 416–417, 417f
Heart block
atrioventricular, 410–411, 410f, 411b, 411f
bifascicular, 411
bundle branch, 411, 412b, 412f
hemiblock, 411
Heart disease
congenital, 465–472, 467b, 468f
HIV-related, 365
pregnancy, 1275
rheumatic, 451–453
rheumatoid arthritis and, 1029
Heart failure, 401–408
in acute coronary syndrome, 434
acute left, 404
biventricular, 402
chronic, 404, 404b, 404f
clinical assessment for, 404, 404b
complications of, 404–405
congestive, in old age, 406b
education for, 405
high-output, 403
investigations for, 405, 405f
left, 402–408
management of, 405, 405b, 406b
drug treatment for, 406–408, 407f
mechanisms of, 403b, 403f
right, 402
Heart murmur, 400b, 401b
Heart rate
effects of respiration on, 391b
pregnancy and, 1266
Heart sounds, 401f
abnormal, 400–401, 400b
normal, 400b
Heart valves, diseases of, 451–465, 451b
Heartburn, 796
Heat cramps, 254b
Heat exhaustion, 254b
Heat oedema, 254b
Heat-related illness, 254–256, 254b
risk factors for development of, 255b
Heat stroke, 254b
pathophysiology of, 255–256, 255b
Heat syncope, 254b
Heberden’s nodes, 1015f
Height, in endocrine disease, 648f
Helicobacter pylori
eradication therapy, 814–815, 815b
gastric lymphoma, 818
peptic ulcer and, 813–814, 814f, 815b, 
820b
Helium dilution technique, 506
HELLP/pre-eclampsia/eclampsia, pregnancy 
and, 1230b
Headache (Continued)

[[p1405]]
1334     INDEX
HELLP syndrome, pregnancy and, 1277
Helminthiases, soil-transmitted, 278b
Helminths, 99–100
drugs used against, 125
Hemicrania, chronic paroxysmal, 1151b
Hemidiaphragm, elevation of, 555, 555b
Hemifacial spasm, 1170
Hemiparesis, 1175
Hemiplegic gait, 1303b
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 630
Hendra viruses, 117 6b
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 573b–574b, 
575, 1046
Henry’s law, 258, 258f
Heparin, 947–949
for acute limb ischaemia, 441
for angina, 431
indications for, 948b
low-molecular-weight, in thrombosis, 214
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), 
948–949
Hepatic acinus, 862f
Hepatic adenomas, 904
Hepatic disease, prescribing for patients with, 
31, 32b
Hepatic encephalopathy, 861, 878–879
clinical grade of, assessment for, 874b
differential diagnosis of, 878b
factors precipitating, 878b
Hepatic brosis, 906
cirrhosis and, 879f
congenital, 882f, 913
non-invasive markers of, 868
pathogenic mechanisms in, 863f
Hepatic jaundice, 870–871
Hepatic-renal disease, 583
Hepatic venous disease, 909–910
Hepatitis
acute kidney injury and, 589b
alcoholic, 893–894
autoimmune, 897–898
liver function test (LFT) abnormality 
in, 867b
viral, 383, 884–891
causes of, 884b
chronic, HIV-related, 360
features of, 885b
investigations for, 885
management of, 885
pregnancy and, 1278
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 885–886, 885b
immunisation, 112b
incubation period of, 108b
in old age, 915b
transmission, sexual, 383
Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), 886, 888b
Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), 886
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 886
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 885b, 886–889, 887f
acute, management of, 886–887
chronic
liver function test (LFT) abnormality 
in, 867b
management of, 886–887
phases of, 887b
risk of, 886b
source of, 886b
co-infection with HIV, 889
HIV-related, 360
incubation period of, 108b
investigations of, 886
in pregnancy, 280b
prevention of, 887b, 889
schematic diagram of, 886f
serology for, 886, 888b, 888f
transmission, sexual, 383
viral load and, 886, 888f
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 885b, 889–890
chronic, risk factors for, 890b
HIV-related, 360
liver function test for, 890
abnormality in, 867b
molecular analysis for, 890
transmission, sexual, 383
Hepatitis D virus, 885b, 889
Hepatitis E, 885b, 890
in pregnancy, 280b
Hepatitis viruses, 292
Hepatobiliary disease, HIV-related, 360
Hepatocellular carcinoma, 901–904, 902f
brolamellar, 904
hepatic resection for, 902
liver biopsy for, 902–903
liver transplantation for, 901–904, 902f
management of, 903f
in old age, 870b
screening for, 902
transarterial chemoembolisation for, 903
Hepatocytes, 879f
necrosis of, 906
Hepatology, 859
Hepatomegaly, 875
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 909
Hepatorenal syndrome
ascites and, 877
type 1, 877, 877b
type 2, 877
Hepatosplenic candidiasis, 345
HER2 receptor, as tumour markers, 137
Herbal medicines, for pain, 165
Herd immunity, 112
Hereditary angioedema (HAE), 83–84
Hereditary ataxia, with vitamin E deciency, 
1169b
Hereditary coproporphyria, 645b
Hereditary elliptocytosis, 956–957
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), 
980
Hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets, 579, 
1056
Hereditary nephrotic syndrome, 578
Hereditary neuropathy, 1193
Hereditary spastic paraplegia, 1191b
Hereditary spherocytosis, 956
investigations of, 956, 957f
management of, 956, 957b
Hernia
diaphragmatic, 555
hiatus, 806, 806b, 807f
lumbar disc, 1188–1189, 1189f
Heroin, misuse, 229
Herpangina, 291
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 282b
after HSCT, 946b
genital, 380–382
HIV-related, 357, 358f, 359b
HSV-1, 290–291, 291f
HSV-2, 290–291, 291f
penile, 375f
in pregnancy, 280b, 372b
Herpes simplex virus type 1, 1176b
Herpes simplex virus type 2, 1176b
Herpes zoster, 282–283, 1177
clinical features of, 282
facial pain from, 1137
HIV-related, 357–358
management of, 283
Herpesvirus infections, skin, 1091
Herring worm, 338
Heterochromatin, 38–39
HFNC. See High-ow nasal cannulae
HHS. See Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state
HHT. See Hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia
Hiatus hernia, 555, 806, 806b, 807f
‘Hibernating’ myocardium, 395
Hibernian fever, 76–77
Hierarchy of systems, 89, 89b, 89f
High altitude
illness at, 256–257
cerebral oedema (HACE), 257
pulmonary oedema (HAPE), 257
physiological effects of, 256
High-altitude cerebral oedema (HACE), 257
High-density lipoproteins (HDL), 1312b
High-energy fracture, 1002b
High-ow nasal cannulae (HFNC), 207
High haemoglobin, 933, 935b
High-risk behaviour, transition medicine and, 
1288–1289
history-taking in, 1289b
personality and, 1289
protective factors in, 1289
theories in, 1288–1289
Highly polyunsaturated long-chain n-3 fatty 
acids, 641–642
Hip
osteoarthritis, 1016–1017, 1016f
pain, 1006, 1006b, 1006f
Hippocampus, 1124
Hirschsprung’s disease, 833–834
Hirsutism, 672–673, 673b, 1110
His bundle, 389
Histamine, 785
Histiocytic disorders, 978, 978b, 978f
Histones, 38
Histopathology, in respiratory disease, 487
Histoplasma capsulatum, 346–347
Histoplasmosis, 346–347
in HIV infection/AIDS, 357f
HIT. See Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HIV infection/AIDS, 355, 1176b, 1177, 1177b
antiretroviral therapy for, 366–368, 366b
asymptomatic, 355, 356f
CD4 counts in, 354–355
chemoprophylaxis for, 365–366
clinical examination of, 350–352
clinical manifestations of, 355
diagnosis of, 354, 354b, 355b
epidemiology of, 352
gastrointestinal tract and, 857
global and regional epidemics of, 352, 
352b
hepatitis B and, co-infection with, 889
immunisation for, 366–367
immunology of, 352–354
investigations of, 354–355, 355b
life cycle of, 353f
liver and, 891
liver blood tests in, abnormal, 891b
modes of transmission of, 352, 352b, 353b
musculoskeletal manifestations of, 1026b
in old age, 368b
pregnancy and, 1274
presenting problems of, 355–365, 356b
cancers, 365, 365b
cardiac disease, 365
fever, 356–357, 357f
gastrointestinal disease, 359–360
haematological abnormalities, 364
hepatobiliary disease, 360
mucocutaneous disease, 357–359, 
358b
nervous system and eye disease, 
362–364, 362f
renal diseases, 364
respiratory disease, 360–362, 361b
rheumatological diseases, 364
weight loss, 356, 357f
prevention of, 365, 368b–369b
primary, 355, 355b
prophylaxis for, 116b
pruritus and, 1073b
staging classications of, 351b
tuberculosis and, 524
viral load in, 354–355
virology of, 352–354
HIV serology, acute kidney injury and,  
589b
Hives, 1103
HL. See Hodgkin lymphoma
HLA antigen, transplant rejection, 84–85
HNF1-beta mutations, 580
Hoarseness, psychogenic, 552
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), 971–973, 971f
classication of, 971b
clinical features of, 971–972
epidemiology of, 971b
investigations of, 972, 972f, 973f
management of, 972–973
prognosis of, 973, 973b
stages of, 972b
Holmes-Adie syndrome, 1148b
Home ventilation, for chronic respiratory 
failure, 499
Homocystinuria, 642–643
Honeycomb lung, 536f
Hookworm. See also Ancylostomiasis
ancylostomiasis, 333, 333f
dog, 338
infestation, 278b
Hoover’s sign, 1139–1140
Hormone replacement therapy
amenorrhoea, 670
cancer, 147
for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1053
Hormone therapy, 147
Hormones
gastrointestinal tract, 789
production, ectopic, 143b
in venous blood, 1311b
Horner’s syndrome, 1147b, 1148b, 1148f
Host-pathogen interactions, 101–102
House dust mite, 502
Howell-Jolly bodies, 931f
HPOA. See Hypertrophic pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy
HPV. See Human papillomavirus
HSCT. See Haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation
HSV. See Herpes simplex virus
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
secretion of, pregnancy and, 1266
as tumour markers, 136b, 137
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), 281–282, 282b
Human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7), 281–282, 282b
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), 282b, 291
Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, 65
antigen processing and presentation 
and, 66
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 382
in pregnancy, 372b
vaccines, 112
Human T-cell lymphotrophic virus type 1, 299
Humidier fever, 544b, 545
Humoral immunity, 65–66
Huntington’s disease, 1168–1169
differential diagnosis of, 1251b
genetic testing of, 1134
HUS. See Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Hydatid cyst, liver and, 892
Hydatid disease, 342, 343f
Hydralazine, 407
lupus syndrome, 1060b
malignant hypertension, 451
pharmacokinetic, 20b
skin reactions, 1116b
Hydroa vacciniforme, 1074b
Hydrocephalus, 1185–1186, 1186f
causes of, 1186b, 1187f
dementia and, 1247b
management of, 1186
normal pressure, 1186
Hydrocortisone
ACTH deciency, 695
adrenal insufciency, 686
asthma, 504
equivalent dose, 684b
for inammatory bowel disease, 841–842
laryngeal obstruction, 552
topical, 1079b
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate, 552
Hydrogen ions
acid-base balance, 630–631
in arterial blood, 498b, 1310b
Hydromorphone, 169
Hydronephrosis, 585
Hydrophobia, 1176
Hydrops fetalis, 281b
Hydroxycarbamide, for skin disease, 1080
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)
for musculoskeletal disease, 1011, 1011b
for rheumatoid arthritis, 1031b
skin reactions, 1116b
for Whipple’s disease, 822
1α-Hydroxycholecalciferol (alfacalcidol), for 
hypoparathyroidism, 679
Hydroxycobalamin (vitamin B12), 777
5-Hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (5-HIAA), 
1313b
11-Hydroxylase deciency, 446b
17α-Hydroxylase deciency, 446b
21-Hydroxylase deciency, 689
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 679, 
681b
deciency, 446b
25-Hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), for skeletal 
disease, 998b
Hyfrecation, 382
Hygiene
hand-washing, 110f
hypothesis, 80
Hyoscine butylbromide, 168b, 171
Hyper IgD syndrome (HIDS), 76
Hyperacusis, 1140
Hyperacute rejection, 84–85
Hyperaesthesia
dengue fever, 287b
herpes simplex, 290
Hyperaldosteronism
glucocorticoid suppressible, 446b, 687
primary, 687–688, 687b
secondary, 687b
Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia, 638
Hyperbilirubinaemia, non-haemolytic, 872b
Hypercalcaemia, 676–677
cancer and, 142, 142b
causes of, 676, 676b
clinical assessment of, 676
familial hypocalciuric, 676, 678
investigations of, 676–677
Hepatocellular carcinoma (Continued)

[[p1406]]
INDEX    1335
malignant, 676
management of, 677
multiple myeloma and, 583b, 977f
sarcoidosis, 538
Hypercapnia, ventilator-induced lung injury 
and, 208
Hypercholesterolaemia, 637–638, 640–641, 
641f
atherosclerosis risk, 425
familial, 638, 639b
management of, 640–641, 641f
nephrotic syndrome and, 572b
polygenic, 637–638
secondary, 638b
Hypercoagulability, nephrotic syndrome and, 
572b
Hypercortisolism, 681b
Hyperemesis gravidarum, pregnancy and, 
1271, 1271b
Hyperglycaemia
diabetes mellitus and, 719–720, 720f, 721b
maternal, diabetes and, 1272
pancreatitis, 851b
symptoms of, 716b
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS), 
723–725, 724b, 724f
diabetes mellitus and, 723–725
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism, 669, 
669b
Hyperkalaemia, 404, 629–630
acute kidney injury and, 587
causes of, 629b
chronic kidney disease, 590–591
heart failure, 404
periodic paralysis, 1198b
treatment of, 630b
Hyperlactataemia, 199, 200f
Hyperlipidaemia
check for signs of, 614f
classication of, 638b
drug treatment of, 640f
familial combined, 638, 638b
mixed, 639, 642
in old age, 642b
rare forms of, 639b
remnant, 639
secondary, 638b
treatment of, 640f
Hypermagnesaemia, 634
Hypermelanosis, focal, 1109
Hypermobility syndromes, 1061
Hypernatraemia, 625–627
causes of, 626b
in old age, 627b
Hyperostosis, diffuse idiopathic skeletal, 1061, 
1061f
Hyperparasitaemia, malaria, 322b
Hyperparathyroidism
chronic kidney disease and, 591
in old age, 676b
pain, 678
primary, pregnancy and, 1273–1274
Hyperphosphataemia, 635
chronic kidney disease and, 591–592
Hyperpigmentation, photo-exposed site, 1109
Hyperprolactinaemia, 696–697, 696b
disconnection, 681
Hyperpyrexia, 322b
Hypersensitive carotid sinus syndrome, 186
Hypersensitivity, 69
allergic rhinitis, 550
drug response, 20b
Gell and Coombs classication of, 78–79, 
78b
patch tests, 1069
prick tests, 1069
type I, 78–79, 81f
type II, 78
type III, 78–79
type IV, 79
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 544–545, 544f, 
545b
Hypersensitivity rashes, 367
Hypersensitivity reaction, denition of, 19–20, 
21b
Hypersomnolence, 1159, 1159b
Hypersplenism, portal hypertension, 882b
Hypertension, 197, 446–451, 446b, 447b, 
447f, 448b, 449f, 451f, 568
accelerated, 451
assessment and management of, 197
atherosclerosis risk, 425
cocaine, 230
denition, 446b
essential, 446
gestational, 1270, 1270b
history, 448
idiopathic intracranial, 1186–1187
investigations, 447–448
management
antihypertensive drugs, 450
British Hypertension Society guidelines, 
449f
intervention thresholds, 448
non-drug therapy, 448
treatment targets, 448, 449b
in old age, 449b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pathogenesis, 446–451
pathophysiology of, 197
portal, 881–884, 882f, 909
classication of, 882f
clinical features of, 881–884
complications of, 882b
investigations for, 882
management of, 882–884
pathophysiology of, 882
portopulmonary, 909
pre-eclampsia, 1270–1271
during pregnancy, 1270–1271
classication of, 1270b
pre-eclampsia and eclampsia in, 
1270–1271, 1270f, 1271b
pre-existing, 1270, 1270b
pulmonary, 483, 549–550, 549b, 549f
congenital heart disease and, 467
renal artery stenosis and, 580
renal disease, 568
AKI, 585
chronic, 588
polycystic, 579
reux nephropathy, 605–606
secondary, 446b
target organ damage, 447
white coat, 447, 1270b
Hyperthermia, malignant, 1198b
Hyperthyroidism, 655
pregnancy and, 1273
Hypertrichosis, 1110
drug-induced, 1116b
Hypertriglyceridaemia, 638
familial, 638, 638b
management of, 641–642
secondary, 638b
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 474–475, 474b
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, 
transition medicine and, 1291
Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy 
(HPOA), in lung cancer, 529
Hyperuricaemia
causes of, 1019b
gout, 1019b
Hyperventilation
in panic disorder, 1255
psychogenic, 1256
and respiratory alkalosis, 633
Hypervolaemia, 620–623
clinical features of, 620b
hypernatraemia with, 626b
hyponatraemia with, 624
Hypnic jerks, 1143
Hypnotics
dosage regimens of, 31b
in old age, 32b
Hypoadrenalism, tuberculosis, 525
Hypoalbuminaemia, nephrotic syndrome 
and, 572b
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia, 639
Hypocalcaemia, 677
aetiology of, 677
clinical assessment of, 677
differential diagnosis of, 677b
ethylene glycol poisoning, 234
hypomagnesaemia and, 634
kidney failure and
acute, 587
chronic, 591
kidney injury, acute, 587
management of, 677, 677b
pancreatitis, 851b
Hypochlorhydria, 814
Hypochlorous acid, 62
Hypochondriacal disorder, 1256–1257
Hypobrinogenaemia, 932b, 982b
Hypoglossal (12th cranial) nerve, tests of, 
1121b
Hypoglycaemia, 725–727, 725b
clinical assessment, 725–726, 725b
awareness, 725
risk factors and causes of, 725–726, 
726b
diabetes mellitus and, 725–727
malaria, 322b
management, 726–727
reducing future risk of, 727
reversing, 726–727, 726b
spontaneous, 689–691, 690f
Hypogonadism
hypergonadotrophic, 669, 669b
hypogonadotrophic, 669, 669b
male, 670–671, 671b
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, 669, 
669b
Hypokalaemia, 404, 627–629
causes of, 628b
chloroquine poisoning, 229b
heart failure, 404
hyperaldosteronism, 687
mineralocorticoid excess, 688
periodic paralysis, 1198b
Hypomagnesaemia, 634
causes of, 634b
management, 634
Hypomania, 1254
Hyponatraemia, 404, 624–625
adrenal insufciency, 685
algorithm for diagnosis of, 626f
brain and, 625f
causes of, 624b
depletional, 685b
dilutional, 587
ecstasy/amphetamine misuse, 230
with euvolaemia, 624
heart failure, 404
with hypervolaemia, 624
hypopituitarism, 694
with hypovolaemia, 624
in old age, 627b
symptoms and severity of, 625b
Hypoparathyroidism, 678–679
Hypophosphataemia, 634–635, 635b
Hypophosphataemic rickets
biochemical abnormalities in, 998b
transition medicine and, 1293
Hypophosphatasia, 1056
Hypopigmentation, 1108–1109
Hypopituitarism, 693f, 694–695, 694b
clinical assessment, 693f, 694
investigations, 694, 694b
management, 695
Hyposmia, 1145
Hypotension, 195–197
assessment and management of, 195–197, 
196b
during dialysis, 597b
pathophysiology of, 195–197, 196b
poisoning, 225b
postural, 184, 1297b, 1303
glucocorticoid insufciency, 685b
in old age, 32b
renal disease, 585
shock, 199b
Hypothalamus, 691–700, 1126
disease
classication of, 692b
presenting problems in, 693–697
functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations of, 692f
in old age, 694b
therapeutic modalities, 696b
thermoregulation and, 252
tumours, 1126
Hypothermia, 253, 253f
mild, 253
severe, 253
Hypothyroidism, 655–659
autoimmune, 655b, 657b
causes, 657b
clinical assessment of, 656–657, 657f
clinical features of, 655b
congenital, 657b, 667
iatrogenic, 657b
investigations of, 657
laboratory abnormalities, 656b
management of, 657–659, 658b
with normal thyroid function tests, 659
in old age, 658, 658b
in pregnancy, 658, 658b, 1273
radiotherapy and, 1291
secondary, 657b
spontaneous atrophic, 657b
subclinical, 659
transient, 657
transient thyroiditis, 657b
Hypoventilation, alveolar, 499, 549b
Hypovolaemia, 620
causes of, 620b
clinical features of, 620b
hypernatraemia with, 626b
hyponatraemia with, 624
Hypovolaemic shock, description of, 210b
Hypoxaemia
assessment and management of, 194–195, 
195b
causes of, 196b
mechanisms of, 196f
pathophysiology of, 194–195, 195f
pulmonary hypertension, 549b
Hypoxia
altitude illness and, 256
cytopathic, 199f
pancreatitis, 851b
respiratory failure, 498b
Hysterectomy, cancer treatment, 151
I
Ibandronate, for osteoporosis, 1051b
IBD. See Inammatory bowel disease
IBS. See Irritable bowel syndrome
Ibuprofen, 1010b
adverse reactions of, 22b
Ice cream headache, 1151b
Ice pick headache, 1151b
ICER. See Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
ICF. See Intracellular uid
Ichthyosis, 1066
ICP. See Intracranial pressure
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, 534–537, 535b
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, pregnancy 
and, 1278
Idiopathic osteoporosis, 1049
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, 1165–1168
causes of, 1165b
clinical features of, 1166, 1166b
investigations of, 1166, 1167f
management of, 1166–1168
drug therapy, 1166–1168
surgery, 1168
pathophysiology of, 1166, 1166f
Idiopathic pulmonary brosis, 534–537, 536f
Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis, 541b
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), 
981
pregnancy and, 1279
If channel antagonists, angina, 430
Ifosfamide, 632b
IGF. See Insulin-like growth factor
IgG4 disease, 1047
IGRAs. See Interferon-gamma release assays
IHCA. See In-hospital cardiac arrest
IKK. See Inhibitor of kappa B kinase
Ileal resection, 823f
Ileus
meconium, 855
paralytic, 850–851
Illumina system, sequencing by synthesis, 53f
Illusions, 1237
Iloprost, 549
Imaging
for epilepsy, 1156b
in gastroenterology, 792b
of gastrointestinal tract, 789–793
for hepatobiliary disease, 867–868
for lung cancer, 530, 530f
for musculoskeletal disease, 996–997
of renal tract, 564
of respiratory system, 484–486
Imatinib
acute leukaemia, 965b
for GIST, 819
Imidazoles, 121, 122b
Imipenem, 117b
nocardiosis, 309
Imipramine, 540b
irritable bowel syndrome, 848
Imiprothrin, 235b
Imiquimod
cream, for anogenital warts, 382
for skin cancer, 1083b
Hypercalcaemia (Continued)
Hypertension (Continued)
Hypothyroidism (Continued)

[[p1407]]
1336     INDEX
Immersion pulmonary oedema, 259
Immotile cilia syndrome, 509b
Immune deciency, 72–76
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
and, 75
common variable, 74
complement pathway deciencies in, 73
consequences of, 72
investigations of
initial, 71b
specialist, 72b
primary, warning signs of, 71b
primary antibody deciencies in, 73–75, 
74b, 74f
primary phagocyte deciencies in, 72–73, 73f
primary T-lymphocyte deciencies and, 
75, 76f
secondary, 75–76, 76b
Immune disorders
anaphylaxis and, 72
intermittent fever and, 71–72
presenting problems of, 70–72
recurrent infections and, 70–71
Immune reconstitution inammatory syndrome 
(IRIS), 102, 367
Immune-related adverse events, 142
Immune response modiers, 1079
Immune responses, in lower airway defences, 
484
Immune senescence, 75–76, 77b
Immune system
adaptive, 65–67
cellular immunity and, 66–67, 68f
immunoglobulins and, 66, 66f, 67b
lymphoid organs and, 65
innate, 60–65
complement and, 63–64
cytokines and, 62, 63f, 64b
dendritic cells in, 62
integrins and, 62–63
mast cells and basophils, 65
natural killer cells and, 65
phagocytes in, 61–62, 61f
physical barriers in, 60–61
regulation of, 865
Immunisation, 111–112, 112b
for chickenpox, 282
for diphtheria, 313
Haemophilus inuenzae, 112b
for hepatitis B, 888b
for HIV infection/AIDS, 366–367
for human papillomavirus, 383
for mumps, 284
for pneumococcal infection, 313
for poliomyelitis, 1177
primary antibody deciencies and, 74–75
principles of, 91
for tetanus, 1180
for tuberculosis, 524–525
for yellow fever, 288
Immunity
adaptive, humoral immunity and, 65–66
cellular, 66–67, 68f
humoral, 65–66
Immunoblot (Western blot), 105
innate, 787
Immunoblot (Western blot), 105
Immunobullous disease, drug-induced, 1116b
Immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic 
tests (RDTs), 322
Immunochromatographic tests, 106
Immunocompromised host, fever in, 268–269
Immunocompromised patient, pneumonia in, 
517–518
Immunodiffusion, 106
Immunouorescence assays, 105
Immunoglobulin(s), 66, 66f, 67b, 74b
intravenous
myasthenia gravis, 1196b
toxic shock syndrome, 301
prophylactic, 112b
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 67b
deciency, selective, 74
linear IgA disease, 1106b, 1107
nephropathy, 573b–574b, 575
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Immunoglobulin D (IgD), 67b
hyper-IgD syndrome, 76
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 67b, 1069
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
serum total, for allergy, 82
specic tests, for allergy, 82
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), 67b
anti-HBc, 888b
cerebrospinal uid, 1313b
reference range of, 1312b
rubella-specic, 279–280
Immunoglobulin M (IgM), 67b
anti-HBc, 888b
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Immunoglobulin replacement therapy, for 
primary antibody deciencies, 75
Immunohistochemistry, tumour identication, 
137
Immunological memory, 66
Immunological tests, 1134
antibody-independent specic, 106
for hepatobiliary disease, 867
for respiratory disease, 487
Immunology, 563–564
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease, 
825
Immunosuppressants, for skin disease, 1080
Immunosuppression
myasthenia gravis, 1196b
in transplant
complications of, 85
drugs used in, 85b
Immunotherapy, 945
antigen-specic, for allergy, 82
cancer, 147–148, 148f
myasthenia gravis, 1196b
Impaired glucose tolerance, 638, 1312b
Impaired upgaze, in older people, 1230b
Impetigo, 1088
non-bullous, 1088f
Implantable cardiac debrillators, 408, 423, 
423b
for acute coronary syndrome, 439
Imprinting, 49, 49b
Incidence of disease, microbiological 
sampling, 103b
Incident pain, 168b
Incidental adrenal mass, 687
Incidental pancreatic mass, 856
‘Incidentalomas,’ 651b
Inclusion body myositis, 1061–1062
Incontinence
continual, 608
overow, 608, 1148
stress, 608
urge, 608, 1148
urinary, 567, 608–609
older people, 608b, 1305–1306, 1306f
Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER), 28
Indirect antiglobulin tests, 957f
Indometacin, 1010b
for paroxysmal headache prevention, 1151
for pericarditis, 476
for persistent ductus arteriosus, 468–469
Inductively coupled plasma/mass 
spectroscopy, 616b
Infection(s), 261, 939
in adolescence, 278, 279b
agents of, 98–100, 98b
bacterial, 299–319
after HSCT, 946b
chlamydial, 319, 319b
gastrointestinal, 309–312
with neurological involvement, 314
respiratory, 312–314
rickettsial, 316–319, 317b
of skin, 1088–1091
soft tissues and bones, 299–303
systemic, 303–309
caused by helminths, 332–342, 332b
central venous catheter, 271
chain of, 98f
chlamydial, 379–380
treatment of, 380b
urethritis, 372
clinical examination of, 262–264, 262f
common infecting organisms, 114b
constitutive barriers to, 61
control, 108–112, 109b
cytomegalovirus, 282b, 286
after HSCT, 946b
clinical features of, 286
encephalitis, 362
investigations of, 286
management of, 286
polyradiculitis, 363
in pregnancy, 280b
denition of, 98
deliberate release, 108
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
emerging and re-emerging disease, 107, 
107f
endemic disease, 106–107
epidemiology of, 106–108
Epstein-Barr virus, 282b, 285–286
clinical features of, 285
complications of, 285, 285b
investigations of, 285
management of, 286
Escherichia coli, 310–311
entero-aggregative, 310
enterohaemorrhagic, 310–311
entero-invasive, 310
enteropathogenic, 310
verocytotoxigenic, 311f
fungal, 342–347, 343f
after HSCT, 946b
skin, 1092–1093, 1092f
subcutaneous, 344
supercial, 343–344
systemic, 344–347
gastrointestinal tract
function of, 793, 795b
oral cancer, 805
test of, 793
geographical and temporal patterns of, 
106–108
history-taking in, 263b
HIV/AIDS, 349, 355
antiretroviral therapy for, 366–368, 366b
asymptomatic, 355, 356f
CD4 counts in, 354–355
chemoprophylaxis for, 365–366
clinical examination of, 350–352
clinical manifestations of, 355
diagnosis of, 354, 354b, 355b
epidemiology of, 352
global and regional epidemics of, 352b
immunisation for, 366–367
immunology of, 352–354
investigations of, 354–355, 355b
life cycle of, 353f
liver and, 891
liver blood tests in, abnormal, 891b
modes of transmission of, 352, 352b, 
353b
musculoskeletal manifestations of, 
1026b
in old age, 368b
pregnancy and, 1274
presenting problems of, 355–365, 356b
prevention of, 365, 368b–369b
primary, 355, 355b
pruritus and, 1073b
staging classications of, 351b
tuberculosis and, 524
viral load in, 354–355
virology of, 352–354
host-pathogen interaction of, 101–102
incubation periods of, 108b
investigation of, 102–106, 103b
culture, 104–105
direct detection of pathogens, 103–104
joints, 1025–1027
in old age, 1025b
of liver, 884–892
liver transplantation and, 912
microbiological sampling, 103b
mycobacterial, 314–316
nematode, 278b
intestinal, 332–335
tissue-dwelling, 335–337, 335b
zoonotic, 337–338
in non-immune haemolytic anaemia, 959
normal microbial ora, 100–101, 101f
of oesophagitis, 807
outbreaks of, 109–111, 111b
reporting, 111b
terminology, 116b
parvovirus B19, 280–281
clinical features of, 280–281, 281b, 281f
diagnosis of, 281
management of, 281
in pregnancy, 280b
periods of infectivity, 108b
in pregnancy, 279, 280b
presenting problems in, 264–279
prevention, 108–112, 109b
protozoal, 319–332
gastrointestinal, 330–332
leishmaniasis, 326–330
systemic, 319–326
recurrent, 70–71
reservoirs of, 107–108
animal, 107–108
environmental, 108
human, 107
respiratory, 512–528, 512b
in old age, 512b
pneumonia, 512–518
pregnancy and, 1271
tuberculosis (TB), 518–525
upper respiratory tract infection, 512
rubella
clinical features of, 279
congenital malformation and, 281b
diagnosis of, 279–280
in pregnancy, 280b
prevention of, 280
sexually transmitted, 369–370, 371b
in children, 372
contact tracing for, 376–377
management goals of, 376b
men who have sex with men, 371b
during pregnancy, 372
presenting problems, 372–375
prevention of, 376–377, 376b
those at particular risk, 371b
viral, 380–383
skin, 1088–1094
bacterial, 1088–1091
fungal, 1092–1093, 1092f
mycobacterial, 1090
tropical, 277–278, 278b, 279f
viral, 1091–1092
of small intestine, 825
soft tissue, 271–272
necrotising, 272b
staphylococcal, 299–301, 300f
cannula-related, 300, 300b
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, 300–301
skin, 300
staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome, 
301, 301f
wound, 300, 300f
supportive therapy for, 966
transmission of, 98f, 108
tropical, 274–278, 275b
urinary tract, 599–602
antibiotic regimens for, 601b
investigation of, 600b
in old age, 600b
persistent or recurrent, 601, 601b
risk factors for, 600b
viral, 279–299
gastrointestinal, 292
with neurological involvement, 298–299
respiratory, 292–298
with rheumatological involvement, 299
sexually transmitted, 380–383
of skin, 290–292, 1091–1092
Infection-related glomerulonephritis, 
573b–574b, 576
Infectious disease
genomics in, 55
pathogenesis of, 102, 105f
periods of infectivity in, 108b
principles of, 97
treatment of, 113–125, 116b
Infectious keratitis/corneal ulceration, 
1228–1229, 1228b, 1229f
Infectious mononucleosis, 285–286
causes of, 285b
clinical features of, 285, 286f
investigations of, 285
management of, 286
Infective endocarditis, 462–465, 464b,  
466b
acute, 464
antimicrobial treatment of, 466b
in old age, 463b
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
post-operative, 464
prevention of, 465
subacute, 464, 464b, 465f
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling, bilateral,  
683f
Inferior vena cava, 388f, 560
Infertility, 671–672, 671b
cytotoxic medications and, 1291
in polycystic ovarian syndrome, 673
Infestations, skin, 1093–1094
Infection(s) (Continued)
Infection(s) (Continued)

[[p1408]]
INDEX    1337
Inammation
acute, 67–69, 69f
chronic, 69
laboratory features of, 69–70
resolution, 68–69
systemic, 198–201
tumour-promoting, 133
Inammatory bowel disease (IBD), 835–847
childhood, 846
clinical features of, 837–838
complications of, 839–840, 839f
differential diagnosis of, 838–839, 839b
disease distribution in, 837f
investigations of, 840–841, 841f
management of, 841
metabolic bone disease and, 846
microscopic colitis and, 846–847
monitoring of, 842, 844b
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pathogenesis of, 836f
pathophysiology of, 835–847, 836b
in pregnancy, 846, 846b, 1271–1272
systemic complications of, 840f
transition medicine and, 1292–1293
treatment of, 843b
Inammatory molecules, 62
Inammatory myopathy, 1046b
Inammatory response, 67–70
acute inammation and, 67–69, 69f
acute phase response in, 68
resolution of, 68–69
septic shock and, 68
chronic inammation and, 69
laboratory features of, 69–70
C-reactive protein as, 69–70
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and, 70
plasma viscosity as, 70
Inammatory rheumatic diseases
biologics for, 1012f, 1013b
in pregnancy, 1274
anti-phospholipid syndrome as, 1275
rheumatoid arthritis as, 1274
systemic lupus erythematosus as, 1275, 
1275b
systemic sclerosis as, 1274–1275, 
1275b
Iniximab
for inammatory bowel disease, 842, 843b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1013b
Inuenza, 284–285
avian, 285
clinical features of, 284
diagnosis of, 284
epidemic, 102
immunisation for, 112b
incubation period of, 108b
management and prevention of, 284–285
prophylaxis for, 116b
Infrapatellar bursitis, 1007b
Inhalation (‘humidier’) fever, 544b, 545
Inhalational administration, 17
Inheritance
autosomal dominant, 46–47
autosomal recessive, 46–47
mitochondrial, 47–48
pedigrees, 45f
X-linked, 47
Inherited cancer predisposition syndromes, 
54b–55b
Inherited liver disease, ophthalmic features 
of, 1220b
Inherited metabolic disorders, 642–645, 643f
Inherited metabolic myopathies, 1197, 1197b
Inherited thrombophilia, 986–989
Inherited tubulo-interstitial diseases, 578, 579b
Inhibin, 651f
Inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKK), 62
In-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA), 203–205
Innate immune system, 60–65
complement and, 63–64
cytokines and, 62, 63f, 64b
dendritic cells in, 62
integrins and, 62–63
mast cells and basophils, 65
natural killer cells and, 65
phagocytes in, 61–62, 61f
physical barriers in, 60–61
Inorganic micronutrients, 778–780, 779b
calcium and phosphorus, 778
uoride, 779–780
iodine, 779
iron, 778
selenium, 779
sodium, potassium and magnesium, 780
zinc, 779
Insect bites, 275
Insect venom allergy, 81
Insecticides
carbamate, 233
organophosphorus, 232–233, 232b, 232f
pyrethroid, 235b
Insertions, 41
Insight, lack of, 1237
Insomnia
fatal familial, 1181b
sporadic fatal, 1181b
Inspiration, of lungs, 482
Insulin
adverse reactions of, 22b
injection sites, diabetes mellitus, clinical 
examination of people with, 705b
puberty and, 1284
reference range of, 1311b
resistance to, pregnancy and, 1266
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF), 651f, 863f
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein (IGF-
BP3), 651f
Insulin receptor signalling, 708f
Insulin resistance, polycystic ovarian 
syndrome, 673b
Insulin tolerance test, for hypopituitarism, 694b
Integrade inhibitors, 366b
Integrase, 353–354
Integrins, 62–63
Intensive care
clinical management in, 212–214
blood transfusion in, 214
clinical review in, 212
delirium in, 213
extubation in, 214
glucose control in, 214
infection surveillance in, 212
nutrition in, 214
peptic ulcer prophylaxis in, 214
sedation and analgesia in, 212–213, 
213b
thromboprophylaxis in, 214
tracheostomy in, 214, 214b
weaning from respiratory support in, 
213–214
discharge from, 217, 218b
withdrawal of active treatment and death 
in, 216–217
Intention tremor, 1126
Intercellular adhesion molecule type 1(ICAM-
1), 391
Intercostal tube drainage, 554, 554f
Interferon-α, 64b
for hepatitis B, 888
Interferon-beta, 1163b
Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), 64b
Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRAs), 
523, 524f
Interleukin, immune response, 64b
Intermediate-density lipoproteins, 636–637
Intermediate syndrome, from OP poisoning, 
233
Intermittent claudication, 440
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation, 
207–208
Intermittent subcutaneous insulin injection 
regimens, 739–740, 740b, 740f
Intermittent subcutaneous insulin injection 
therapy, 738–740
International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), 
609b
International system of units (SI units), 1310
Interpersonal psychotherapy, 1246
Interphalangeal joints, osteoarthritis in, 1016f
Interstitial and inltrative pulmonary diseases, 
533–541
diffuse parenchymal lung disease (DPLD), 
533–538, 534b, 534f, 535b, 536b
due to irradiation and drugs, 540–541
due to systemic inammatory disease, 
538–539
in old age, 535b
pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides, 
539–540, 540b
rare interstitial lung diseases, 541b
Interstitial cells of Cajal, 789
Interstitial nephritis
acute, 576–577, 576b, 577f
chronic, 576–577, 578b
drug-induced, 599b
Interstitial pneumonia
acute, 535b
desquamative, 535b
lymphocytic, 535b
usual, 536f
Interstitial pneumonitis
lymphoid, 362
usual, 536f
Intertrigo, 343–344
Intervertebral discs, intra-articular, 995
Intestinal defence mechanisms, 787f
Intestinal failure (‘short bowel syndrome’), 
771–772
jejunostomy patients, 772, 772b
jejunum-colon patients, 771
management, 771–772, 771b
small bowel and multivisceral 
transplantation, 772, 772b
Intestinal microbiota, 788
Intestinal motility, 822b
Intestinal tapeworm, 340–341
Intra-abdominal pressure, increased, 806
Intra-aortic balloon pump, 211
Intra-articular discs, 995
Intra-articular glucocorticoids, for 
musculoskeletal disease, 1012
Intra-articular injections, for osteoarthritis, 
1018
Intracellular uid (ICF), 617
Intracerebral haemorrhage, 1208
Intracranial hypertension, idiopathic, 
1186–1187
Intracranial mass lesions, 1182–1187
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 168b
raised, 1182–1183, 1182b, 1182f, 1183f
Intramuscular administration, 17
Intramuscular androgen replacement therapy, 
671b
Intravascular haemolysis, 955b, 956
Intravenous administration, 17
Intravenous uid therapy, 620
Intravenous urography (IVU), 564
for retroperitoneal brosis, 606
Introns, 39
Intubation, 207–208
endotracheal, critically ill patients, 194b, 
212
safety during, 207b
ventilator modes in, 207, 208f
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), 
527–528, 527b
Involuntary movements, 1126
Iodide, 651–652
Iodine, 663–664, 779, 779b
deciency, 657b, 663–664
pregnancy and, 658b, 1273
radioactive
for fetal hypothyroidism, 1273
for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 661b, 662
for thyroid neoplasia, 665
Iodine-associated thyroid disease, 663–664
Iodine-induced thyroid dysfunction, 664
Iodoquinol, 124
Ion channels, drugs acting on, 15b
Ion-selective electrodes, 616b
IPA. See Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Ipratropium bromide, asthma, 504
IPSS. See International Prostate Symptom 
Score
Irbesartan, 448
Irinotecan, 829–830, 856
IRIS. See Immune reconstitution inammatory 
syndrome
Iron, 778, 779b
poisoning from, 228
reference range of, 1314b
supplements, in pregnancy, 952b
Iron deciency anaemia, 933, 950–952
alimentary tract disorders, 808
blood loss in, 950–952
conrmation of, 952, 953b
investigations in, 952
of cause, 952
malabsorption in, 950, 951f
management of, 952
physiological demands in, 950, 952b
pregnancy and, 1278
Iron oxide, 543b
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 847–848
clinical features of, 848, 848b
complementary and alternative therapies 
for, 849b
investigations of, 848, 848b
management of, 848, 849b, 849f
pathophysiology of, 847–848
behavioural and psychosocial factors, 
847
luminal factors, 848
physiological factors, 847–848
Irritant eczema, 1098
Irritant-induced asthma, 542
Ischaemia
cerebral, 977f
critical limb, 440–441
liver, 909
lower limb, 442b
Ischaemic gut injury, 848–850
Ischaemic heart disease
hierarchy of systems applied to, 89b
levothyroxine replacement in, 658
Ischaemic nephropathy, 580–581
Ischaemic pain, 168b
Ischiogluteal bursitis, 1006b
Isocyanates, 541b
Isolated gonadotrophin deciency, 669
Isolation precaution, types of, 110b
Isoniazid
as antimycobacterial agents, 121
hepatotoxicity, 117b, 905b
poisoning, 229b
prophylactic, 116b
skin reactions, 1116b
tuberculosis
HIV/AIDS patients, 366, 366b
treatment, 522, 523b
Isophane, 738
Isoprenaline, 418
AV block, 411
Isosorbide dinitrate, 429b
Isosorbide mononitrate, 429b
Isotretinoin, 1080
Ispaghula husk, 833
Itch, 1072–1074
ITGB2 gene, loss-of-function mutations in, 
leucocyte adhesion deciencies 
and, 72
ITP. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Itraconazole, 122, 122b
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, 
526
chromoblastomycosis, 344
cutaneous leishmaniasis, 330
histoplasmosis, 347
mycetoma, 344
P. marneffei infection, 346
prophylactic, 116b
sporotrichosis, 344
ITU, referral to, in community-acquired 
pneumonia, 515b
Ivabradine
angina, 430
for heart failure, 407
Ivermectin
for helminthic infections, 125
lariasis, 336
for strongyloidiasis, 334
IVU. See Intravenous urography
J
JAK proteins, 62
Janus kinase inhibitor, 842
for inammatory bowel disease, 843b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1012
Japanese encephalitis virus, 298–299, 1176b
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, 379
Jaundice, 870–872, 871b, 872b
alcoholic hepatitis and, 894b
cholestatic, 870b, 872, 872b
hepatic, 870–871
investigation of, 873f
obstructive, 919
pre-hepatic, 870
JC virus, 362
Jejunal mucosa, 821f
Jejunum
coeliac disease. See Coeliac disease
hormones, 790b
Jellysh, 242b
Jiggers, 342
Jod-Basedow effect, 664
Joint capsule, 995
Joint disease
crystal-associated, 1018–1023, 1018b, 
1019f
in tuberculosis, 520–521
Inorganic micronutrients (Continued)
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (Continued)

[[p1409]]
1338     INDEX
Joint hypermobility syndrome, 166–167
Joints, 994–995
aspiration, 995–996, 996f
brous and brocartilaginous, 994
hypermobility, 1061b
infection, 1025–1027
neuropathic (Charcot), 1061f
in old age, 1025b
protection, 1008
replacement, arthroplasty, 1009b
synovial, 994–995, 995f
tumours, 1059
types of, 994b
Jugular venous pressure, effects of respiration 
on, 391b
Jugular venous pulse
examination of, 387b
respiratory system, 480
tricuspid regurgitation, 461
Junin and Machupo viruses, 289b
Juvenile absence epilepsy, 1155b
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM), 1043
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 1032
in adolescence, 1032b
clinical features of, 1032b
oligoarticular, 1293
transition medicine and, 1293
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, 1155b
Juvenile polyposis, 832
K
Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis), 327–329, 
327f
clinical features of, 327
differential diagnosis of, 328
HIV co-infection, 328–329
investigations of, 327–328, 328f
management of, 328
post-kala-azar, dermal leishmaniasis, 329, 
329f
Kallmann syndrome, 669
Kaposi’s sarcoma, HIV-related, 358, 359f
Karyotype, 38f
Katayama syndrome, 338
Kawasaki disease, 1045
Kayser-Fleischer rings, 907, 1229f
KCO (transfer coefcient for carbon monoxide), 
489b
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 1197b
Keloid scar, denition of, 1078–1079
Kennedy’s disease, 1148b
Keratin, 1066
Keratinocytes, 1066
Keratoacanthoma, 1087, 1087f
Keratoconus, in adolescents, 1230b
Keratolysis, pitted, 1091
Keratosis, actinic, 1083b
Kerion, 1092–1093
Kernig’s sign, 1171
Kerosene, poisoning, 235b
Ketamine, 163b
Ketoconazole, 121, 122b
Cushing’s syndrome, 684
cutaneous leishmaniasis, 330
mycetoma, 344
paracoccidioidomycosis, 347
Kidney
acid-base balance control, 630
clinical examination of, 558–560, 559f
cystic diseases of, 579
drugs and, 597–599
duplex, 604
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
560–562, 561f
imaging of, 564, 565f
MRI images of, 580f
single, 604
sodium handling, 617
stones, 603b
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 1039
transplantation, 596–597
tumours of, 606–608
Kidney disease
in adolescence, 598b
chronic, 588–593, 590b
causes of, 588b
haemodialysis in, 594–595
indications for dialysis for, 595b
osteodystrophy and, 592f
physical signs of, 589f
pregnancy and, 1277, 1277f
pruritus, 588
stages of, 564b
staging of, in children over 2 years of 
age, 1292b
transition medicine and, 1291–1292
medullary sponge, 604
Kidney injury, acute, 584–588
causes of, 585f
clinical features of, 585
dialysis for, indications for, 595b
haemodialysis in, 593–594
investigations of, 586b
management of, 585–588, 587b
in old age, 584b
pathophysiology of, 584–588
post-renal, 585, 586b
pregnancy and, 1276, 1277b
pre-renal, 585, 586b
recovery from, 588, 588f
renal, 585, 586b
renal replacement therapy, 587–588
Kinases, cyclin-dependent, 131
Klebsiella granulomatis, 381b
Klebsiella oxytoca, 274
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 113
Klebsiella spp., 101f
Klinefelter syndrome, 44b, 674–675
Knee
osteoarthritis, 1015–1016, 1016f
pain, 1006, 1007b
Knudson hypothesis, 55
Köbner phenomenon, 1103
Koch’s postulates, 98b
Koilonychia, 1111, 1111f
Koplik’s spots, 279, 280f
Korsakoff’s syndrome, 1138
Krebs (citric acid) cycle, 47
Krukenberg tumour, 818
Kupffer cells, 62, 863f
Kuru, 1181b
Kussmaul breathing, 588
Kussmaul’s sign, 478b
Kyasanur fever, 289b
Kyphoplasty, 1009b
Kyphoscoliosis, 480
thoracic, 555
Kyphosis, 521f, 1296
L
Labetalol
aortic dissection, 445
hypertension, 449
accelerated, 451
Laboratory investigations, biochemical, 616, 
616b
Laboratory reference ranges, 1309
of adolescence, 1315–1316
of adults, 1310–1315
of childhood, 1315–1316
in pregnancy, 1315–1316
Labyrinthitis, 1158
Lacrimal gland/lacrimal drainage, 1218
Lactase deciency, 825
Lactate
reference range of, venous blood,  
1312b
sepsis and, 199, 200f
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
acute kidney injury, 586b
empyema, 495–496
megaloblastic anaemia, 953b
pleural effusion, 538
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Lactic acidosis, 631–632
Lactobacillus spp., 101f
Lactoferrin, 60
in acute phase response, 68
Lactose hydrogen breath test, 795b, 825
Lactose intolerance, 825
Lactulose, for variceal bleeding, 883b
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), 
138b, 1195, 1195f
Lamina densa, 1066
Lamina lucida, 1066
Laminin, 1066
Lamivudine, 366b
for hepatitis B, 888
resistance, 367
Lamotrigine, 1157b, 1158b
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (histiocytosis 
X), 541b
Langerhans’ cells, 1066
Language, spoken, 1127f
Lanreotide, 698–699
Laparoscopy
for infertility, 671
for lower abdominal pain, 375
for pyrexia of unknown origin, 264–265
Large bowel tumours, ophthalmic features 
of, 1220b
Large rectal adenomatous polyp, 827f
Large-bowel diarrhoea, HIV-related, 360
Laron dwarsm, 692b
Larva currens, 333
Larva migrans
cutaneous, 338, 338f
visceral, 277
Laryngeal disorders, 552–553
Laryngeal obstruction, 552–553, 552b
Laryngeal paralysis, 552
Laryngoscopy, 486
Lasègue sign, 1188
Laser therapy
for bleeding control, 793f
for lung cancer, 531–532
for oesophageal carcinoma, 822
for skin disease, 1082
Lassa fever, 289b
incubation period of, 108b
Latent tuberculosis, detection of, 523, 524f
Lateral cutaneous nerve, entrapment, 1193b
Lateral lm, of chest X-ray, 484
Lateral ow immunochromatography, 106
Lateral humeral epicondylitis, 1006b
Lavage
bronchoalveolar, 538
gastric, 223–224, 224b
Law, psychiatry and, 1260–1261
Laxative misuse syndromes, 833
Laxatives, 833b
Lead
poisoning, 235b
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Lead pipe rigidity, 1126
Leão, spreading depression of, 1150
Learning difculties, congenital heart disease 
and, 467
Lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT), 
639
deciency, 639, 639b
Lectin, mannose-binding, deciency, 73
Lectin pathway, for complement, 63
Leunomide, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1011, 1011b
Left anterior descending artery (LAD)
and coronary arteries with a stenosis, 397f
in coronary circulation, 388, 389f
Left atrial dilatation, 394
Left bundle branch block, 411, 412f
Left main coronary artery, 388, 389f
occlusion, 389
Left ventricular dilatation, 394
Left ventricular hypertrophy, 459f
Legionella pneumophila infection, 103, 114b
Legionella spp., 111b, 116b
Legs
examination of, 990–992
cardiology, 386
endocrine disease, 648f
febrile injecting drug user, 268f
HIV/AIDS, 350
liver and biliary disease, 860
oedema and, 567–568
examination of, respiratory system, 480
ulcers, 1076–1077
causes of, 1076b, 1076f
clinical assessment of, 1076–1077
due to arterial disease, 1077
due to neuropathy, 1077
due to vasculitis, 1077
due to venous disease, 1076–1077, 
1076f
investigations in, 1077
management of, 1077
Leigh syndrome, 48
Leishman-Donovan body (amastigotes), 327f
Leishmania, 326
life cycle of, 326, 327f
Viannia subgenus, 330
Leishmania aethiopica, 329
Leishmania amazonensis, 329
Leishmania brasiliensis, 329
Leishmania chagasi, 327, 327f
Leishmania donovani, 327, 327f
Leishmania guyanensis, 329
Leishmania infantum, 327, 327f
Leishmania major, 329
Leishmania mexicana, 329
Leishmania tropica, 329
Leishmaniasis, 326–330, 1090
cutaneous, 329–330, 330b, 330f, 331f
incubation period of, 108b
dermal, post-kala-azar, 329, 329f
epidemiology and transmission of, 
326–327, 327f
mucosal, 330
prevention and control of, 329
visceral, 327–329, 327f
clinical features of, 327
differential diagnosis of, 328
HIV co-infection, 328–329
incubation period of, 108b
investigations of, 327–328, 328f
management of, 328
Lemierre syndrome, 516
Lens, 1221
Lens opacication, diabetes mellitus, clinical 
examination of people with, 705b
Lens opacities, in older people, 1230b
Lentigo, 1087
Leprosy, 314–316, 314f
borderline cases of, 315
clinical features of, 314–315, 315b, 316f
epidemiology and transmission of, 314
granulomas in, 69
incubation period of, 108b
investigations of, 315
management of, 315, 316b, 317b
pathogenesis of, 314
patient education of, 315
prevention and control of, 316
prognosis of, 315
reactions, 315, 316b
tuberculoid, 314
Leptosphaeria senegalensis, 344
Leptospira interrogans, 305
Leptospirosis, 305–306, 892
aseptic meningitis, 305
bacteraemic, 305
clinical features of, 305–306, 306f
diagnosis of, 306
icteric, 305–306
management and prevention of, 306
microbiology and epidemiology of, 305
Letermovir, 123
Leucocyte adhesion deciencies, 72
Leucocytes, 927
Leucocytosis, 935
in inammation, 69
Leucoencephalopathy, progressive multifocal, 
1178
HIV-associated, 362, 362f
Leucopenia, 933–935
Leukaemias, 963–971
acute, 964–967
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
for, 967
investigations of, 964, 964f
management of, 964–967
outcome of, 967b
prognosis of, 967
specic therapy for, 964–966, 965b
supportive therapy for, 966–967
in children, 1291
chronic lymphocytic, 969–970, 969f
clinical features of, 969
investigations of, 969
management of, 969–970
prognosis of, 970
staging of, 969b
chronic myeloid, 967–969, 968f
accelerated phase, management of, 
968–969
blast crisis, management of, 968–969
chronic phase, management of, 968, 
968b
clinical features of, 967
investigations of, 967–968
management of, 968–969
natural history of, 967
epidemiology and aetiology of, 963
hairy cell, 970
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
prolymphocytic, 970
risk factors for, 963b
terminology and classication of, 963–964, 
963b
Leukoplakia, hairy, 359
Leukotriene receptor antagonists, asthma, 
503f
Kidney disease (Continued)

[[p1410]]
INDEX    1339
Leukotrienes, 65
Levetiracetam, 1155b
in pregnancy, 1158b
Levodopa
adverse reactions, chorea, 1142
for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Levooxacin, 114b, 119b
plague, 307
Levothyroxine
hypothyroidism management, 658, 658b
in ischaemic heart disease, 658
Lewy body dementia, 1249
Leydig cell tumours, 611
LH. See Luteinising hormone
Lice
body, 1093
head, 1093
pubic (crab), 1093–1094
relapsing fever, 304b, 305, 305f
Lichen planus, 1103
clinical features of, 1103, 1103f
investigations of, 1103
management of, 1103
in nails, 1111
pathogenesis of, 1103
rash in, 373b, 1071b
vulval pain/itch, 373b
Lichen sclerosus, 373b
Lichen simplex, 1099
Lichenoid eruptions, drug-induced, 1103, 
1116b
Liddle syndrome, 627
Lidocaine
arrhythmias, 419, 420b
effect in old age, 32b
for pain, 163b
in renal/hepatic disease, 32b
Life course, 89
Life expectancy, 88, 1298, 1298b
Lifestyle changes
for chronic kidney disease, 592
for dyslipidaemia, 639
for musculoskeletal disease, 1007–1008
in osteoarthritis, 1018
Lifestyle factors
ageing, 1298
cancer, 130
Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 135b
Ligand assay, 616b
Likelihood ratios (LR), 3, 3f
Limb girdle dystrophy, 1196b
Limbic (emotional) inuences, in control of 
breathing, 483
Limbic system, 1124
Lincomycin, 29
Lincosamides, 118
antibiotics, 118
mechanism of action, 113b
Lindane, 235b
Linear accelerators, 145
Linear IgA disease, 1106b, 1107
Linezolid, 114b, 120
in pneumonia, 517
in pregnancy, 117
Linitis plastica, 817
Lipase, 788b
Lipid emulsion therapy, 224
Lipid metabolism, 1197b
Lipid-lowering therapy
for acute coronary syndrome, 439
chronic kidney disease, 592
for dyslipidaemia, 639
Lipids, 635–642. See also Fats
acute kidney injury and, 589b
cardiovascular disease and, 637
dietary, 635–636
endogenous, 636–637, 636f
measurement, 637
metabolism, 635–642, 864
presenting problems in, 637–639
transport, 636f
Lipodermatosclerosis, 1076
Lipohypertrophy, diabetes mellitus, clinical 
examination of people with, 705f
Lipomas
skin, 1088
small intestine and, 825
Lipopeptides, 120
Lipoprotein lipase, 636–637
deciency, 638b
Lipoproteins
high-density (HDL), 1312b
intermediate-density, 636–637
low-density, 636–637
metabolism, 635–642
structure of, 636f
very low-density, 636–637
Liquorice, excessive intake of, 627
Lisinopril
heart failure, 407b
hypertension, 448
Listeria monocytogenes
bacterial meningitis from, 1172
listeriosis from, 307
Listeriosis, 307
in pregnancy, 280b
Lisuride, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167b
Lithium
drug interactions of, 23b, 24
hypothyroidism and, 657b
nephrotoxicity, 599b
plasma interactions of, 35b
poisoning from, 227
prescribing, 32b
skin reactions, 1116b
teratogenesis, 1254
Lithium carbonate, for bipolar disorder, 1254
Livedo reticularis, 1039f
Liver
abscess, 891–892, 904
amoebic, 892
in old age, 870b
pyogenic, 891–892, 891b
biopsy of, 869b
for hepatocellular carcinoma, 902–903
for non-alcoholic fatty liver, 896
blood supply to, 862–863, 862f
cells, 862–863, 863f. See also Hepatocytes
drugs and, 904–906
fatty
alcoholic, 893, 894b
non-alcoholic, 895–897, 897f
brosis of, 906
cirrhosis and, 879f
congenital, 882f, 913
non-invasive markers of, 868
pathogenic mechanisms in, 863f
function of, 864–865, 864f
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
862–865
HIV infection and, 891
infections of, 884–892
injury to
drug-induced, 905–906, 905b
types of, 905–906
ischaemia, 909
nodular regenerative hyperplasia of, 910
size of
assessment for, 861
change in, causes of, 875b
structure of, 862–863, 862f
transplantation of, 911–912
for alcoholic liver disease, 895
complications of, 912
for hepatitis B, 888
for hepatocellular carcinoma, 901–904, 
902f
indications and contraindications for, 
911–912, 911b, 911f
prognosis for, 912
tumours, metastatic, 143–144
Liver capsule pain, 168b
Liver disease
abdominal signs in, history and signicance 
of, 862–863
alcoholic, 892–895
fatty, 893
liver function test (LFT) abnormality 
in, 867b
in old age, 870b
autoimmune, 897–901
bleeding, 984–985
chronic, 866b
cirrhosis. See Cirrhosis
clinical examination for, 860
clinical features of, 872b
cystic, 904, 905f
drug-induced, liver function test (LFT) 
abnormality in, 867b
hydatid cyst and, 892
inherited, 906–908
haemochromatosis as, 906–907
investigation of, 865–869, 865b
in old age, 870b
pregnancy and, 910–911, 1277–1278
acute fatty liver as, 1277, 1277b
obstetric cholestasis as, 1277
viral hepatitis as, 1278
prescribing in, 31, 32b
presentation of, 870b
presenting problems of, 869–879, 869f
pruritus and, 1073b
silent presentation of, 861b
tumours as, 901–904
benign, 904
primary malignant, 901–904
secondary malignant, 904, 904f
vascular, 908–910
Wilson’s disease and, 907–908
Liver failure
acute, 872–875
adverse prognostic criteria in, 874b
causes of, 869f
classication of, 873b
clinical assessment of, 873–874
complications of, 875b
hepatic encephalopathy and, 874b
investigations for, 874, 874b
management of, 875, 875b
pathophysiology of, 873–875
chronic, causes of, 869f
Liver ukes, 278b, 340, 341b
Liver function tests
abnormal, 870, 870b
asymptomatic, 871f
HIV infection and, 891b
identifying the cause of, 867b
in pregnancy, 911
cholestatic/obstructive, 866b
hepatitic, 866b
for hepatitis C, 890
Loa loa, 278b, 335b, 336
Loading dose, 19
Local pupillary damage, 1148b
‘Locked-in’ syndrome, 215, 216b
Lockjaw, 1180
Lofexidine, 1251
Löfgren syndrome, 537–538
Loiasis, 278b, 336
Long QT syndrome, 418
Long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy (LTOT), 
for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), 508
Loop diuretics, for hypervolaemia, 622
Loop of Henle, 560, 618–619
Loperamide
for faecal incontinence, 835
intussusception and, 274
for radiation enteropathy, 823–824
for small bowel bacterial overgrowth, 822
Lopinavir, 366b
Loratadine, 550, 1104–1105
Lorazepam
disturbed behaviour, 1244f
palliative care, 170
status epilepticus, 1138b
Loricrin, 1066
Losartan, 56
Loss of vision, 1224–1225, 1225b
Loss-of-function mutations, 43
Lotions, 1078b
Louse-borne relapsing fever, 304b, 305, 305f
Low back pain
causes of, 1003b
mechanical, features of, 1004b
radicular, 1004b
Low birth weight, and disease susceptibility, 
89
Low mood, 1241–1242
alcohol misuse and, 1249
Low-density lipoproteins, 636–637
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test 
(LDDST), in Cushing’s syndrome, 682
Lower airway defences, 484
Lower limbs. See also Foot/feet; Legs
ischaemia, 442b
Lower oesophageal sphincter, abnormalities 
of, 806
Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs), 
948b
Lumbar canal stenosis, 1189
Lumbar disc herniation, 1188–1189, 1189f
Lumbar nerve root compression, 1189f
Lumbar puncture, 1134
for meningitis, 1171
for viral encephalitis, 1171
Lumbar spondylosis, 1188–1189
Lumbosacral plexopathy, 1194
Lumefantrine, for malaria, 124
Lumps, skin, 1069–1071
Lung(s)
abscess, 265f, 300f
biopsy
in interstitial pneumonias, 535
pleural effusion, 494
cavitation of, 485b
collapse
by bronchial obstruction, 486f
upper lobe, 481
consolidation of, 485b
defences, 483–484, 484f
drowning and, 257
brosis. See Pulmonary brosis
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
482–484, 482f, 483f
gas exchange in, 483f
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
innate response of, 484
irradiation and, 540–541
mechanics, 482–484
shrinking, 539, 539b
systemic lupus erythematosus in,  
1039
transplantation, 499, 500b
tumours of, 528–533
metastatic, 143, 144f
primary, 528–532
secondary, 532
volumes, 488
Lung cancer, 528–532, 528f
burden of, 528b
cell types in, 528b
clinical features of, 528–530
investigations of, 530–531
management of, 531–532
non-metastatic extrapulmonary 
manifestations of, 529–530, 530b
occupational, 546
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pathology of, 528, 529f
prognosis for, 532, 532b
Lung disease
alveolar
microlithiasis, 541b
proteinosis, 535b, 541b
diffuse parenchymal, 533–538, 535b
drug-induced, 540–541, 540b
due to organic dusts, 544–545, 544b
due to systemic inammatory disease, 
538–539
dust exposure and, 542, 543b
HIV-related, 361b
infection, 512–528, 512b
interstitial, 533–541
investigation of, 484–489
obstructive, 505–509
in old age, 508b
occupational, 541–546
presenting problems of, 489–499
radiotherapy-induced, 540
rheumatoid arthritis, 1029
tumours, 528–533
secondary, 532
vascular, 546–550
Lung ukes, 278b
Lung injury, ventilator-induced, 207–208
Lupus anticoagulant, 930
Lupus erythematosus, 1074b, 1112
bullous, 1106b
drug-induced, 1116b
systemic, 584, 1038–1044
classication of, criteria for, 1040b
clinical features of, 1038–1040
investigations of, 1040
management of, 1040
pathophysiology of, 1038
pregnancy and, 1275, 1275b
respiratory involvement in, 539
Lupus nephritis, 569b
Lupus pernio, 537f, 538
Luteinising hormone (LH)
deciency, 693b
puberty and, 1284
reference range of, 1311b
Lyme disease, 303–305, 304b, 304f,  
1178
myopericarditis, 472
Lymecycline, 1095
Lymph node biopsy, in Hodgkin lymphoma, 
973f
Lipoproteins (Continued)
Liver disease (Continued)

[[p1411]]
1340     INDEX
Lymph nodes, 65
diphtheria, 313
of envenomed patient, 240
examination of, cancer, 128
normal architecture of, 971f
trypanosomiasis, 324
tuberculosis and, 519–520
Lymphadenitis, 519–520
Lymphadenopathy, 923b, 935–937,  
936b
HIV-related, 356
persistent generalised, 355
Lymphangiectasia, intestinal, 824
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis, 541b
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis, 532
Lymphatic lariasis, 335–336
Lymphatics, 65
Lymphocytes, 927, 936b, 936f. See also B 
lymphocytes; T lymphocytes
count, 1314b
older people, 933b
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia, 535b
Lymphocytosis, 935, 936b
infectious mononucleosis, 285
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), 381b
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, 362
Lymphoid organs, 65
Lymphoid tissue
gastrointestinal mucosa-associated, 
787–788
mucosa-associated, 65
Lymphomas, 666, 971–975, 971f
cutaneous, 1085
gastric, 818–819
Hodgkin, 971–973, 971f
classication of, 971b
clinical features of, 971–972
epidemiology of, 971b
investigations of, 972, 972f, 973f
management of, 972–973
prognosis of, 973, 973b
stages of, 972b
MALT, 787–788
non-Hodgkin, 973–975, 974f
clinical features of, 973–974, 974f
epidemiology of, 974b
high-grade management of, 975
investigations of, 974
low-grade management of, 974–975
management of, 974–975
prognosis of, 975
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
primary CNS, 363, 363f
thyroid, 663
Lymphopenia, 935, 936b
HIV infection, 355
sarcoidosis and, 538
Lymphoproliferative syndrome, autoimmune, 
75
Lynch syndrome, 46
D-Lysergic acid diethylamide, 231
Lysosomal storage diseases, 643, 644b
Lysosomes, 643
Lysozyme, 60
M
Machado-Joseph disease, genetics, 43b
Machupo virus, 289b
Macrocytosis, 931f, 951f
Macroglobulinaemia, Waldenström, 976
Macrolides, 114b, 118
mechanism of action, 113b
Macronutrients, dietary recommendations for, 
762, 762b
Macrophage colony stimulating factor 
(M-CSF), 1028f
Macrophages, 62, 484
alveolar, 346, 542
foamy, 602
functions of, 62b
in gastrointestinal tract, 787–788
Macroprolactin, 696–697
Macroprolactinaemia, 695f, 696–697
Macroprolactinomas, pregnancy and, 1273
Macrovascular complications, 215–216
Macules
café au lait, 1185f
denition of, 1065
Madopar, 1167
Madura foot, 344
Madurella grisea, 344
Madurella mycetomatis, 344
Magic (hallucinogenic) mushrooms, 1250
Magnesium, 779b
homeostasis, 633–634
intravenous
acute severe asthma, 504
arrhythmias, 228
tetany, 677b
torsades de pointes, 418
metabolism, disorders of, 633–634
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Magnesium ammonium phosphate stones, 
602b
Magnesium chloride, 634
Magnesium salts, 634
Magnesium sulphate
asthma, 504f
hypomagnesaemia, 634
pre-eclampsia, 1270
ventricular tachycardia, 225b
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
in nervous system, 1130
renal artery stenosis, 581, 581f
urinary tract disease, 564–565
Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), 
793
for cholangiocarcinoma, 868f
for gallstones, 915f
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of aldosterone-producing adenoma, 
688–689
for cancer, 134
for cardiovascular system, 396, 396f
of gastrointestinal tract, 790–791, 791f
for haemangiomas, 905f
for hepatobiliary disease, 868
for musculoskeletal disease, 996, 996b, 
997f
for neurological disease, 1130, 1130b
viral encephalitis, 1175
for pain, 159
pregnancy and, 1268
for respiratory disease, 486
for sacroiliitis, 1034f
Magnetic stimulation, 1134
Magnifying glass, 1068
Main d’accoucheur, 677
Major haemorrhage, transfusion in, 940b
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 1099
Malabsorption, 801, 802b, 802f, 951f
biliary cirrhosis, 899
of chronic pancreatitis, 854
cystic brosis, 511
disorders causing, 819–824
investigations of, 801, 802b, 802f
iron deciency anaemia, 950, 951f
in old age, 820b
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pathophysiology of, 801
primary biliary cholangitis and, 899
Maladie de Roger, 470
Malar ush, 386
Malar rash, of systemic lupus erythematosus, 
1039f
Malaria, 319–323
algid, 322b
cerebral, 322b
chemoprophylaxis of, 323, 323b
clinical features of, 320–322, 321b, 321f
complicated, 322–323
control in endemic areas, 323
distribution of, 319f
exchange transfusion, 323
haemolysis, 320
incubation period, 108b, 321b
investigations of, 322
management of, 322–323, 323b
mild, 322
non-falciparum, 323
pathogenesis of, 320
pathology of, 320
in pregnancy, 280b
prevention of, 323
vector control, 365
Malarial parasite, life cycle of, 320, 320f
Malarone, 323b
Malassezia, 101f, 1093
Malassezia furfur, 1093
Male
hypogonadism in, 670–671, 671b
reproductive system of, 667–668, 667f
Malignancy, pruritus and, 1073b
Malignant disease, rheumatological 
manifestations of, 1059–1060, 1060b
Malignant hyperpyrexia, 198
Malingering, 1259–1260
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, 179b
Malnutrition. See Under-nutrition
MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue), 
787–788
Malt worker’s lung, 544b
Mammary artery grafts, 431
Mammography, 149
Mania, 1242
Manic episode, differential diagnosis of, 1251b
Mannitol, 622
Mannose-binding lectin deciency, 73
Mansonella perstans infection, 278b, 337
Mansonella streptocerca, 335b
MAOI-B inhibitors, for Parkinson’s disease, 
1167
Maple bark stripper’s lung, 544b
Marburg fever, 275, 289b
Marche à petits pas, 1144
Marcus Gunn pupil, 1148b
Marfan syndrome, 445–446
cardiovascular system
aortic aneurysm, 443, 443f
aortic dissection, 444, 444b
mitral valve prolapse, 455
congenital defects, 466–467
mutation, 445
Marine poisonous animals, envenomation 
of, 250
Marine venomous animals, envenomation 
of, 250
Marjolin’s ulcer, 1076
Mass spectroscopy (MS), 616b
inductively coupled, 616b
Mast cell tryptase, 82
Mast cells, 65
degranulation of, clinical features of, 71b
Mastectomy, 150
Maternal medicine, 1263
adrenal disease in, 1274
bone disease in, 1275
clinical evaluation in, 1265–1266
clinical examination in, 1264
diabetes in, 1272–1273
gestational, 1272, 1272b
endocrine disease in, 1273–1274
functional anatomy and physiology in, 
1266–1267
bone metabolism and, 1266–1267
cardiovascular system and, 1266
endocrine system and, 1273–1274
gastrointestinal system and, 1266
genitourinary system and, 1266
glucose metabolism in, 1266
haematological system and, 1266–1267
respiratory system and, 1267
gastrointestinal disease in, 1271–1272
haematological disease in, 1278–1279
human immunodeciency virus infection 
in, 1274
hypertension in, 1270–1271
imaging and, 1268
inammatory rheumatic disease in, 1274
investigations in, 1267–1268, 1268b
liver disease and, 1277–1278
medical disorders in pregnancy and, 
1269–1279
neurological disease in, 1278
parathyroid disease in, 1273–1274
pituitary disease in, 1273
planning pregnancy in, for patients with 
medical conditions, 1266
presenting problems in pregnancy and, 
1268–1269
breathlessness as, 1268
chest pain as, 1269
circulatory collapse as, 1269
headache as, 1269
nausea and vomiting as, 1269, 1269b
oedema as, 1269
seizures as, 1269, 1270b
psychiatric disorders in, 1278
renal disease in, 1276–1277
respiratory disease in, 1271
thyroid disease in, 1273
Matrix metalloproteinases, 424
Mayaro viruses, 299
McArdle disease, 1197b
McCune-Albright syndrome, 49
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), calculation of, 
196b
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH), 930, 1314b
Mean cell volume (MCV), 930
in alcohol misuse, 1240
reference range of, 1314b
Measles, 279, 1176b
clinical features of, 279, 280f
management of, 279
periods of infectivity, 108b
in pregnancy, 280b
prevention of, 279
rash, 280f
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 279
Mebendazole, for helminthic infections, 125
Mechanical heart valves, pregnancy and, 1275
Meckel’s diverticulum, 795, 824–825
bleeding from, 800
Meckel’s scan, 795b
Meconium ileus, 855
Medial collateral ligament lesions, 1006b, 
1007b
Medial broplasia, 581
Medial humeral epicondylitis, 1006b
Medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), 1127
Median nerve, entrapment, 1193b
Mediastinal spread, in lung cancer, 529
Mediastinoscopy, 533
Mediastinum
divisions of, 532f
tumours of, 532–533, 533b, 533f
Medical emergency team, deterioration and, 
191, 193b, 196b
Medical interview, 275b
Medical ophthalmology, 1217, 1218b
functional anatomy and physiology, 
1218–1222
blood supply of the orbit/eye, 
1221–1222
extraocular muscles, 1218, 1220f
eye, 1218–1221, 1221f
eyelid/orbital septum/conjunctiva, 1218
lacrimal gland/lacrimal drainage, 1218
orbit, 1218–1222
investigation of visual disorders, 
1222–1223
imaging, 1222–1223, 1223f
perimetry, 1222
visual electrophysiology, 1223
presenting problems in ophthalmic disease
blurred vision, 1224
distortion of vision, 1225
eyelid retraction, 1225–1226
loss of vision, 1224–1225, 1225b
optic atrophy, 1226, 1227f
optic disc swelling and papilloedema, 
1226, 1226b, 1227f
pain/headache, 1223–1224
photophobia/glare, 1224
photopsia, 1224
proptosis, 1226
pruritus, 1223
watery/dry eye, 1223
specialist ophthalmological conditions, 
1226–1235
age-related macular degeneration, 1233
cataract, 1229–1230, 1229f, 1230b
diabetic eye disease, 1230–1232
infectious conditions, 1228–1229
ocular inammation, 1226–1228
presenting problems in ophthalmic 
disease, 1223–1226
retinal vascular occlusion, 1232–1233
Medical psychiatry, 1235
Medically unexplained somatic symptoms, 
1242–1243, 1243b, 1259f
general management principles for, 1257b
in old age, 1240b
Medication errors, 24–25
causes of, 25b, 25f
response to, 24
types of, 24b
Medication overuse
headache, 1150
migraine and, 1150
Medicine, in austere environments, 251
acute high altitude illness, 256–257
extremes of temperature and, 252–256
Medicines management, 25
Medroxyprogesterone, 670
Medullary carcinoma, 666
Medullary cystic kidney disease, 578
Medullary sponge kidney disease, 604
Medulloblastoma, 1183
Mefenamic acid, overdose, 226
Meoquine, for malaria, 323b

[[p1412]]
INDEX    1341
Megacolon
acquired, 834
toxic, 839
Megakaryoblasts, 925f, 927
Megakaryocytes, 927
Megaloblastic anaemia, 952–955
clinical features of, 953b
investigations in, 953b
management of, 954–955
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
Megaureter, 605
Meglumine antimoniate, 124
Meiosis, 40–41, 40f
Meissner’s plexus, 789
Melaena, 797
Melanocytes, 1066
Melanocytic naevi, 1070, 1087–1088, 1088f
Melanoma, 1085–1087
ABCDE rule of, 1070, 1070b
acral lentiginous, 1086
clinical features of, 1085–1086
cutaneous, 1086b
diagnosis and management of, 1086
lentigo maligna, 1086
malignant, 1070
nodular, 1085–1086, 1086f
pathophysiology of, 1085
prognosis of, 1086–1087
subungual, 1086
supercial spreading, 1085, 1086f
Melanoptysis, 542
Melanosis coli, 833
Melarsoprol, for trypanosomiasis, 124
MELAS, 1197b
Melasma, 1109
Meleney’s gangrene, 272b
Melioidosis, 309
Melphalan, 134b
Memantine, 1248
Membrane attack complex (MAC), 63–64
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, 575
Membranous nephropathy, 573b–574b, 
574–575, 599b
Memory
Alzheimer’s disease, 1248
disorders of, 1124b
long-term, 1248
loss, 1138
short-term, 1138, 1248
Memory cells, 65–66
Mendelian randomisation, 91–94, 93f
Ménétrier’s disease, 812
Ménière disease, 1159
MENIN, 700–701
Meningioma, 1184
Meningism, 1171
Meningitis, 1171–1175
aseptic, 305
bacterial, 1172–1174
headache and, 187, 187b
management of, 1173, 1174b
causes of, 1172b
Coccidioides, 347
cryptococcal, HIV-related, 363
fungal, 1175
HIV-related, 363
in mumps, 284
tuberculous, 1174, 1174b
viral, 1171–1172
Meningococcaemia
chronic, 1172
incubation period, 108b
Meningococcal infection
chemoprophylaxis following, 1174b
meningitis, 1172, 1172b
prevention of, 1173
Meningococcal sepsis, 1172b
Meningoencephalitis, 325
Menopause, 667
male, 671b
premature, 669
Menorrhagia, 933
Menstrual cycle, normal, 668f
Menstrual irregularity, in polycystic ovarian 
syndrome, 673
Menstruation, 1284
Mental state examination, 1237
Menthol, topical, 1073
Mepacrine, hyperpigmentation from, 1109b
Meralgia paraesthetica, 1193b
Mercaptopurine
for acute leukaemia, 965b
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
Mercury poisoning, 632b
Merkel cells, 1066
Meropenem, 114b, 117b
melioidosis, 309
neutropenic fever, 141–142
nocardiosis, 309
in pregnancy, 117
MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red 
bres), 1197b
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis (MCGN), 
573b–574b, 575
Mesenteric ischaemia, chronic, 850
Mesothelioma, 546
Metabolic acidosis, 631–632
acute mountain sickness, 257
causes of, 631b
kidney failure/renal failure
acute, 587
chronic, 588
malaria, 322b
poisoning, 226b, 229b
Metabolic alkalosis, 632–633, 633f
Metabolic disorders, 802
clinical examination of, 614–616, 614f
supportive therapy for, 967
Metabolic medicine, 613
Metabolic myopathies, 1197
Metabolism
cold environment and, 252
rst-pass, 17
interactions, 24
phase I, 18
phase II, 18
Metadrenalines, 1313b
Meta-iodobenzyl guanidine (MIBG) 
scintigraphy, 689
Metalloproteinases, 424
Metamyelocytes, 927
Metaphase, 41
Metapneumovirus, 292
Metastatic bone disease, 1059
Metastatic spread, in lung cancer, 529
Metatarsophalangeal joints, polyarthritis in, 
1002f
Metered-dose inhaler, for asthma, 503f
Metformin, 735
acidosis, 223b, 228
overdose, 223b, 228
polycystic ovarian syndrome, 674
in pregnancy, 1272
renal/hepatic disease, 32b
Methadone
misuse, 229b, 230
withdrawal, 16b
Methaemoglobin, 323
Methaemoglobinaemia, 117, 223f, 1080
Methanol, poisoning from, 234, 234f
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), 300–301
Methimazole, 661
Methionine, 225
Methotrexate (MTX), 842
acute leukaemia, 965b
drug interaction, 23b
eczema, 1080
hepatic brosis and, 906
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
for inammatory bowel disease, 842, 
1292–1293
for musculoskeletal disease, 1010–1011, 
1011b
pregnancy and, 1079b, 1271–1272
psoriasis, 1080, 1102
renal disease, 32b
and respiratory disease, 540b
sarcoidosis, 538
N-methyl D-aspartate antagonists, 1253b
Methylbenzethonium chloride, 330
Methylcellulose, 662–663
Methyldopa, for pre-existing hypertension, 
pregnancy and, 1270
Methylphenidate, 1159
Methyl-phenyl-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), 
1165b
Methylprednisolone
for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, 
1163
Grave’s ophthalmopathy, 662–663
histoplasmosis, 347
for inammatory bowel disease, 844
for transverse myelitis, 1164
Methysergide, and respiratory disease,  
540b
Meticillin, 117b
Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), 114b
Metoclopramide
chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, 826
and hyperprolactinaemia, 696b
nausea and vomiting, 169b
poisoning, 225b
sodium content of, 877b
Metoprolol, 407b, 420b
angina, 438–439
arrhythmias, 420
hypertension, 448–449
Metronidazole, 114b
for amoebiasis, 332
for balanitis, 373b
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
for Clostridium difcile infection, 311
for gas gangrene, 272
for giardiasis, 332
for Helicobacter pylori eradication, 814–815
for inammatory bowel disease, 842
for neutropenic fever, 141–142
for PID, 375
for pneumonia, 517
in pregnancy, 117
prophylactic, 116b
for small bowel bacterial overgrowth,  
822
for tropical ulcer, 302
Metyrapone, 684, 685b
Mevalonate kinase deciency, 76
Mexiletine, 419, 420b
Micafungin, 122b
Miconazole, 122b
Microalbuminuria, 569–570
Microaneurysms, 447
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia (MAHA), 
582
Microarrays, 50
Microbial ora, normal, 100–101, 101f
Microbiological investigations, for respiratory 
disease, 487
Microbiome, 61
Microcytosis, 931f, 951f
Microdeletion syndromes, 42
Microlithiasis, alveolar, 541b
Microorganisms
culture, 104–105
detection of components, 103–104
detection of whole organisms, 103
host response, 102
MicroRNA (miRNA), 40
Microsatellite repeats, 41
Microscopic polyangiitis, 1044
Microscopy
bright eld, 103
dark eld, 103
electron, 103
Microsporidiosis, HIV-related, 360b
Microsporum audouinii, 1092–1093
Microsporum canis, 1092–1093, 1092f
Microvascular angina, 427
Microvascular complications, 215–216
Micturating cystourethrography, reux 
nephropathy, 606f
Micturition
cycle, 560
disorders of, benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
609
frequency of, 567
Midazolam, 213b, 1244f
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
(MERS-CoV), 293
Midges, lariases, 337
Migraine, 1150
pregnancy and, 1278
stroke risk in, 1150
in visual disturbance, 1145
Migrainous neuralgia, 1150
Migrating motor complexes (MMC), 789
Mild nephritic syndrome, diseases typically 
presenting with, 575
Miliary tuberculosis (TB), 519
Miller Fisher syndrome, 1192–1193
Miltefosine, 328
Milwaukee shoulder syndrome, 1023
Mineralocorticoid receptor, 622
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
for acute coronary syndrome, 439
for primary hyperaldosteronism, 688
Mineralocorticoid replacement, for adrenal 
insufciency, 686–687
Mineralocorticoids, 679, 680f
in adrenal insufciency, 686
excess in, causes of, 687b
Minerals, storage of, liver and, 865
Minimal change nephropathy, 572, 
573b–574b
Minimally conscious state, 215, 216b
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 1237
Minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC), 
106
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), 106
Minocycline
for acne, 1095
hyperpigmentation from, 1095, 1109b
for leprosy, 315
skin reactions, 1116b
Minor HIV-associated disorders, 355
Minoxidil
hypertension, 449–450
skin reactions, 1116b
Missense mutation, 42f
Mites
house dust, 499, 502, 1096–1097
typhus, 317
Mitochondria, 47–48, 48f
Mitochondrial disease, 1169b
Mitochondrial disorders, 48, 1197
Mitochondrial DNA, 1298b
Mitochondrial energy metabolism disorders, 
643
Mitochondrial inheritance, 47–48, 49b
Mitochondrial syndromes, 1197b
Mitomycin C, 540b, 607
Mitosis, phases of, 41
Mitotane, 684
Mitoxantrone, 946b
acute leukaemia, 965b
Mitral regurgitation, 455–457, 455b, 456f
clinical features of, 456b, 457f
investigation of, 457b
management of, 457
Mitral stenosis, 453–455, 454b, 454f
investigations in, 454f, 455b
chest X-ray for, 394f
pregnancy and, 1275
Mitral valve
balloon valvuloplasty, 455, 455b, 455f
disease of, 453–457
endocarditis, 203f
prolapse, 455
pain, 179
repair, 457
replacement, 462
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), 1042
Mixed venous oxygen saturation, 200b
Mobitz type I second-degree AV block, 410, 
411f
Mobitz type II second-degree AV block, 410, 
411f
Moclobemide, 1253b
Modanil, 1159
Modied Beighton score, for joint 
hypermobility, 1061b
Mohs’ micrographic surgery, 1082
Molecular diagnostics, 616b
Molecular mimicry, 78
Moles, 1087–1088, 1088f
Mollaret’s syndrome, 1175
Molluscum contagiosum, 292f, 382, 382f, 
1091–1092, 1091f
HIV disease and, 350, 358b
Mometasone, 1079b
Monday fever, 542
Monitoring
in critical care/critical illness, 177–178, 177f
drug therapy, 35–37
Monkeypox, 291
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 1253b, 1254
drug interactions, 23b
Monoarthritis, 1000, 1000b
Monobactams, 117b, 118
Monoclonal antibody therapy, 945
for allergy, 82
for haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 582–583
Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain 
signicance (MGUS), 975–976
Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition 
disease, multiple myeloma and, 583b
Monocytes, 62, 927, 936b, 936f
count, 1314b
Monocytosis, 936b
Monogenic diabetes, 714b, 719
Monoiodotyrosine (MIT), 653f

[[p1413]]
1342     INDEX
Mononeuritis multiplex, 1192
Mononeuropathy, multifocal, 1193b
Monosodium urate monohydrate crystals, 996f
Monospot test, 285
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
1237, 1238f
Mood, 1129
assessment of, in psychiatric interview, 
1237
Mood disorders, 1253–1254
bipolar, 1254
organic, 1241b
Mood-stabilising drugs, 1245b
Moraxella catarrhalis, 101f
Morphine
adverse reactions of, 22b
COPD, 508
intensive care, 213b
misuse, 229b
palliative care, 168
pharmacogenetics, 20b
renal colic, 603
renal or hepatic disease, 32b
rout of administration, 30b
Morphoea, 1112
Mosaic warts, 1091
Mosquitoes, 276b
lariasis, 335
malaria, 319
virus transmission of, 108
Motilin, 790b
Motor cortex, 1121
Motor neuron disease, 1170–1171, 1170b, 
1170f
Motor neurons
lower, 1126
upper, 1126
Motor neuropathy, 441b
Motor system, 1126, 1126f
Mountain sickness, acute, 257
Mouth
disease of, 805–806
of envenomed patient, 240
examination of
cardiology, 386
respiratory system, 480
ulcers, in Behçet’s disease, 1047f
Movement disorders. 1165–1169. See also 
names of specic disorders
involuntary movements, 1126
Moxioxacin, 119b
meningitis, 1174b
Mucociliary escalator, 484f
Mucocutaneous disease, HIV-related, 
357–359, 358b
Mucopolysaccharidosis, 644b
Mucor spp., 345–346
Mucormycosis, 345–346, 528
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), 65
Mucosal leishmaniasis, 330
Mucous membranes
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
as physical barrier, 60
Mucous patches, syphilis, 377
Multidisciplinary team, 138, 138b, 1301, 
1301b
Multifocal neuropathy, 1192, 1193b
Multimorbidity, 1299–1300
Multinodular goitre, 664f, 665, 665f
Multi-organ failure, causes of, 206
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), 700–701, 
700b
Multiple myeloma, 583, 583b, 976–977
classication of, 976b
clinical features and investigations of, 
976, 977f
management of, 976–977
bisphosphonates for, 977
chemotherapy for, 976, 977f
immediate support for, 976
radiotherapy for, 977
prognosis of, 977
Multiple organ failure, 584
Multiple sclerosis, 1160–1165
cerebrospinal uid in, 1162
clinical features of, 1160–1161, 1161b
investigation of, 1162, 1162f, 1163f
management of, 1162–1163
acute relapse, 1162
disease-modifying treatments, 1162, 
1163b
symptoms, complications and disability, 
1163, 1164b
McDonald criteria for, 1161b
pathophysiology of, 1160, 1161f, 1162f
in pregnancy, 1164b
Multiple system atrophy (MSA), 1168
Mumps, 284, 1176b
clinical features of, 284, 284f
diagnosis of, 284
incubation period, 108b, 276b, 284
management and prevention of, 284
periods of infectivity, 108b
testicular swelling, 262f
Münchausen syndrome, 1259
Murmur
aortic regurgitation, 459–460, 460b, 461f
aortic stenosis, 458, 458b, 459f
atrial septal defect, 470f
auscultatory evaluation, 387b
Austin Flint, 459–460
benign, 400, 400b, 402b
cardiac, 400b, 401b, 401f
carditis, 452
Carey Coombs, 452
coarctation of aorta, 469
continuous, 401
diastolic, 401
Graham Steell, 462
mitral regurgitation, 455, 456b, 456f
mitral stenosis, 454, 454f
persistent ductus arteriosus, 468
pulmonary regurgitation, 462
pulmonary stenosis, 461
systolic, 400, 402b
tetralogy of Fallot, 471
timing and pattern, 401f
tricuspid stenosis, 460
ventricular septal defect, 402b, 470
Muscle
biopsy, in polymyositis and 
dermatomyositis, 1043f
contraction, 1126
of envenomed patient, 240
skeletal, 995
Muscle disease, 1195–1199
acquired, 1197, 1198f
Muscle bre, 390f
Muscle spindles, in control of breathing, 483
Muscle weakness, 1002–1003, 1003b
Muscular atrophy, spinal, 1171
Muscular dystrophies, 1196–1197, 1196b
transition medicine and, 1290
Musculoskeletal disease
anatomy and physiology of, 992–995, 992f
investigation of, 995–1000
management of, 1007–1014, 1007b
X-rays for, 996, 996b
bony metastases, 676
Charcot’s joint, 1061f
chondrocalcinosis, 1022f
osteoarthritis, 1016f, 1017f
osteomalacia, 1055f
supraspinatus tendon calcication, 1023f
Musculoskeletal system
anatomy and physiology of, 992–995, 992f
clinical examination of, 990–992
drug-induced effects on, 1060b
presenting problems in, 1000–1007
primary tumours of, 1059b
Mushrooms, magic (hallucinogenic), 231, 
1250
Mutation(s)
de novo, 46
domain negative, 43
gain-of-function, 43
loss-of-function, 43
missense, 41
nonsense, 41, 42f
simple tandem repeat, 41, 43b
splice site, 43f
tandem repeat, 41, 43b
Myalgia
drug-induced, 1060b
fever and, 263b
infections, 267
Myasthenia gravis, 1194–1195, 1195f, 1196b
diplopia, 1194
drug-induced, 1060b
weakness, 1194
Myasthenic crisis, 1195
Mycetoma, 344
intracavitary, 492
Mycobacteria, 99
opportunistic infection, 525, 525b
Mycobacterial infections, skin, 1090
Mycobacterium abscessus, 511
Mycobacterium avium complex, HIV-related
disseminated, 359b
prophylaxis for, 366
Mycobacterium chelonei, 525b
Mycobacterium fortuitum, 525b
Mycobacterium genavense, 525b
Mycobacterium haemophilum, 525b
Mycobacterium kansasii, 525, 525b
Mycobacterium leprae, 101f, 104, 525b
Mycobacterium malmoense, 525, 525b
Mycobacterium marinum, 525b
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), 104, 518
Mycobacterium ulcerans, 525b
Mycobacterium xenopi, 525, 525b
Mycology, 1069
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), for 
musculoskeletal disease, 1011b, 1012
Mycoplasma genitalium, 380
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 513
Mycoplasma spp., 118
Mycoses, supercial, 343–344
Myelin sheaths, 625
Myelinolysis, 625
Myelitis, transverse, 1164
Myelocytes, 927
Myelodysplasia, 120
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs), 970–971, 
970b, 971b
Myelobrosis, 979–980
Myeloma
AKI, 586b
multiple, 583, 583b, 976–977
Myelopathy
cervical, 1188
HIV-related, 363
vacuolar, 363
Myeloperoxidase, 62
Myeloproliferative disorders, ophthalmic 
features of, 1218b
Myeloproliferative neoplasms, 979–980
Myelosuppression, drug-induced, 147
Myiasis, 342
Myocardial contraction, 389–390, 390f
Myocardial infarction, 202, 203b, 432–433
acute, 432b
diagnosis of, 432
electrocardiogram (ECG) for, 391
investigation of, 435
management of, late, 437, 438b
in old age, 439b
pregnancy and, 1276
rehabilitation, 439
time course, 433f
Myocardial ischaemia
electrocardiogram (ECG) for, 391
myocardial infarction, 437
Myocardial perfusion scanning, 397
Myocardial stunning, 202
Myocarditis, 472–473, 473b
acute, 472
chronic, 473
fulminant, 472
Myocardium
disease of, 472–476
hibernating, 395
Myoclonic seizures, 1154
Myoclonus, 1143
Myocytes, 389–390, 390f
Myoglobinuria, 568b
Myonecrosis, clostridial, 272
Myopathic gait, 1143
Myopathy, critical illness, 215
Myophosphorylase deciency (McArdle’s 
disease), 1197b
Myosin, 389–390
Myositis
drug-induced, 1060b
inclusion body, 1061–1062
Myotonia, potassium-aggravated,  
1198b
Myotonia congenita, 1198b
Myotonic dystrophy, 1196b
genetics/inheritance, 43b
Myotoxicity, 243
Myxoedema, Graves’ disease, 660
Myxoedema coma, 659
Myxoma, atrial, 476
N
NADH dehydrogenase, 49b
Nadolol, arrhythmias, 420
Naevi
blue, 1088
melanocytic, 1070, 1087–1088, 1088f
spider, 860
Nafcillin, 117b
Nails, 1067
abnormalities, 1077
in congenital disease, 1111
disorders, 1110–1111
HIV-related, 359–360
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
involvement in skin diseases, 1111
plate and bed, 1110f
in systemic disease, 1111, 1111f
trauma, 1110–1111
Na,K-activated adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase), 617
Nalidixic acid, 119b
skin reactions, 1116b
Naloxone
adverse reactions of, 23
drug interactions of, 23b
Naproxen, 1010b
Narcolepsy, 1159, 1159b
Narcotics, cirrhosis and, 905b
Nasal cannulae, high-ow, 207
Nasogastric tube, 818b
Nasogastric tube feeding, 770, 770b
Nasopharynx, disease of, 550
Natalizumab, 62–63, 1163b
Natural killer cells, 65
Nausea and vomiting
palliative care and, 171, 171f
pregnancy and, 1269, 1269b
Necator americanus, 333
Neck
examination of, endocrine disease, 648f
stiffness, 363
Neck pain, 1005, 1005b
Necrobiosis lipoidica, 1113, 1113f
Necrosis, 41, 130–131
Necrotising enteritis, 310
Necrotising fasciitis, 271–272, 272f
Necrotising pancreatitis, 852
Necrotising soft tissue infections, 272b
skin, 1090
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 114b, 379
in pregnancy, 280b, 372b
Neisseria spp., 101f
Nelson syndrome, 684
Nematode infections, 278b
intestinal, 332–335
tissue-dwelling, 335–337, 335b
zoonotic, 337–338
Neomycin, allergy, 1099b
Nephelometry, 616b
Nephrectomy, 606–607
Nephritic syndrome, 569, 569b, 570f
Nephritis
crescentic, 573b–574b, 584
drug-induced, 599b
interstitial
acute, 576–577, 576b
chronic, 576–577, 578b
drug-induced, 599b
lupus, 569b
post-streptococcal, 576
Nephrocalcinosis, 602
drug-induced, 599b
Nephrogenic sclerosing brosis, 565b
Nephrology, 557
Nephron, 560, 617, 618f
Nephronophthisis, 578
Nephropathy
analgesic, 598
Balkan, 577
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
HIV-associated, 364
IgA, 573b–574b, 575
ischaemic, 580–581
membranous, 573b–574b, 574–575
minimal change, 572, 573b–574b
multiple myeloma and, 583b
pregnancy and, 1272
reux, 605–606
salt-losing, 577
sickle-cell, 584
Nephrotic syndrome, 569b, 571–576, 571b
diseases typically presenting with, 572
Neprilysin inhibitors, for heart failure, 407
Nerve agents, organophosphorus insecticides 
and, 232–233
Nerve biopsy, 1135
Multiple sclerosis (Continued)

[[p1414]]
INDEX    1343
Nerve blocks
and nerve ablation, for pain, 165
for pain, 160
Nerve conduction studies, 1133, 1133f
for pain, 160
Nerve entrapment, in lung cancer, 529
Nerve bre, 156
types of, 156b
Nerve root decompression, 1009b
Nerve root lesions, 1140
Nerve root pain, 1004b
Nervous impulse, 1123, 1123f
Nervous system
anatomy and physiology of, 1122–1129
functional, 1123–1129, 1123f
cells of, 1122–1123, 1122f
clinical examination of, 1120–1122
in old age, 1136b
in gastrointestinal function, 788–789
Nervous system disease
cerebrovascular disease. See specic 
conditions
clinical examination of, 1120–1122
cranial nerves, 1121b
emergencies, 1122b
HIV-related, 362–364, 362f
infections, 1171–1182, 1171b
intracranial mass lesions/raised intracranial 
pressure, 1182–1187, 1182b
investigation of, 1129–1136
lesion localisation in, 1129, 1129b
neuromuscular junction, 1194–1195
paraneoplastic, 1165, 1165b, 1185
paraneoplastic syndromes, 143
peripheral nerves, 1191–1194, 1192b
presenting problems in, 1136–1149, 
1136b, 1137b, 1191b
spine/spinal cord, 1187–1191
Neuralgia
migrainous, 1150
post-herpetic, 282, 1137
trigeminal, 1137, 1151
Neuralgic amyotrophy, 1194
Neurocognitive disorders, HIV-associated, 362
Neurodegenerative diseases, 1165–1171
Neurodestructive interventions, for cancer 
pain, 169–170
Neurodevelopmental disorders, rare, genomics 
in, 52
Neuro-endocrine tumours (NETs), 532b, 691, 
691b, 692f, 825
Neurobroma, 1183b, 1190f
Neurobromatosis, 541b, 1114, 1185, 1185f, 
1186b
and cancer predisposition, 135b
Neurogenic bladder, 1149b
Neurogenic shock, description of, 210b
Neuroimaging, 1130–1132, 1130b
Neuro-inammatory diseases, 1160–1165
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and, 
1163–1164
transverse myelitis and, 1164
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 1252
Neurological disease
in pregnancy, 1278
epilepsy as, 1278
idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
as, 1278
migraine as, 1278
stroke as, 1278
rheumatological manifestations of, 1060, 
1061f
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 1039
transition medicine and, 1290
cerebral palsy in, 1290
epilepsy in, 1290
muscular dystrophy in, 1290
Neurological support, in intensive care, 212
Neurological system, cold environment and, 
253
Neurology, 1119
Neuroma, acoustic, 1185
Neuromuscular junction, diseases of, 
1194–1195
Neuromyelitis optica, 1164, 1164f
Neuropathic pain, 165–166, 166b, 166f, 
168b, 1141
Neuropathy
ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), 
1197b
critical illness, 215
entrapment, 1191–1192, 1193b
hereditary, 1193
leg ulcers due to, 1077
motor, 441b
multifocal, 1192, 1193b
peripheral
drug-induced, 363
HIV-related, 363
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1030
sensorimotor, 363
sensory, 441b
Neuropeptides, 156, 158b
Neurosyphilis, 378, 1178–1179, 1179b
Neurotoxic accid paralysis, 243
Neurotransmission/neurotransmitters, 1123f
in pain processing, 158b
Neutral Protamine Hagedorn insulin, 738
Neutral variants, 42–43
Neutropenia, 935
drug-induced, 936b
fever in, 141–142, 141b, 269
HIV-related, 364
Neutropenic fever, cancer and, 141–142, 141b
Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation, 
62
Neutrophil granulocytes, 1314b
Neutrophilia, 935, 936b
asthma, 500–501
Neutrophilic dermatoses, 1112
Neutrophils, 61–62, 927, 936b
asthma, 500–501
count, 1314b
toxic granulation, 61
Nevirapine, in pregnancy, 368
Newborn, haemolytic disease of, 942, 942b
Next-generation sequencing (NGS), 50–51
capture, 51
challenges of, 51–52
methods of, 54b
uses of, 52–57
Niacin (vitamin B3 ), 776–777
toxicity, 777
Nicardipine, angina, 430b
Nickel, hypersensitivity, 1099b
Niclosamide, 125
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH)-oxidase enzyme complex, 
62
Nifedipine
altitude illness, 257
angina, 429–430, 430b
unstable, 438–439
for high-altitude pulmonary oedema, 257
hypertension, 448
and neutropenia, 936b
older people, 32b
Raynaud syndrome, 442
Nifurtimox, for trypanosomiasis, 124
Night sweats, 263b
Night terrors, 1149
Nightmares, 1149
Nikolsky sign, 1105
Nipah virus encephalitis, 299
Nipah viruses, 1176b
Nitazoxanide, 124–125
Nitrates
angina, 428–429
duration of action, 429b
heart failure, 407
Nitric oxide (NO), 391, 562
anal ssure, 835
Nitrites, 600
Nitrofurantoin, 121
and pulmonary eosinophilia, 540b
urinary tract infection, 600–601, 601b
Nitroimidazoles, 120
mechanism of action, 113b
‘Nits,’ 1093
NMDA receptor blockers, for neuropathic 
pain, 170b
Nocardia, 517–518
pneumonia, 362
Nocardiosis, 309
Nociceptive pain, 1141
Nocturia, 567
Nocturnal hypoventilation, 551–552
Nodal osteoarthritis, generalised, 1015–1017, 
1015b, 1016f
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia, of the 
liver, 910
Nodules
denition of, 1065
pulmonary, 493–494, 493b, 493f, 494b, 
495f
cryptococcosis, 345
lung metastases, 143
rheumatoid, 1029, 1029f
skin, denition, 1065
thyroid, 648f, 652
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 
895–897, 897f
biochemical tests for, 896, 896b, 906b
clinical features of, 896
imaging for, 896
investigations for, 896–897
liver biopsy for, 896
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
management of, 897
pathophysiology of, 895–897
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 897f
Non-antivenom treatments, 248
Non-cardiac surgery, with heart disease, 
439–440, 440b
Non-compliance, 30
Non-disjunction, 42
Non-epileptic attack disorder (‘dissociative 
attacks’), 1158
Non-freezing cold injury, 254
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, 973–975, 974f
clinical features of, 973–974, 974f
epidemiology of, 974b
investigations of, 974
management of, 974–975
high-grade, 975
low-grade, 974–975
Non-immune haemolytic anaemia, 959
Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD), 55
Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), 53–55
Non-invasive ventilation, for acute 
exacerbations of COPD, 509
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NNRTIs), 366b
Non-opioid analgesics, for pain, 162–163
Non-polyposis syndromes, 830, 831b
Nonsense mutation, 41, 42f
Non-specic interstitial pneumonia, 537
Non-specic urethritis (NSU), 372
Non-steroidal anti-inammatory drugs. See 
NSAIDs
Non-thrombocytopenic purpura, 937b
Non-thyroidal illness, 659
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine), for refractory 
hypotension, 200, 200b
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) re-uptake 
inhibitors, 1253b, 1254
poisoning from, 227
Noroxacin, urinary tract infection, 600–601
Normal distribution/range, 3, 4f
Normetadrenaline, 1313b
Normoblasts, 924–925, 925f
Norovirus, 292
incubation period, 108b
Nortriptyline, pharmacokinetics, 20b
Nosocomial (health care-acquired) infections
Clostridium difcile, 214
MRSA, 109
Notication
food poisoning, 309
partner, STIs, 376–378
NSAIDs
adverse reactions of, 22b
associated with small intestinal toxicity, 824
cirrhosis and, 905b
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
for intermittent fever, 72
mechanism of action of, 1009f
for musculoskeletal disease, 1009–1010
in old age, 1010b
for pain, 162–163, 163b
for pancreatitis, 854
for peptic ulcer, 814
poisoning from, 226
recommendations for the use, 1010b
renal disease and, 598
risk of, in gastrointestinal bleeding and 
perforation, 1010b
topical, 1010
ulcers induced by, risk factors for, 1010b
Nuclear antigens, extractable, antibodies to, 
563–564
Nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) pathway, 62
Nucleic acid amplication test (NAAT), 
103–104, 373
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs), 366b
Nucleosome, 38
Nucleotide substitutions, 41, 42f
Numbness, 1140–1141
‘Nutcracker’ oesophagus, 811
Nutraceuticals, for osteoarthritis, 1018
Nutrition
for alcoholic liver disease, 895
in intensive care, 214
Nutritional factors in disease, 755, 758f
clinical assessment and investigation of 
nutritional status, 757–758, 757b
clinical examination in nutritional disorders, 
756
disorders of altered energy balance, 
762–773
obesity, 762–766
under-nutrition, 780–781
micronutrients, minerals and their diseases, 
773–780
inorganic micronutrients, 778–780
vitamins, 773–778
physiology of nutrition, 758–762, 758f
energy balance, 758–760, 759f, 760f
macronutrients (energy-yielding 
nutrients), 760–762
Nutritional status, 757
Nystagmus, 1126, 1146
balance disorders and, 1159f
gaze-evoked, 1146
Nystatin, 122b
candidiasis, 122, 805
O
Obesity, 90, 762–766
aetiology, 763–764, 764b
susceptibility, 764
atherosclerosis risk, 426
clinical features and investigations, 764, 
764b, 765b
complications, 762–766, 763f
body fat distribution, 763
management, 764–766, 765f
drugs, 765–766
lifestyle advice, 765
surgery, 766, 766b
weight loss diets, 765
Obidoxime, 233
Obliterative cardiomyopathy, 475
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 1255
Obstetric cholestasis, pregnancy and, 1277
Obstetric haemorrhage, circulatory collapse 
and, 1269
Obstetrics, genomics and, 53–55
Obstructive pulmonary diseases, 499–512
asthma, 499–505
bronchiectasis, 509–510
chronic, 505–509
cystic brosis, 510–512
Obstructive shock, description of, 210b
Occipital lobes, 1124
clinical manifestations of visual eld loss, 
1225b
functions of, 1124b
Occupational airway disease, 541–542
Occupational and environmental lung disease, 
541–546
asbestos-related, 545–546
due to organic dusts, 544–545, 544b
occupational airway disease, 541–542
pneumoconiosis, 542–544, 543b
Occupational asthma, 541–542, 541b, 542f
Occupational lung cancer, 546
Occupational pneumonia, 546
Occupational therapist, 1301b
Occupational therapy
for musculoskeletal disease, 1008
for Parkinson’s disease, 1168
Ochrobactrum spp., 545
Ocrelizumab, 1163b
Octopus, blue-ringed, 242b
Octreotide
acromegaly, 698–699
gastrointestinal obstruction, 171
scintigraphy, 692f
Ocular abnormalities, 1145–1146
Ocular dysmetria, 1146
Ocular inammation, 1226–1228
pregnancy and, 1230b
Ocular pain, 1137
Ocular ultrasound, investigation of visual 
disorders, 1223
Oculomotor (3rd cranial) nerve
palsies, 1174b, 1197b
tests of, 1121b
Neuropathy (Continued)
Nodules (Continued)

[[p1415]]
1344     INDEX
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy, 1196b
Odds ratio, drug therapy, 28f
Odynophagia, 138b, 359
Oedema, 567–568
ascites, 567–568
causes of, 567b
cerebral. See Cerebral oedema
generalised, 327
legs, 567–568
mechanisms of, 188b
nephrotic syndrome, 572b
peripheral
differential diagnosis, 404b
heart failure, 404b
hypervolaemia, 621
pitting, 567
pregnancy and, 1269
pulmonary. See Pulmonary oedema
Oesophageal candidiasis, in HIV/AIDS 
patients, 359, 360f
Oesophageal diseases, HIV-related, 359, 
359b, 360f
Oesophageal dysmotility, secondary causes 
of, 812
Oesophageal motility, 794
Oesophageal transection, for variceal 
bleeding, 884
Oesophageal variceal bleeding, management 
of, 883f
Oesophageal varices, 878f
management of, 883f
Oesophagitis, 807, 807f
eosinophilic, 809, 809f
other causes of, 809
Oesophagus
Barrett’s, 807–808, 808f
carcinoma of, 809–810
diseases of, 806–812
achalasia of, 811, 812f, 813f
motility disorders, 811–812
reux, 806–809
functional anatomy of, 784–785, 784f, 785f
lower, adenocarcinoma of, 810f
‘nutcracker,’ 811
perforation of, 810–811
tumours of, 809–810
benign, 809
17β−Oestradiol, 1311b
Oestradiol, pregnancy and, 1266
Oestrogen
in bone remodelling, 994b
for delayed puberty, 669
hepatotoxicity, 905b
Oestrogen deciency, 670b
Oestrogen receptors, as tumour markers, 147
Oestrogen replacement therapy
delayed puberty, 670
Turner syndrome, 674
Ooxacin
leprosy, 315
for STIs, chlamydial infection, 380b
Ogilvie syndrome, 834
Ointments, 1078b
Older people
acute illness, 1303, 1303b
acute kidney injury in, 584b
adrenal glands, 686b
antimicrobial therapy in, 117b
cancer in, 137b
collapse, 1303
common ophthalmological ndings in, 
1230b
comorbidities in, 1302
critical illness in, 216, 217b
delirium, 1304–1305, 1304b
demography of, 1298
deprescribing in, 1307–1308
dizziness, 1303–1304
endoscopy in, 792b
epilepsy in, 1158b
examination, 1297b
falls, 1303, 1303b
frailty, 1298–1299, 1300b
gait and balance, 1297b
geriatric assessment, 1296
gout in, 1020b
haematological investigations in, 933b
history, 1297b
hypernatraemia in, 627b
hyponatraemia in, 627b
incontinence, 608b, 1305–1306, 1306f
infection in, 1306–1309
investigation, 1301–1302
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment, 
1301–1302, 1302f
decisions on, 1302
medical psychiatry in, 1240b
neurological examination in, 1136b
NSAIDs in, 1010b
oral health in, 806b
osteoarthritis in, 1017b
osteoporosis in, 1052b
polypharmacy in, 1307b
prescribing in, 1307–1308
presenting problems in, 1302–1306, 1308, 
1308b
rehabilitation, 1301, 1301f
renal replacement therapy in, 595b
respiratory disease in
infection, 512b
interstitial lung disease, 535b
obstructive pulmonary disease, 508b
pleural disease, 553b
respiratory function in, 484b
urinary tract infection in, 600b
Oleander, poisoning from, 227–228
Olecranon bursitis, 1006b, 1029f
Olfactory loss, 1145
Olfactory (1st cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Oligoarthritis, asymmetrical inammatory, 1036
Oligoclonal bands, 1134
Oligodendrocytes, 1122–1123
Oligodendroglioma, 1183b
Oligopeptides, 786
Oliguria, 566–567
critically ill patients, 198
Omalizumab, for allergy, 82
Omeprazole, for H. pylori eradication, 814–815
Onchocerca volvulus, 336, 336f
Onchocerciasis, 278b, 336–337
Oncogenes, 49
Oncogenesis, 132f
Oncological emergencies, 139–142
Oncology, 127
acute, 138–145
genomics and, 55
transition medicine and, 1291
Onychogryphosis, 1110–1111
Onychomycosis, 1093
Oophoritis, mumps, 284
Open reading frame (ORF), 40
Ophthalmia neonatorum, 379
Ophthalmopathy, Graves’, 662–663, 662f
examination of, 649b
Opiates/opioids
adverse reactions of, 22b
for cancer pain, 168–169
misuse of, 229, 229b, 1250
overdose, 229–230
for pain, 163–164, 163b, 164b, 165b
adverse effects of, 169, 169b
Opioid-induced endocrine dysfunction, 701
Opisthorchiasis, 341b
Opisthotonus, 1180
Opportunistic mycobacterial infection, 525, 525b
Opsonins, 61
complement fragments as, 64
Opsonisation, 61, 61f
Optic atrophy, 1146, 1226, 1227f
Optic chiasm, clinical manifestations of visual 
eld loss, 1225b
Optic disc, clinical manifestations of visual eld 
loss, 1225b
Optic disc drusen, in adolescents, 1230b
Optic disc swelling and papilloedema, 1226, 
1226b, 1227f
Optic nerve, clinical manifestations of visual 
eld loss, 1225b
Optic (2nd cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Optic neuritis
multiple sclerosis, 1161
onchocerciasis, 337
Optic neuropathy, Leber hereditary, 1197
Optic tract, clinical manifestations of visual 
eld loss, 1225b
Optical coherence tomography (OCT), 
investigation of visual disorders, 1222
OptiMAL, 322
Oral administration, 16–17
Oral cancer, 805, 805b
Oral cavity, organisms in, 101f
Oral contraception/contraceptives
migraine and, 1150
skin reactions, 1116b
venous thrombosis and, 985b
Oral contraceptive pill (OCP)
cystic brosis and, 1290–1291
epilepsy and, 1290–1291
Oral diseases, HIV-related, 359
Oral glucocorticoids, for chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), 509
Oral hairy leukoplakia, 359
Oral health, in old age, 806b
Oral nutritional supplements, under-nutrition in 
hospital, 769
Oral rehydration solution (ORS), 274b
Oral ulcers, in Behçet’s disease, 1047f
Orbit, 1218–1222
imaging of, 1131, 1131f
Orchitis, mumps, 284
Orf, 1092
Organ donation, 85
after brain death, 217
after cardiac death, 217
altruistic living, 85
cadaveric, 85
Organic solvents, misuse of, 1250
Organisms
detection of components of, 103–104
whole, detection of, 103
Organophosphate-induced delayed 
polyneuropathy, 233
Organophosphorus compound, 232–233, 
232b, 232f
Oriental spotted fever, 317b
Orientation, assessment, 1237
Ornidazole, 332
Ornithine tricarboxylase deciency, 643
Oropharynx, examination
HIV disease, 350
infectious disease, 262f
Oroya fever, 318
Orphenadrine, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Orthopnoea, 491, 539
Oscillopsia, 1146
Oseltamivir, 116b, 123
Osgood-Schlatter disease, 1007b
Osmolality, 1312b
presenting problems of, 624–627
Osmolarity, 1312b
Osmotic agents, 14–16
Osteitis brosa cystica, 591
Osteoarthritis (OA), 1014–1018
clinical features of, 1015, 1015b
early-onset, 1017, 1017b
epidemiology of, 1014–1018
erosive, 1017
generalised nodal, 1015–1017, 1015b, 
1016f
hip, 1016–1017, 1016f
investigations for, 1017
knee, 1015–1016
management of, 1017–1018
in older people, 1017b
pathophysiology of, 1014–1015, 1014f
risk factors for, 1014b
spine, 1017, 1017f
Osteoarthropathy, hypertrophic pulmonary, 529
Osteoblasts, in bone remodelling, 993f
Osteochondritis, of patella ligament, 1006b
Osteoclasts, in bone remodelling, 993f
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), 1058–1059
transition medicine and, 1293
Osteoid, 993f
Osteoid osteoma, 1059b
Osteomalacia, 1055
causes of, 1053b
clinical features of, 1055
coeliac disease and, 821
investigations in, 1055, 1055f
management of, 1055
pathogenesis of, 1055
tumour-induced, 1056
vitamin D-decient, biochemical 
abnormalities in, 998b
Osteomyelitis, 1026
Osteonecrosis, 1058
drug-induced, 1060b
Osteopetrosis, 1059
Osteophytes, 1188
Osteoporosis, 1047–1053
biochemical abnormalities in, 998b
clinical features of, 1049
coeliac disease and, 821
fractures associated with, 1048f
bone mineral density and, 1049f
glucocorticoid-induced, 1049
transition medicine and, 1293
idiopathic, 1049
investigations of, 1049–1051, 1050f, 1051b
management of, 1051–1053
non-pharmacological interventions for, 
1051
in old age, 1052b
pathophysiology of, 1047–1049, 1048f
pharmacological interventions for, 
1051–1053, 1051b
pregnancy-associated, 1049
risk factors for, 1048b
secondary, 1049–1053
surgery for, 1053
Osteoprotegerin, in bone remodelling, 994b
Osteosarcoma, 1059
Osteosclerosis, osteoarthritis and, 1017f
Osteotomy, 1009b
Ostium primum defects, 469
Otitis media, 279, 301b, 313, 1172
Ovarian cancer, 150
investigations of, 150
management of, 150
pathogenesis of, 150
Ovarian failure, chemotherapy-induced, 1291
Ovaries, polycystic, 673–674, 674f
Overow incontinence, 608, 1148
in older people, 1306
Overnight dexamethasone suppression test 
(ONDST), in Cushing’s syndrome, 
682
Ovulation, 672
Oxacillin, 117b
Oxalate, 1313b
Oxazolidinones, 120
Oxcarbazepine, 1157b
Oxidative killing, 62
Oxidative stress, 894f
Oximes, 233
Oximetry, 488
asthma, 504–505
Oxygen
arterial blood (PaO2), 1310b
content and delivery of, in shock, 195, 
196b
for gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 799
Oxygen dissociation curve, in haemoglobin, 
926, 926f
Oxygen saturation, 1310b
Oxygen therapy
for acute exacerbations of COPD, 509
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 508, 508b
for community-acquired pneumonia, 514
for critical illness, 194, 195b
for high-altitude pulmonary oedema, 257
Oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve, 194, 195f
Oxytetracycline, acne, 1095
P
Pabrinex, 1250
Pachyonychia congenita, 1111
Pacing
AV block, 422, 422f
tachyarrhythmias, 409–410
transcutaneous, 422
Packed cell volume (PCV), 1314b
Paclitaxel, 150
Paediatric disease, in systemic lupus 
erythematosus, 1039–1040
Paediatric health services, transition to adult 
health services from, 1282–1284
Paget’s disease
biochemical abnormalities in, 998b
of bone, 1057–1058
clinical features of, 1057
investigations in, 1057, 1057f
management of, 1057–1058, 1057b
pathophysiology of, 1057–1058
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Pain, 156, 1129, 1223–1224
abdominal, 567, 797
acute pancreatitis, 850–852, 850b
chronic or recurrent, 804–805, 804b
chronic pancreatitis, 852–854
constant, 805
irritable bowel syndrome and, 847
in lower abdomen, 375
ankle, 1007
back, 1003–1005
red ags for, 1004b
triage assessment of, 1004f
biopsychosocial model of, 156f
Older people (Continued)
Osteoporosis (Continued)

[[p1416]]
INDEX    1345
in cancer, 168, 168b
central processing of, 157
challenges in, 161b
chest, 179–181, 398
associated features of, 179–180, 180f
characteristics of, 179
clinical assessment of, 180
differential diagnosis of, 179b
initial investigations of, 180–181, 181b
ischaemic, 398f
onset of, 179
pregnancy and, 1269
in respiratory disease, 492
site and radiation of, 179
elbow, 1005, 1006b
on eye movement, red ag symptoms in 
visual loss, 1225b
facial, 1137
foot, 1007
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
156–158
hand, 1005–1006
in headache, 1137
hip, 1006, 1006b, 1006f
instruments for assessment of, 161b
interventions for, 162–165
complementary and alternative 
therapies for, 165
nerve blocks and nerve ablation in, 165
pharmacological therapies in, 162–164, 
163b, 164b
physical therapies in, 161b, 162, 162b
psychological therapies in, 164
stimulation therapies in, 164–165, 165f
supported self-management in, 162
investigations of, 158–160
knee, 1006, 1007b
loin, 567
low back
causes of, 1003b
mechanical, features of, 1004b
radicular, 1004b
musculoskeletal, regional, 1003–1007
neck, 1005b
neuropathic, 165–166, 166b, 166f, 1141
ocular, 1137
palliative care for, 167–172, 167f
perception of, 156f, 158
principles of management of, 160–162
radicular, 1004b
shoulder, 1005, 1005b, 1005f
somatoform disorder, 1256
wrist, 1005–1006
Pain relief, for pancreatitis, 854
Pain scoring system, 160
Painful vaso-occlusive crisis, 960
Palliation, for cancer, 144
Palliative care, 167–172, 167f
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 508
presenting problems of, 167–172
anxiety and depression in, 171
cough in, 170
dehydration in, 172
delirium and agitation in, 171–172
gastrointestinal obstruction in, 171
nausea and vomiting in, 171, 171f
weight loss in, 171
Palliative chemotherapy, 145
Palmar erythema, 648f, 652–653, 860
Palmoplantar pustulosis, 1101
Palpable purpura, 1045f
Palpation
of abdomen, 783b
of precordium, 387b
in respiratory system, examination of,  
480
Palpitation, 399, 399b, 399f
Pamidronate
bone metastases, 144
hypercalcaemia, 144
for Paget’s disease, 1057b
Pancoast syndrome, 529
Pancolitis, 836–837
Pancreas, 788, 788f
annular, 854
carcinoma of, 855f
congenital abnormalities affecting, 854–855
diseases of, 850–856
divisum, 854
endocrine, 689–691
tumours of, 855–856
Pancreatic cancer, 855f
Pancreatic diabetes, 719
Pancreatic enzymes, 788b
Pancreatic necrosis, 852f
Pancreatic pseudocyst, 851f
‘Pancreatic rests,’ 819
Pancreatitis
acute, 850–852, 850b
causes of, 851b
complications of, 851b
management of, 852
pathophysiology of, 850–852, 851f
autoimmune, 854
chronic, 852–854
causes of, 853b
complications of, 853b
investigations of, 853, 853b, 854f
management of complications of, 853b
pathophysiology of, 853f
hereditary, 852–855
necrotising, 852
Pancytopenia, 939, 939b
Panic disorder, 1255
Panton-Valentine leukocidin, 516
Papillary carcinoma, 665–666
Papillary muscle rupture, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 434
Papillary necrosis, 577
Papillary renal cell cancer syndrome, 135b
Papilloedema, 1146
Papilloma, basal cell, 1087, 1087f
Papillomaviruses, 1091
Papular pruritic eruption, HIV-related, 358
Papule, denition of, 1065
Papulosquamous eruption, 1102
Para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), skin reactions, 
1116b
Parabens, 1099b
Paracentesis, for ascites, 877
Paracetamol
adverse reactions, 22b
for chronic pain, 163b
for fever, 264
for headache, 1150
hepatoxicity of, 874f
for pain, 162
poisoning, 222b
poisoning from, 224–225, 226f
acute liver disease and, 875b
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 347
Paracoccidioidomycosis, 347
Paraesthesia, 1140–1141
Paraganglioma, 688–689
Paragonimiasis, 277
Paragonimus spp., 125
Paragonimus westermani, 278b
Parainuenza viruses, 292
Paraldehyde
disturbed behaviour, 1244f
poisoning, 223b
Paralysis, ventilator-induced lung injury and, 208
Paralysis ticks, envenomation of, 249
Paralytic ileus, 850–851
Paralytic shellsh poisoning, 236–237
Paramyotonia congenita, 1198b
Paraneoplastic disease, neurological, 1165, 
1165b
Paraneoplastic syndromes, neurological, 143
Paraphenylenediamine, 1099b
Parapneumonic effusion, 495
Paraproteinaemias, 975–978
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
Paraquat, poisoning from, 233
Parasitic infections
and cancer, 134b
eosinophilia, 278b
Parasitosis, delusional, 1257
Parasomnias, 1159–1160
non-REM, 1160
Parasympathetic pathways, 788–789
Parathyroid disease
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pregnancy in, 1273–1274
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 
as, 1274
primary hyperparathyroidism as, 
1273–1274
Parathyroid glands, 675–679
disease of
classication of, 676b
presenting problems in, 676–677
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 
and, 678
functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations of, 675–676
hypoparathyroidism and, 678–679
in old age, 676b
primary hyperparathyroidism and, 
677–678, 678b, 678f
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 675
acute kidney injury and, 589b
in bone remodelling, 994b
osteoporosis, 1051b
reference range of, 1311b
in skeletal disease, 998b
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), 
ectopic production, 143b
Parathyroidectomy, 591–592
Paratyphoid fever, 308
Parenchymal bacterial infections, 1178–1179
Parenteral administration, 17
Parenteral nutrition, under-nutrition in hospital, 
770–771, 771b
Parietal lobes, 1124
clinical manifestations of visual eld loss, 
1225b
functions of, 1124b
Parkinsonian syndromes, 1168–1169
Parkinsonism, 1141, 1142b, 1165–1166
drug-induced, 1165b
Parkinson’s disease, idiopathic, 1165–1168
causes of, 1165b
clinical features of, 1166, 1166b
investigations of, 1166, 1167f
management of, 1166–1168
drug therapy, 1166–1168
surgery, 1168
pathophysiology of, 1166, 1166f
Paromomycin, 125
for leishmaniasis, 328
Parotitis, 805, 806b
Paroxysmal atrial brillation, 414
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH), 
959
Partial agonists, 14
Partial thromboplastin time with kaolin (PTTK), 
930
Parvovirus B19 infection, 280–281
clinical features of, 280–281, 281b, 281f
diagnosis of, 281
management of, 281
in pregnancy, 280b
Pastes, 1078b
Pastia’s sign, 301, 302f
Past-pointing, 1126
Patau’s syndrome (trisomy 13), 44b
Patch testing, for skin disease, 1069
Patella ligament enthesopathy, 1007b
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), 61
‘Pathogenicity,’ in host-pathogen interactions, 
102
Pathogens
direct detection of, 103–104
host-pathogen interactions, 101–102
indirect detection of, 105–106
Pathological fracture, 1002b
Pathological myopia, in adolescents, 1230b
Pathway medicine, for genetic disease, 56
Patient factors, of gastro-oesophageal reux 
disease, 806
Patient-centred evidence-based medicine, 
9, 10f
Patients, autonomy, 1284
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 61
Paul-Bunnell test, 285
PCSK9 inhibitors, 640
Peak expiratory ow (PEF)
asthma, 501f, 504f
home monitoring, 487–488
morning dipping, 501f
Peak ow meters, 487–488, 501
Peanut allergy, 81
PECAM-1, 391
Pectus carinatum, 555
Pectus excavatum, 555
Pediculus humanus, 305
Pediculus humanus capitis, 1093
Pedigree, construction of, 45–49, 45f
Pegvisomant, 698–699
Pellagra, 776–777, 777f, 1074b
Pelvic inammatory disease (PID), 375
Pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction (PUJO), 605
Pemphigoid, bullous, 1106, 1106b, 1107f
Pemphigoid gestationis, 1073b, 1106b
Pemphigus, 138b, 1107
Pemphigus foliaceus, 1106b
Pemphigus vulgaris, 1106b
Penciclovir, as anti-herpesvirus agent, 122, 123b
Pendred syndrome, 653f, 667
Pendrin, 653f
Penetrance, genetic, 46
Penicillamine, nephrotoxicity, 599b
Penicillin(s), 114b, 117
adverse reactions, 22b
anthrax, 314
diphtheria, 313
endocarditis, 463
leptospirosis, 306
listeriosis, 307
meningitis, 1173
nephrotoxicity, 599b
for neurosyphilis, 1179
penicillinase-resistant, 117
in pregnancy, 117
prophylactic, 73, 116b
resistance, 113
rheumatic fever, 453
syphilis, 378
for syphilis, 378
tropical ulcer, 302
urinary tract infection, 600–601
Penile erection, 611
Penis, 562
Pentamidine, prophylactic, 116b
Pentamidine isethionate
for leishmaniasis, 328
for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 124
Pentavalent antimonials, 124, 328
Pepsinogen, 785
Peptic ulcer
complications of, 816
indications for, 815b
in old age, 814b
perforation, 816
prophylaxis for, in intensive care, 214
Peptic ulcer disease, 812–817
Peptide YY, 790b
Peptides, antimicrobial, 60
Peptostreptococcus spp., 301b
Perceptions
abnormal, 1143, 1237
delusional, 1251
Percussion
abdomen, 783b
in respiratory system, examination of, 480
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
angina, 430–431, 430f
myocardial infarction, 432b
vs. CABG, 432b
Perforating dermatosis, acquired reactive, 1115
Perforin, 65
Perfusion, in respiratory system, 483
Perianal disease, inammatory bowel disease 
and, 845
Pericardial disease, in tuberculosis (TB), 520
Pericardial effusion, 128, 476–477, 476b, 477f
Pericarditis
acute, 476–478, 476b, 477f
in acute coronary syndrome, 434
chronic constrictive, 477–478, 478b, 478f
tuberculous, 477
Pericardium, diseases of, 476–478
Periodic fever syndromes, 76–77
Periodic limb movements, in sleep, 1160
Periodic paralysis
hyperkalaemic, 1198b
hypokalaemic, 1198b
Periostitis, 377, 529
Peripartum cardiomyopathy, pregnancy and, 
1276
Peripheral arterial disease, 440–442, 440b
Peripheral circulation (foot disease), diabetes 
mellitus and, 747b
Peripheral nerves, 156
disease of, 1191–1194, 1192b
HIV-related, 363
endings, 156
lesions, 1140
Peripheral nervous system
motor, 1125
sensory, 1125
Peripheral neuropathy
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
drug-induced, 363
HIV-related, 363
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1030
sensorimotor, 363
Pain (Continued)
Parathyroid glands (Continued)

[[p1417]]
1346     INDEX
Peripheral sensitisation, 157–158, 159f
Peripheral ulcerative keratitis (‘corneal 
melting’), 1227
Peripheral vascular disease, in diabetes, 441b
Peristalsis, 789
Peritoneal cavity, disease of, 856
Peritoneal dialysis, 595–596
automated, 595–596
continuous ambulatory, 596
haemodialysis vs., 593b
problems with, 597b
Peritonitis, 856
spontaneous bacterial, 877
Permanent pacemakers, for arrhythmias, 
422–423, 422f, 423b
Pernicious anaemia, 954
Persistent atrial brillation, 414–415
Persistent ductus arteriosus, 467–469, 468f, 
469f
Personality, 1129
atherosclerosis risk, 426
change, 1149
high-risk behaviour and, 1289
psychiatric disorders and, 1239–1240
Personality disorders, 1258–1259
prevalence of, 1236b
Pes cavus, 1193
Pesticides, 231–236
Petechiae, denition of, 1065
Petechial purpura, 938, 938f
Petit mal, 1152
Pets
allergic rhinitis and, 550
asthma and, 499
HIV infection/AIDS and, 365
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 832, 832f
Peyer’s patches, 65, 787–788
Phaeochromocytoma, 688–689, 688b, 689f
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
Phaeohyphomycoses, 344
Phagocytes, 61–62, 61f
deciency in, 71b
primary, 72–73, 73f
Phagocytosis, 61, 61f
Phagolysosome, 62
Phantom limb pain, 166
Pharmacist, 21b
Pharmacodynamics, 14–16, 14f
dose-response relationship in, 14–16, 15f
drug targets in, 14, 15b
mechanisms of action of, 14
Pharmacogenomics, for genetic disease, 56
Pharmacokinetics, 16–19, 17f
absorption in, 16–17
distribution in, 17
elimination in, 17–18
patient-specic factors in, 19b
repeated dose regimens in, 18–19
Pharmacological therapies, for pain, 162–164, 
163b
Pharmacovigilance, 22–23, 22b
Pharmacy, 26
Pharyngeal pouch, 811
Phenelzine, 1253b
Phenicols (chloramphenicol), 120
Phenobarbital
epilepsy, 1157b
in old age, 32b
poisoning, 224b
status epilepticus, 1138b
Phenothiazines
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
for schizophrenia, 1252b
Phenoxymethylpenicillin, 117b
prophylactic, 116b
Phenylketonuria, 642
Phenytoin
ataxia, 1168b
drug interactions, 23b
epilepsy, 1157b
pharmacokinetics of, 18
plasma concentration, 35b
poisoning, 229b
renal or hepatic disease, 32b
sodium content of, 877b
status epilepticus, 1138b
Phobia, 1255
Phobic anxiety disorder, 1255
Phosphate
acute kidney injury and, 589b
enema, 883b
homeostasis, 634–635
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
in skeletal disease, 998b
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, erectile 
dysfunction, 611
Phospholipids, 122, 637
Phosphorus, 778, 779b
Photoallergy, 1074b
Photochemotherapy, 1079–1080
Photodynamic therapy (PDT)
for oral cancer, 805
for skin disease, 1082
Photo-exposed site hyperpigmentation, 1109
Photography, investigation of visual disorders, 
1222
Photophobia/glare, 1224
Photopsia, 1224
Photosensitivity, 1074–1076, 1074b
clinical assessment of, 1075–1076
drug-induced, 1116b
investigations and management of, 
1075–1076
Phototesting, for skin disease, 1069
Phototherapy, 1079–1080
Phototoxicity, 1074b
Physical activity, atherosclerosis risk, 425
Physical therapies
for musculoskeletal disease, 1008
for pain, 161b, 162, 162b
Physiological anaemia of pregnancy, 
1266–1267
Physiological breathlessness, of pregnancy, 
1268
Physiotherapy
for bronchiectasis, 510
for cancer pain, 170
for community-acquired pneumonia, 514
for Parkinson’s disease, 1168
Pick’s disease, 1248–1249
Pigment stones, 914, 914b
Pigmentation
drug-induced, 1109, 1109b, 1116b
endocrine, 1109
Pigmented villonodular synovitis, 1062
Pinta, 302, 302b
Piperacillin, 117b
Piperacillin-tazobactam, 114b
for necrotising fasciitis, 272
for neutropenic fever, 269
Piperazine, 125
Pitted keratolysis, 1091
Pituitary disease
investigation of patients with, 692–693, 
693b
pregnancy and, 1273
diabetes insipidus as, 1273
prolactinoma as, 1273
Sheehan syndrome as, 1273
Pituitary hormones, 650
Pituitary tumours, 695–696, 1183
Pityriasis lichenoides chronica, 1102–1103
Pityriasis rosea, 1071b, 1102
Pityriasis versicolor, 1093
rash in, 1071b
Placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), as 
tumour markers, 136b
Plague, 306–307, 307f
Plain chest X-ray
for gastrointestinal disease, 789, 790f
contrast studies of, 789–790
normal, 485f
for respiratory disease, 484, 485b, 485f
abnormalities, 486b
aspergillosis, 527f
asthma, 501
bronchiectasis, 510
COPD, 506
empyema, 497f
haemoptysis, 492
interstitial, 533, 534f
lobar collapse, 486f
lung cancer, 528, 529f
mediastinal tumours, 533, 533f
pleural effusion, 494
pleural plaques, 545f
pneumothorax, 554
pulmonary embolism, 546, 547b, 547f
pulmonary hypertension, 549f
sarcoidosis, 538b
silicosis, 543f
tuberculosis, 520f
Plane warts, 1091
Plant poisoning, 237, 237b
Plantar warts, 1091
Plaques
amyloid in, 1247–1248
denition of, 1065
Plasma exchange (PE)
for Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1193
pre-renal transplant, 596
Plasma viscosity, inammation and, 70
Plasmodium falciparum infection, 320f, 321, 
322b
Plasmodium knowlesi infection, 322
Plasmodium malariae infection, 322
Plasmodium ovale infection, 321
Plasmodium vivax infection, 321
Platelet function disorders, 980–981
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), 132
Platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule 
type 1 (PECAM-1), 391
Platelets, 927, 929f
concentrate, 940b
count
in coagulation screening tests, 932b
high, 938–939
low, 938
reference range of, 1314b
Plethysmography (SpO2), 177f
Pleural disease, 553–555
Pleural effusion, 144, 494–496
cardiac failure in, 497b
causes of, 496b, 497b
clinical assessment of, 494–495
investigations of, 494
large right, 481
malignant, 497b
management of, 494
obstruction of thoracic duct in, 497b
oedema, 567–568
pancreatitis in, 497b
pulmonary infarction in, 497b
rheumatoid disease in, 497b, 538
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 497b
tuberculosis in, 497b, 519f
Pleural pain
in community-acquired pneumonia, 
treatment of, 514
in lung cancer, 529
Pleural plaques, 545, 545f
Pleural rub, 400
Pleural tuberculosis, 520
Plexopathy, 1191
brachial, 1194
lumbosacral, 1194
Pluripotent stem cells, induced, for genetic 
disease, 56
Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis, 857
Pneumococcal infection, 313
Pneumoconiosis, 542–544, 543b
Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, after HSCT, 
946b
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, HIV-related, 
359b, 361, 361b, 361f
Pneumocytes, 482
Pneumonia, 512–518
bacterial, HIV-related, 361f
community-acquired, 513–518, 513f
clinical features of, 513
discharge and follow-up of, 514
investigations of, 513, 515b
management of, 513
organisms causing, 513b
prognosis for, 514
complications of, 516b, 525b
differential diagnosis of, 513b
factors predispose to, 513b
hospital-acquired, 514–516, 516b
in immunocompromised patient, 517–518
necrotising, 102b
occupational, 546
pregnancy and, 1271
causes of, 1271b
viral, 1271
right middle lobe, 481, 515f
suppurative pneumonia, aspiration 
pneumonia and pulmonary abscess, 
516–517, 517b
Pneumonic plague, 307
Pneumothorax, 481, 553–555, 553f
age distribution of, 553f
classication of, 553b
clinical features of, 553–554
investigations of, 554
management of, 554–555, 554f, 555f
spontaneous
recurrent, 555
types of, 554f
tension, 497–498
Podocytes, 560
Podophyllotoxin, 382
Point-of-care testing (POCT), 616
Poiseuille’s Law, 390–391
Poisoning, 219
acute, 222
assessment and investigation for, 222, 
223b
from chemicals and pesticides, 231–236
chemicals less commonly taken in, 235, 
235b
clinical signs of, 221f
decontamination and enhanced elimination 
for, 221f
drugs of misuse and, 228
environmental, 236
evaluation for, 220–222, 220f, 222b
food-related, 236–237
management of, 223–224
antidotes for, 224, 225b
gastrointestinal decontamination for, 
223–224, 224b
haemodialysis and haemoperfusion for, 
224, 224b
lipid emulsion therapy for, 224
supportive care for, 224, 225b
urinary alkalinisation for, 224
in old age, 222b
by pharmaceutical agents, 224–228
less commonly taken in, 228, 229b
plant, 237, 237b
poisoned patient, general approach to, 
222–224
psychiatric assessment for, 223
substances involved in, 222b
substances of very low toxicity and, 222b
triage and resuscitation, 222
Poliomyelitis, 1177
immunisation for, 1177
incubation period, 108b
Pollution, atmospheric, 90
PolyA tail, 39–40
Polyadenylation signal, 38
Polyarteritis nodosa, 1045
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Polyarthritis, 1000–1001, 1001b
inammatory arthritis and, extra-articular 
features of, 1001b
joint involvement in, 1002f
symmetrical, 1036
Polycystic ovarian syndrome, 673–674, 674f
features of, 673b
hirsutism and, 673–674, 673b
Polycythaemia, 560
Polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV), 980
Polydipsia, 624, 652b
Polyenes, 122
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 103
for genetic diseases, 50, 51f
for herpes simplex virus, 1134
for Whipple’s disease, 822
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, 1073b
Polymorphic light eruption, 1074b
Polymorphisms, 45
single nucleotide, 45
Polymorphonuclear cells, 1175
Polymorphonuclear leucocytes, 61
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), 1045–1046
mimic, 1046b
Polymyositis (PM). See Dermatomyositis/
polymyositis
Polymyxins, 120
Polyneuropathy, 1192b
chronic, 1193–1194
critical illness, 215
Polyostotic brous dysplasia, ophthalmic 
features of, 1220b
Polypeptides, 786
Polyposis syndromes, 830–831, 831b
juvenile, 832
Polyps, 830–831, 831b
Polyuria, 567, 567b, 652b
Pompe disease, 1197b
Pompholyx, 1099
Popliteal cyst, 1006b, 1007b
Population health, 87
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), 1108, 1114, 
1114f
Phosphate (Continued)
Pneumothorax (Continued)

[[p1418]]
INDEX    1347
Porphyrias, 643–645, 1074b, 1113–1114
acute intermittent, 645b
cutaneous, 645, 1114
erythropoietic protoporphyria, 645b
hepatic, exacerbation of, 1116b
hereditary coproporphyria, 645b
variegate, 645b
Portal hypertension, 881–884, 882f, 909
classication of, 882f
clinical features of, 881–884
complications of, 882b
investigations for, 882
management of, 882–884
pathophysiology of, 882
Portal vein thrombosis, 909
Portal venous disease, 909
Portal venous pressure, pharmacological 
reduction of, 882–883
Portopulmonary hypertension, 909
Portosystemic shunt, for variceal bleeding, 
884
Posaconazole, 122
Positron emission tomography (PET)
for cancer, 134–135
of gastrointestinal tract, 795b
for Hodgkin lymphoma, 972f
of nervous system, 1130
for oesophageal carcinoma, 810f
for respiratory disease, 485, 487f
Post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 918, 918b
Posterior descending artery, 388
Posteroanterior (PA) lm, of chest X-ray, 484
Post-exposure prophylaxis, for HIV infection/
AIDS, 368
Post-micturition dribble, 608
Post-partum blues, 1260
Post-partum haemorrhage
primary, 1269
secondary, 1269
Post-partum thyroiditis, 658b, 663
in pregnancy, 658b, 1273
Post-pyloric feeding, under-nutrition in 
hospital, 770
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders 
(PTLDs), 1292
Post-traumatic stress disorder, 1256
Postural hypotension, renal dysfunction, 
567–568
Posture, examination of, 1121b
Potassium, 617b, 779b
channelopathies, 1198b
foods high in, 591b
homeostasis, 627–630
presenting problems in, 627–630
intake, chronic renal failure, 591
plasma concentration control and, 627f
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1310b
renal handling, 627f
ROMK channel, 627
supplements, 633
Potassium chloride, hypokalaemia, 628–629
Potassium phosphate, 635
Potassium-sparing diuretics, for 
hypervolaemia, 622
Potency, 16
Poverty, health consequences of, 90
Powassan virus, 1176b
Poxviruses, 291–292
Praziquantel, 125
Prednisolone
for eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 824
for respiratory disease
aspergillosis, 526
asthma, 503
chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, 
539–540
COPD, 509
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 545
rheumatoid disease, 538
sarcoidosis, 538
for syphilis, 379
for type II thyrotoxicosis, 664
Pre-eclampsia, hypertension and, 1270–1271, 
1270f, 1271b
Pre-exposure prophylaxis, for HIV infection/
AIDS, 368
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), high-risk behaviour 
and, 1288–1289
Pregabalin, 1157b
Pregnancy
abnormal liver function tests in, 911
adolescent, rates of, 1289b
adrenal disease in, 1274
analytes affected by, 1316b
antimicrobial agents in, 117
bone disease in, 1275
cardiac disease in, 1275–1276
congenital heart disease in, 467, 468b
diabetes in, 1272
dyslipidaemia in, 642b
ectopic, 375
endocrine disease in, 1273–1274
functional anatomy and physiology in, 
1266–1267
bone metabolism and, 1266–1267
cardiovascular system and, 1266
endocrine system and, 1266
gastrointestinal system and, 1266
genitourinary system and, 1266
glucose metabolism in, 1266
haematological system and, 1266–1267
respiratory system and, 1267
gastrointestinal disease in, 1271–1272
haematological disease in, 1278–1279
anaemia as, 1278, 1278b
Rhesus disease as, 1278
thrombocytopenia as, 1278–1279, 
1278b
venous thromboembolism as, 1279, 
1279b–1281b
haematological physiology in, 952b
hormonal changes in, 1267f
human immunodeciency virus infection 
in, 1274
hypertension in, 1270–1271
hypothyroidism in, 658, 658b
immunological diseases during, 84b
inammatory bowel disease in, 846, 846b
inammatory rheumatic disease in, 
1274–1275
iodine deciency in, 658b
ketoacidosis and, 1272
laboratory reference range in, 1315–1316
liver disease and, 910–911, 1277–1278
medical disorders in, 1269–1279
multiple sclerosis in, 1164b
neurological disease during
epilepsy, 1157, 1158b
multiple sclerosis, 1164b
neurological disease in, 1278
nutrition in, 774b
osteoporosis in, 1049
parathyroid disease in, 1273–1274
physiological anaemia of, 1266–1267
pituitary disease in, 1273
diabetes insipidus as, 1273
prolactinoma as, 1273
Sheehan syndrome as, 1273
planning of, in patients with medical 
conditions, 1266
post-partum thyroiditis in, 658b
prescribing in, 31, 32b
presenting problems of, 1268–1269
breathlessness as, 1268
chest pain as, 1269
circulatory collapse as, 1269
headache as, 1269
nausea and vomiting as, 1269, 1269b
oedema as, 1269
seizures as, 1269, 1270b
prolactinoma in, 698
psychiatric disorders during, 1260, 1260b, 
1278
renal disease in, 597, 598b, 1276–1277
respiratory disease in, 1271
Rhesus D blood groups in, 942b
rheumatoid arthritis in, 1031b
safety of antirheumatic drugs during, 1274b
sickle-cell disease in, 960, 961b
STI during, 372, 372b
swollen legs in, 188, 189b
syphilis in, 378–379
thyroid disease in, 658b, 1273
thyrotoxicosis in, 658b, 662
unplanned, transition medicine and, 1289
visual disorders and, 1230b
Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), 55
Prenatal genetic testing, 53–56
Pre-patellar bursitis, 1007b
Prescribed drugs, side effects of, differential 
diagnosis of, 1251b
Prescribing, 13, 14b
choice of drug, 29
decision-making in, 28–31
for elderly patients, 31, 32b
high-risk moments, 35b
in hospitals, 32–33
monitoring treatment effects, 30
patient involvement, 30, 31b
for patients with hepatic disease, 31, 32b
for patients with renal disease, 31
in practice, 28–37
for pregnancy and breastfeeding, 31, 32b
in primary care, 33–35
principles of, during transition, 1283, 1283b
repeat, 34
in special circumstances, 31–32
steps in, 14b
writing, 30, 32–35, 32b
Prescription-only medicine (PoM), 26
Pressure sores, 1112
Pre-symptomatic/predictive testing, 56
Presyncope, 184–186
clinical assessment of, 185–186
differential diagnosis of, 185f
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 797
initial investigations of, 186
in older people, 1304
presentation of, 184–186
seizures versus, 186b
Pre-test probability, in clinical decision-making, 
11
Pretibial myxoedema, 663
Pre-transfusion testing, 942
Prevalence, of disease, 91
Preventive medicine, 89–90
alcohol, 90
atmospheric pollution, 90
obesity, 90
poverty and afuence, 90
smoking, 90
Prevotella spp., 101f
Prick tests, 1069
Primary afferent neurons, 156
Primary biliary cholangitis, 898–899
AMA-negative, 899
associated diseases with, 899
autoimmune hepatitis and, 899
bone disease and, 899
clinical features of, 898–899
diagnosis and investigations for, 899
epidemiology of, 898–899
fatigue and, 899
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
management of, 899
in old age, 870b
overlap syndromes, 899
pathophysiology of, 898
primary sclerosing cholangitis and, 911b
pruritus and, 899
Primary CNS lymphoma, 363, 363f
Primary disease, in endocrinology, 650
Primary granules, 61
Primary haemostasis, disorders of, 980–981
Primary headache syndromes, 186b
Primary hyperaldosteronism, 687–688, 687b, 
688f
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 677–678, 678b, 
678f
biochemical abnormalities in, 998b
pregnancy and, 1273–1274
Primary idiopathic acquired aplastic anaemia, 
978–979, 979b
Primary immune deciency, warning signs 
of, 71b
Primary sclerosing cholangitis, 899–901, 
900f, 901f
diseases associated with, 900b
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in, 867b
magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatogram of, 900f
primary biliary cholangitis and, 911
Primary Sjögren syndrome (PSS), 1042
Primidone, 1157b
Prion diseases, 299, 1181–1182, 1181b, 
1247b
Prions, 100
Probenecid, for neurosyphilis, 1179
Problem-solving therapy, 1246, 1246b
Procaine penicillin
for neurosyphilis, 1179
for syphilis, 379
Procaine reaction, 379
Procarboxypeptidases, 786, 788b
Prochlorperazine, 1159
Proctitis, 375, 837
Proctoscopy, 379
Procyclidine, 1245
Pro-elastase, 788b
Progeric syndromes, 41
Progesterone
pregnancy and, 1266
reference range of, 1311b
Progesterone receptors, as tumour markers, 
149–150
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy, 
1178
Progressive supranuclear palsy, 1168
Proguanil, 124
for malaria, 323b
Prokaryotes, 99
Prolactin (PRL), reference range of, 1311b
Prolactinoma, 695f, 697–698, 697b
pregnancy and, 1273
Proliferative retinopathy, diabetes mellitus, 
clinical examination of people with, 
705f
Prolymphocytic leukaemia (PLL), 970
Prone positioning, as advanced respiratory 
support, 208
Propafenone, for arrhythmias, 419
Propantheline, 1195
Prophase, 41
Prophylactic gonadectomy, for Turner 
syndrome, 674
Propionibacterium spp., 101f
Propofol, 213b
Propranolol, for anxiety disorder, 1255
Proptosis, 1226
Propylthiouracil (PTU)
for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 661
for thyrotoxicosis, in pregnancy, 1273
Prosody, 1128
Prostacyclin, 391
Prostaglandin E1
erectile dysfunction, 611
Prostaglandin E2
febrile response, 102
Prostate
benign hyperplasia, 609
cancer, 610–611
Prostate gland, 561–562
Prostate-specic antigen (PSA), 610b
as tumour markers, 136b, 137
Prostatitis, 609–611
Prosthetic valve dysfunction, 462
Prosthetic valves, 462
Protease inhibitors (PIs), 366b
Proteases, 786
Protein C deciency, 987
Protein S deciency, 987
Protein-losing enteropathy, 824b
Proteins, 762, 762b, 1298b
Bence Jones, 570
biliary transport, 864f
cerebrospinal uid, 1313b
cholesterol ester, 637
digestion of, 786, 787f
IGF-BP3, 651f
production of, 38f, 39–40
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
Tamm-Horsfall, 569
Proteinuria, 569–571, 570b
investigation of, 571f
orthostatic, 569
overt (dipstick-positive), 570
pregnancy and, 1276–1277
reduction of, 590–591
tubular, 570
Proteus spp., 101f
Prothrombin G20210A, 987
Prothrombin time (PT), 930
in coagulation screening tests, 932b
reference range of, 1314b
Prothrombotic states, 986–989
‘Proton pump,’ 785
Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy, 799, 799b
for variceal bleeding, 883b
Proto-oncogenes, 55
Protozoa, 99–100
Protozoal infections, 319–332
gastrointestinal, 330–332
leishmaniasis, 326–330
systemic, 319–326
Prurigo gestationis, 1073b
Pruritic folliculitis, 1073b
Pregnancy (Continued)
Prescribing (Continued)

[[p1419]]
1348     INDEX
Pruritus, 138b, 1072–1074, 1223
clinical assessment of, 1072–1074
investigations and management of, 1073, 
1074f
in pregnancy, 1073b
primary biliary cholangitis and
treatment for, 899
primary causes of, 1072b
secondary causes of, 1073b
Pruritus ani, 834, 835b
Pseudocyst, pancreatic, 851f
Pseudo-hallucinations, 1241
Pseudohypoparathyroidism, 679
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 114b
Pseudomonas uorescens, 271
Pseudoporphyria, 1074b, 1108, 1116b
Psittacosis, incubation period, 108b
Psoralens
drug-induced pigmentation, 1109b
for skin disease, 1079–1080
Psoriasiform, drug-induced, 1116b
Psoriasis, 1099–1102
arthropathy and, 1101
clinical features of, 1100–1101, 1101f
erythrodermic, 1100
guttate, 1100
investigations of, 1101
management of, 1101–1102, 1102f
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pathogenesis of, 1099–1100, 1100b, 1100f
plaque, 1100
pustular, 1101
rash in, 1071b
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA), 1036–1038
CASPAR criteria for, 1036b
clinical features of, 1036–1038, 1037f
investigations for, 1038
management for, 1038
pathophysiology of, 1036–1038
Psoriatic spondylitis, 1036
Psychiatric assessment, poisoning and, 223
Psychiatric disorders, 1149, 1246–1260
classication of risk factors for, 1239b
clinical examination of, 1236–1238
mental state examination, 1237
psychiatric interview, 1237, 1237b
emergencies for, 1244b
functional anatomy and physiology in, 
1238–1240
biological factors, 1238–1239
psychological and behavioural factors, 
1239
social and environmental factors, 1240
HIV-related, 364
law and, 1260–1261
management of, 1245–1246
electroconvulsive therapy, 1245
pharmacological treatment, 1245
psychological therapies, 1246
social interventions, 1246
surgery, 1245
in old age, 1240b
organic, 1240b
in pregnancy, 1278
presenting problems of, 1240–1245
prevalence of, 1236b
psychological factors affecting medical 
conditions, 1242, 1242b
puerperal, 1260
WHO classication of, 1236, 1236b
Psychodynamic psychotherapy, 1246
Psychogenic attacks, 1153
Psychogenic pruritus, 1073b
Psychological anxiety, in older people, 1304
Psychological factors
affecting medical conditions, 1242,  
1242b
of migraine, 1150
Psychological therapies/psychotherapy, 
 1246
for alcohol misuse, 1250
for cancer pain, 170
general, 1246
interpersonal, 1246
for pain, 164
psychodynamic, 1246
Psychosis
affective, 1254
organic, 1252
puerperal, 1260
toxic, 1250
Psychotropic drugs, 1245b
Pthirus pubis, 373b
Ptosis
causes of, 1147b
in older people, 1230b
unilateral, 1147f
Puberty
analytes affected by, 1315b
delayed, 668–669, 669b, 1284
hormonal events of, 1285f
initiation of, 1283–1284
onset of, 1284
Pubic (crab) lice, 1093–1094
Pubic symphysitis, 1006b
Puerperal psychiatric disorders, 1260
Puerperal psychosis, differential diagnosis 
of, 1251b
Pulmonary abscess, 516–517, 517b
Pulmonary artery catheter, 210–211, 211f
Pulmonary circulation, 483
Pulmonary embolism, 546–549
acute massive, 202
clinical features of, 546–549, 547b
investigations of, 546–548, 547f, 548f
management of, 548
PERC rule for, 182b
in pregnancy, 548b
prognosis for, 548–549
Pulmonary eosinophilia and vasculitides, 
539–540, 540b
Pulmonary brosis, 481
in dermatomyositis, 539b
idiopathic, 534–537, 536f
in respiratory function abnormalities, 489b
in rheumatoid arthritis, 539b
in sarcoidosis, 538b
in sclerosis, 539b
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 539b
Pulmonary hypertension, 483, 549–550, 
549b, 549f
congenital heart disease and, 467
Pulmonary nodules
cryptococcosis, 345
lung metastases, 143, 144f
in respiratory disease, 493–494, 493b, 
493f, 494b, 495f
Pulmonary oedema, 586, 587f
high-altitude, 257
renal artery stenosis, 581
sputum in, 480
Pulmonary regurgitation, 462, 462b
Pulmonary rehabilitation, for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 507
Pulmonary stenosis, 461–462
Pulmonary syndrome, 306
Pulmonary tuberculosis
clinical presentations of, 520b
HIV-related, 361, 361f
post-primary, 519, 520b
primary, 519, 519b, 519f, 520b
Pulmonary tuberous sclerosis, 541b
Pulmonary valve disease, 461–462
Pulmonary vascular disease, 546–550
pulmonary embolism, 546–549
pulmonary hypertension, 549–550, 549b, 
549f
Pulse, in endocrine disease, 648f
Pulse oximetry(SpO2), 177b
Pulsus paradoxus, 391
Pupillary abnormalities, 1148b, 1148f
Pupillary responses, abnormal, 1146
Purkinje bres, 389
Purpura
denition of, 1078–1079
drug-induced, 1116b
Henoch-Schönlein, 573b–574b, 575, 1046
idiopathic thrombocytopenic, 981
non-thrombocytopenic, 937b
petechial, 938, 938f
pinch, 1114
senile, 982b
thrombotic thrombocytopenic, 563, 583, 
988
Pustule, denition of, 1065
Pustuloderma, drug-induced, 1116b
Pustulosis
acute generalised exanthematous, 1116b
palmoplantar, 1101
PUVA, 1079–1080
granuloma annulare, 1113
lichen planus, 1103
necrobiosis lipoidica, 1113
Pyelography, 565
retrograde, 565f
Pyelonephritis
acute, 577f, 602
chronic, 605
emphysematous, 602
pregnancy and, 1276
Pyeloplasty, 605
Pyloroplasty, 799
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 1111, 1112f
Pyonephrosis, 604
Pyopneumothorax, 495
Pyramidal gait, 1143–1144
Pyrantel pamoate, 125
Pyrazinamide
as antimycobacterial agents, 121
for tuberculous meningitis, 1174–1175
Pyrexia of unknown origin, 264–268
aetiology of, 266b
clinical assessment of, 264
investigations of, 264–265, 267b
prognosis of, 265
Pyridostigmine, 1195
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 777
Pyrimethamine
malaria, 322
toxoplasmosis, 326
HIV-related, 362–363
Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine, 124
Pyrimidine 5’ nucleotidase deciency, 958
Pyrin, 76
Pyrophosphate arthritis, 1001b
Pyruvate kinase deciency, 958
Pyuria, sterile, 602
Q
Q fever, 276b, 318
endocarditis, 318, 463
Qualitative abnormalities, 959–960
Quality of life, 206b
Quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), 28, 28b
Quantitative abnormalities, 959–960
Quantitative sensory testing, for pain, 160, 
160f
Questions, medical interview, 275b
Quetiapine
bipolar disorder, 1254
delirium, 213
Quinagolide, prolactinoma, 697
Quincke’s sign, 460b
Quinidine
arrhythmias, 419
malaria, 323b
and neutropenia, 936b
poisoning, 225b
Quinine
babesiosis, 323–324
lichenoid eruptions, 1103
for malaria, 124
poisoning, 229b
Quinoline-containing compounds, 124
Quinolones, 119, 119b. See also
Fluoroquinolones
adverse effects of, 119
drug eruptions, 1116b
mechanism of action, 113b
in old age, 117b
pharmacokinetics of, 119
in pregnancy, 117
R
RA. See Rheumatoid arthritis
Rabies, 1176–1177, 1176b
incubation period, 108b, 276b
prophylaxis for
post-exposure, 1177
pre-exposure, 1177
vaccination, 112b, 1177
Radial nerve, entrapment, 1193b
Radial pulse, 469
examination of, in respiratory system, 480
Radiation(s)
infrared, 1075f
mutagenic effects, 134b
pneumonitis, 540
ultraviolet. See Ultraviolet radiation
Radiation enteropathy, 823–824, 823b
Radicular pain, 1004b, 1005f
Radiculography, 1130b
Radiculopathy, 304, 1191, 1194
cervical, 1187–1188, 1188f
HIV-related, 363
Radioactive iodine, for Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, 
661b, 662
Radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 82
Radio-femoral delay, 386
Radiofrequency ablation
arrhythmias, 421b, 423f
cardiovascular disease, 423–424
GORD, 808
liver metastases, 143
renal cell cancer, 607
Radiography. See X-rays
Radioiodine
multinodular goitre, 665
thyrotoxicosis, 653–654, 661b, 662b
Radioisotope imaging. See Radionuclide 
(radioisotope) imaging
Radioisotope tests, gastroenterology, 795
Radionuclide (radioisotope) imaging
of cardiovascular system, 397
of nervous system, 1130b
Paget’s disease, 1057f
renal disease, 565–566, 566f
Radionuclide studies, renal disease, 565–566, 
566f
Radionuclide ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) 
scanning, pregnancy and, 1268
Radiotherapy, 145–146
for acromegaly, 699
blood disorders, multiple myeloma, 977
for brain tumours, 1184–1185
breast cancer, 150
for cancer pain, 170
fractionation, 145
hypothyroidism and, 1291
late effects, 963b
for lung cancer, 531
lung damage, 540
lung disease due to, 540
mesothelioma, 546
for multiple myeloma, 977
for oral cancer, 805
pain management, 162
palliative, 170
pituitary tumours, 696
for prolactinoma, 697
prostate cancer, 610
for skin disease, 1082
Radon, lung cancer and, 494b
Raloxifene, for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1053
Raltegravir, 116b
Ramadan, diabetes mellitus and, 733
Ramipril
heart failure, 407b
hypertension, 448
myocardial infarction, 439
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 282
Randomised controlled clinical trials, 28f
Ranitidine
and neutropenia, 936b
urticaria, 1104–1105
RANKL. See Receptor activator of nuclear 
factor κB ligand
Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), 
immunochromatographic, 322
Rapid immunochromatographic tests, 306
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR), 378
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, 571
diseases typically presenting with, 575–576
Rare inherited bleeding disorders, 984
Rare interstitial lung diseases, 541b
Rasagiline, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Rashes, 1071, 1071b
atopic eczema, 1071b, 1098b
buttery (malar), 990–992
in chickenpox, 282
clinical features, 1071b
dengue, 287
dermatitis herpetiformis, 821
distribution, 1071b
drug eruption, 358, 1071b
erythema migrans, 304f
in fever, 264
genital, 373–374, 373b
haemorrhagic, 317b
hand, foot and mouth disease, 291
herpes simplex, 291f
HIV-related, 358
infectious mononucleosis, 286f
lichen planus, 373b, 1071b
Lyme borreliosis (disease), 304f
macular/maculopapular, 317b
morbilliform, 317b
parvovirus B19, 281f
petechiae, 938, 938f
photosensitivity, 1074f
pityriasis rosea, 1071b

[[p1420]]
INDEX    1349
pityriasis versicolor, 1071b
post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis, 329f
psoriasiform, 1116b
psoriasis, 1071b
purpura. See Purpura
rheumatic fever, 452
in rubella infection, 278b
scaly, 1071b
scarlet fever, 302f
shingles, 283f
syphilis, 1071b
of systemic lupus erythematosus, 1039f
tinea corporis, 1071b
tropical diseases, 278b
typhoid, 308
typhus, 317–318
urticarial, 1104f
RAST (radioallergosorbent test), 82
Rat bite fever, 279f
Raynaud’s phenomenon
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 
1038–1039, 1039f
in systemic sclerosis, 1041
Raynaud’s syndrome, 442
RBBB. See Right bundle branch block
RB-ILD. See Respiratory bronchiolitis-
interstitial lung disease
RCA. See Right coronary artery
Reactive arthritis, 1035–1036
Reactive disorders, 1114–1115
‘Ready Steady Go’ programme, 1283
Reassurance, somatoform disorders and, 
1257
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve, 5f
Receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand, 
in bone remodelling, 994b
Receptors
B-cell, 65–66, 66f
drugs acting on, 15b
in pain processing, 158b
Recombinant human DNAse, cystic brosis, 
512b
Recombinant human erythropoietin, chronic 
renal failure, 592
Recombination, 41
Rectal administration, 17
Rectal examination, 783b
prostate, 600, 608
Rectum, 789f. See also Colorectal cancer
dysfunction of, 1149
Red cell enzymopathies, 957–958
Red cell membrane
defect, 956–957
structure, 925–926, 926f
Red cells, 924–927, 925f, 926f
anaemia, 951f
appearance of, 931b, 931f
blood lm examination, 931f
concentrate, 940b
count, 1314b
destruction of, 926–927
effects of malaria, 320
enzymopathies, 957–958
formation, 925–926, 925f
fragments, 931f
haemoglobin and, 926, 926f
haemolytic anaemia, 955b, 955f
incompatibility, in blood transfusion, 
940–942
lifespan, 1314b
membrane defects, 956–957
nucleated, 931f
sickled. See Sickle-cell anaemia
transfusion, (in)compatibility, 940–942
Red eye, 1223, 1224f
Red hepatisation, 513
‘Red man’ reaction, 97
5α-Reductase inhibitors, 610
Reduviid bugs, 325
Re-entry, 408
Reference range, 3, 4f
Reex(es)
cough, 489
stretch, 1126
tendon, root values of, 1121b
Reex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), 166
Reux
bile, 816
duodenogastro-oesophageal, 807
gastro-oesophageal, 806–809, 806f
Reux nephropathy, 605–606
Refractory hypertension, 450–451
Regenerative medicine, for genetic disease, 56
Regurgitation, 796
aortic, 387b, 458–460, 460b, 461f
causes, 460b
chest X-ray for, 394f
clinical features of, 459–460, 460b, 461f
investigations of, 460, 461b
mitral, 455–457, 455b, 456f
clinical features of, 456b, 457f
investigation of, 457b
management of, 457
pulmonary, 462, 462b
tricuspid, 461, 461b
Rehabilitation
for acute coronary syndrome, 439
myocardial infarction, 439
in older people, 1301, 1301f
schizophrenia, 1252–1253
for somatoform disorders, 1257
Rehydration. See Fluid replacement
Reiter’s disease/syndrome. See Reactive 
arthritis
Relapsing fevers
louse-borne, 304b, 305, 305f
tick-borne, 304b, 305
Relapsing polychondritis, 1047
Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), 
1148b, 1226f
Relative erythrocytosis, 935b
REM sleep behaviour disorder, 1160
Remdesivir, 124
Remifentanil, 213b
Renal. See Kidney
Renal allograft dysfunction, common causes 
of, 598b
Renal arteriography/venography, 565
Renal artery stenosis, 580–581, 581b, 581f
Renal biopsy, 566–571, 566b
Renal cell cancer, 606, 607f
Renal colic, 567
Renal dialysis. See Dialysis, renal
Renal disease. See also Nephropathy
in adolescence, 597, 598b
atheroembolic, 565b
chronic, 588–593
pruritus, 588
stages, 564b
in connective tissue disease
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 1046
cystic, 579
adult polycystic kidney, 579–580
medullary, 578
drug-induced, 597–598, 599b
genetic, 577–580
glomerular, 571–576
HIV-related, 364
infections, 599–602
investigation of, 562–566
in pregnancy, 597, 598b, 1276–1277
acute kidney injury as, 1276, 1277b
chronic kidney disease as, 1277, 1277f
glomerular disease and, 1276–1277
renal replacement therapy for, 1277
renal tract infection as, 1276
for prescribing patients with, 31, 598
presenting problems in, 566–571
signs, 589f
transition medicine and, 1291–1292
tubulo-interstitial, 576–577
vascular, 580–583
Renal failure
acute. See Acute kidney injury
bleeding, 985
chronic, 588–593, 590b
causes of, 588b
haemodialysis in, 594–595
indications for dialysis for, 595b
osteodystrophy and, 592f
physical signs of, 589f
pregnancy and, 1277, 1277f
staging of, in children over 2 years of 
age, 1292b
transition medicine and, 1291–1292
cystic disease. See Renal disease, cystic
heart failure causing, 404
pruritus and, 1073b
pyelonephritis. See Pyelonephritis
Renal impairment, causes of, in childhood and 
adolescence, 1292b
Renal infarction, acute, 581–582
Renal osteodystrophy, biochemical 
abnormalities in, 998b
Renal pelvis, 560
obstruction, 565f
pyelonephritis, 602
stone in, 602
tumours, 607
Renal replacement therapy (RRT), 212, 
593–597, 594f
for acute kidney injury, 587–588
in old age, 595b
percentage survival in, 594f
pregnancy and, 1277
preparing for, 593
Renal stones, 602
composition of, 602b
investigations for, 603b
Renal support, in intensive care, 212
Renal tract infection, pregnancy and, 1276
Renal transplantation, recipients of, pregnancy 
and, 1277
Renal tubular acidosis, 579, 631, 632b
Renal tubules, 560
collecting ducts, 560, 619
distal, 619, 619f
loop of Henle, 560, 618–619
proximal, 617–618
Renal ultrasound, acute kidney injury and, 
589b
Renin, 619
Renin activity, 679
Renin concentration, reference range of, 
1311b
Renin-angiotensin blockade, for acute 
coronary syndrome, 439
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 628
hypertension, 446
hypokalaemia, 628
Repeat prescriptions, 34
Repeated dose regimens, 18–19
Reperfusion therapy, for acute coronary 
syndrome, 438
replacement, 462
Replacement therapy, for amenorrhoea, 670
Replicative immortality, 131
Reproductive disease
classication of, 668b
presenting problems in, 668–673
Reproductive system, 667–675
classication of diseases of, 668b
female, 667–668, 668f
functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations of, 667–668, 667f, 
668f
Klinefelter syndrome in, 674–675
male, 667–668, 667f
polycystic ovarian syndrome in, 673–674, 
674f
Turner syndrome in, 674, 675f
Resection, hepatic, for hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 902
Residual volume (RV), 489b
Resin
bile acid-sequestering, 641
ion-exchange, 629–630, 630b
Respiration. See also Breathing
haemodynamic effects of, 391, 391b
Kussmaul, 588
Respiratory acidosis, 633
Respiratory alkalosis, 633
Respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung 
disease (RB-ILD), 535b
Respiratory burst, 62
Respiratory chain complexes, 49b
Respiratory disease, 489–499
breathlessness in, 489–492, 490f, 491b
caused by fungi, 525–528, 525b
chest pain in, 492
cough in, 489, 490b
drug-induced, 540–541, 540b
nger clubbing in, 492, 492b, 492f
haemoptysis in, 492–493, 493b, 493f
HIV-related, 360–362, 361b
investigation of, 484–489
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pleural effusion in, 494–496, 496b, 497b
pregnancy and, 1271
pulmonary nodule in, 493–494, 493b, 493f, 
494b, 495f
respiratory failure in, 496–499, 498b
transition medicine and, 1290–1291
cystic brosis in, 1290–1291
tumours, 528–533
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute. See 
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Respiratory failure, 496–499
acute, management of, 497–498
chronic and ’acute on chronic’ type II, 
498–499
management of, 498–499, 499b
pathophysiology of, 496–498, 498b
Respiratory function
in old age, 484b
testing, 487–489, 488f
airway obstruction, measurement of, 
487–488
arterial blood gases and oximetry, 
488, 489f
in asthma, 489b
in chronic bronchitis, 489b
in emphysema, 489b
exercise tests, 488–489
lung volumes, 488
in pulmonary brosis, 489b
transfer factor, 488
Respiratory infections, 512–528
cystic brosis, 510–512
fungal, 525–528
in old age, 512b
pneumonia, 512–518
pregnancy and, 1271
bacterial, 1271
viral, 1271
tuberculosis (TB), 518–525
upper respiratory tract infection, 512
Respiratory medicine, 479
Respiratory support, in intensive care, 
207–210
advanced, 208
extracorporeal, 208–210
intubation and intermittent positive pressure 
ventilation, 207–208
non-invasive, 207
weaning from, 213–214
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), 292
Respiratory system
clinical examination of, 480–482
cold environment and, 252
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
482–484, 482f, 483f
high altitude and, 256, 256f
infections. See Respiratory infections
in old age, 484b
pregnancy and, 1267
tumours, 528–533
Response evaluation criteria in solid tumours 
(RECIST), 148b
Restless legs syndrome, 1160, 1160b
Restraint, for aggressive behaviour, 1242
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, 475
Resuscitation
for gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 798
hypothermia and, 253
initial, 210, 210b
for poisoning, 222
in sepsis, 200, 200b
Resynchronisation devices, 408
heart failure, 408f
Resynchronisation therapy, cardiac, 408f, 423
Reteplase, 438
Reticulocytes, 924–925
reference range of, 1314b
Retina, 1221
clinical manifestations of visual eld loss, 
1225b
Retinal artery occlusion, 1232–1233, 1233f
Retinal haemorrhage. See Diabetic retinopathy
Retinal pigment epithelium, congenital 
hypertrophy, 831
Retinal vascular occlusion, 1232–1233
Retinal vein occlusion (thrombosis), 1232, 
1232f
Retinitis
cytomegalovirus, 262f
HIV-related, 364
Retinitis pigmentosa, 824
Retinoblastoma, 135b
Retinochoroiditis, due to toxoplasmosis, 
326, 326f
Retinoids
hyperlipidaemia, 638b
hypertriglyceridaemia, 638
phototherapy and photochemotherapy, 
1079–1080
for skin disease, 1080
squamous cell carcinoma, 1084
Retinopathy, 138b
of anaemia, ophthalmic features of, 1218b
Rashes (Continued)

[[p1421]]
1350     INDEX
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
HIV-related, 364
hypertensive, 447, 447b
pregnancy and, 1272
of prematurity, in adolescents, 1230b
Retroperitoneal brosis, 606
drug-induced, 599b
Retroviruses, 99
Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC), in 
post cardiac arrest, 205, 206b
Reverse transcriptase, 353–354
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
non-nucleoside, 358, 366b
nucleoside, 366b
Reversibility test, 501f
Revised International Prognostic Scoring 
System (IPSS-R), in myelodysplasia, 
971b
Rhabdomyolysis, 629
diagnosis and management of, 198
Rhesus D blood group, 942, 942b
Rhesus disease, pregnancy and, 1278
Rheumatic fever, 451–453, 452f
investigations in, 453b
Jones criteria for, 452b
prophylactic, 116b
Rheumatic heart disease, 451–453
chronic, 453
Rheumatoid arthritis, ophthalmic features of, 
1220b
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 1027–1032
clinical features of, 1027–1030, 1029f
cardiac involvement in, 1029
extra-articular, 1029b
nodules in, 1029, 1029f
ocular involvement in, 1029
peripheral neuropathy in, 1030
pulmonary involvement in, 1029
serositis in, 1029
spinal cord compression in, 1030, 1030f
systemic, 1028–1029
vasculitis in, 1029
criteria for diagnosis of, 1028b
investigations in, 1030, 1030b, 1031f
management of, 1030–1032
algorithm for, 1031f
non-pharmacological therapy for, 1031
surgery for, 1031
pathophysiology of, 1027–1032, 1028f
in pregnancy, 1031b, 1274
Rheumatoid disease
pleural effusion, 497b, 538
respiratory involvement in, 538–539, 539f
Rheumatoid factor (RF), in musculoskeletal 
disease, 998, 998b
Rheumatoid nodules, 1029, 1029f
Rheumatological/musculoskeletal disease
diabetes mellitus and, 747b
HIV-related, 364
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Rheumatology, 989. See also Musculoskeletal 
disease
Rheumatology and bone disease, transition 
medicine and, 1293
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis in, 
1293
hypophosphataemic rickets in, 1293
juvenile idiopathic arthritis in, 1293
osteogenesis imperfecta in, 1293
Rhinitis, allergic, 550
Rhinocladiella mackenziei, 344
Rhinosinusitis, 512
Rhinoviruses, 292
Rhizomucor spp., 345–346
Rhizopus spp., 345–346
Rhodesiense infections, 324
Rhodesiense trypanosomiasis, 324–325
Rhodococcus equi, 362
Rib fracture, 553b
Ribavirin, 124
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 289
Riboavin (vitamin B2), 776
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
degradation of, 39
editing of, 39
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), 38
microRNA (miRNA), 40
non-coding, 40
ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 40
splicing of, 39
synthesis of, 39
transfer RNA (tRNA), 40
Ribosomes, 39
Ribozymes, 40
Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS), 
213, 213b
Rickets, 1055
causes of, 1053b
hypophosphataemic, 998b
hereditary, 1056
transition medicine and, 1293
vitamin D-resistant, 1055–1056
Rickettsial fevers, 316–318, 317b
Riedel’s thyroiditis, 666
Rifampicin, 114b
as antimycobacterial agents, 121
drug interactions of, 24
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
infective endocarditis, 466b
for leprosy, 315
meningitis, 1173b
pneumonia, 516b
prophylactic, 116b
Q fever, 318
for tuberculosis, 523
Rifamycin, mechanism of action, 113b
Rift Valley fever, 289b
Right atrial pressure, in critically ill patients, 
211f
Right bundle branch block (RBBB),  
412f
Right coronary artery (RCA), 388, 389f
Right ventricle, 388f
Right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 
arrhythmogenic, 396, 473f
Right ventricular dilatation, 394
Rigidity
cogwheel, 1126
lead pipe, 1126
Parkinson’s disease, 1141
tetanus, 1180
Rigors, 263b
Riluzole, 1171
Rimantadine, 124
Ringer’s lactate, 312
Risedronate
for osteoporosis, 1051b
for Paget’s disease, 1057b
Risk
attributable, 93b
factors underlying disease, 88–89
global burden of disease and underlying 
factors, 88–89
relative, 93b
Risperidone
bipolar disorder, 1254
schizophrenia, 1252b
Risus sardonicus, 1180
Rituximab, for musculoskeletal disease, 1013, 
1013b
Rivastigmine, for Parkinson’s disease, 
1166–1167
River blindness, 336–337
RNA
degradation of, 39
editing of, 39
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), 38
microRNA (miRNA), 40
non-coding, 40
ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 40
splicing, editing and degradation, 39
splicing of, 39
synthesis, 39
transfer, 40
RNA polymerase, 38
Robertsonian translocation, 44f
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 317, 317b
Rodent ulcer, 1083
Rodenticide poisoning, 234
Romaña’s sign, 325
Ropinirole, Parkinson’s disease, 1167b
Rosacea, 1074b, 1094–1096, 1095f
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Roseola infantum, 281
Ross River virus, 299
Rotator cuff lesions, 1005b
Rotavirus, 292
Rotigotine, Parkinson’s disease, 1167b
Rotor syndrome, 872b
Roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), 334
RPGN. See Rapidly progressive 
glomerulonephritis
RSV. See Respiratory syncytial virus
RTA. See Renal tubular acidosis
Rubber allergy, 1099b
Rubella infection
clinical features of, 279
congenital malformation and, 281b
diagnosis of, 279–280
incubation period, 108b
periods of infectivity, 108b
in pregnancy, 280b
prevention of, 280
Russell’s sign, 1258
RV. See Residual volume
Ryanodine receptor channelopathies, 1198b
S
Sabin-Feldman dye test, 326
Saccades, 1146
Sacroiliitis, 1034f
and axial spondyloarthropathies, 1033b
and brucellosis, 303f
and inammatory bowel disease, 840f
polyarthritis and, 1002f
Salbutamol
asthma, 504
drug interactions, 23b
scombrotoxic sh poisoning, 237
Salicylates (aspirin)
overdose, 225–226
poisoning from, 224–226
Salicylic acid, actinic keratosis, 1083b
Saline, 621b
abdominal compartment syndrome, 198
hyperkalaemia, 629–630
hyperphosphataemia, 635
hyponatraemia, 625
hypovolaemia, 620
metabolic alkalosis, 633
Salivary glands
disease of, 805–806
enlargement, 1042b
Salmonella
food poisoning/gastroenteritis, 310
HIV/AIDS patients, 365
Salmonella enteritidis, 310
Salmonella paratyphi, 272–273
Salmonella spp. infection, 310
Salmonella typhi, 114b
Salmonella typhimurium, 310
Salmonellosis, 276b
Salt-losing nephropathy, 577
‘Salt-wasting’ disease, 591
Sand ea, 342
Sandies, 327
bartonellosis, 318
leishmaniasis, 327
Sanger, Fred, 50–51
Sanger sequencing, 50–51, 52f
Saphenous vein grafts, 431f
Sarcoidosis, 537–538, 537f, 583–584, 1113, 
1191b
clinical features of, 537–538, 537f, 538b
investigations of, 538, 538b
management of, 538
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
Sarcoma. See also Kaposi’s sarcoma
Ewing’s, 1059
Sarcomere, cardiac, 390
Sarcoptes scabiei, 1093
SARS-CoV-2, 266, 293, 294f, 295b
clinical features of, 266, 296b
infection prevention and control in health-
care settings, 266
investigations of, 266, 297f
management of, 266
public health measures of, 266
responses to control, 266
vaccination for, 266, 298b
Saxophone player’s lung, 544b
SBAR system, of communication, 9, 10b
SBP. See Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Scabies, 1093, 1093f
HIV/AIDS, 370
pruritus, 1072b
Scalp
head lice, 1093
psoriasis, 1099–1102
tinea capitis, 1092–1093, 1092f
Scarlet fever
incubation period, 108b
period of infectivity, 108b
streptococcal, 301, 302f
Scars, denition, 1078–1079
Scedosporium apiospermum, 344
SCF. See Stem cell factor
‘Schatzki ring,’ 809
Scheuermann’s osteochondritis, 1058
Schistosoma, life cycle of, 338, 339f
Schistosoma haematobium, 338–339, 339f, 
340f
Schistosoma intercalatum, 340
Schistosoma japonicum, 340
Schistosoma mansoni, 339–340, 339f
Schistosoma mekongi, 340
Schistosomiasis, 278b, 338–340, 1191b
clinical features of, 338–340, 339b
investigations of, 340
management of, 340
pathology of, 338
prevention of, 340
Schizoaffective disorder, 1254
differential diagnosis of, 1251b
Schizophrenia, 1251–1253
acute, 1251
clinical features of, 1251
diagnosis of, 1251–1252
differential diagnosis of, 1251b
investigations of, 1252
management of, 1252–1253
pathogenesis of, 1251–1253
prevalence of, 1236b
prognosis of, 1253
symptoms of, 1251b
auditory hallucinations as, 1241
thought disorder as, 1237
Schmidt syndrome, 701b
Schöber’s test, 991–992
Schwann cells, 1122–1123
Sciatica, 1188
Scintigraphy. See also Radionuclide 
(radioisotope) imaging
bone, in musculoskeletal disease, 996
meta-iodobenzyl guanidine, 689
octreotide, 692f
of thyroid gland, 656f, 660
SCLE. See Subacute cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus
Sclera/cornea, 1219
Scleritis, 1227
Scleroderma. See Systemic sclerosis
Sclerosing bone dysplasias, 1059
Sclerosing cholangitis
primary, 899–901, 900f, 901f
diseases associated with, 900b
liver function test (LFT) abnormality 
in, 867b
magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatogram of, 900f
primary biliary cholangitis and, 911
secondary, 900b
Sclerosis, systemic. See Systemic sclerosis
Sclerostin, in bone remodelling, 994b
Sclerotherapy, for variceal bleeding, 883
Sclerotic bodies, 344
Scoliosis, 1062
Scombrotoxic sh poisoning, 237
Scorpions, envenomation of, 249
Scotoma, 1150
Screening
aortic aneurysm, 443
breast cancer, 137b
for chronic liver disease, 867b
ciliary dysfunction syndromes, 510
coagulation, 932b
cystic brosis, 510
diabetes mellitus, 1272
genetic, 56
gestational diabetes, 1272
for hepatocellular carcinoma, 902
microalbuminuria, 569–570
principles of, 90–91
Scrub typhus fever, 317–318, 317b
Scurvy, 777, 778b, 778f, 980
Sebaceous glands, 1066
Seborrhoeic dermatitis, HIV-related, 357
Seborrhoeic eczema, 1098
Seborrhoeic warts, 1087
Secondary aplastic anaemia, 979, 979b
Secondary disease, in endocrinology, 650
Secondary drowning, 257
Secondary granules, 61
Secondary headache syndromes, 186b
Secondary osteoporosis, 1049–1053
Secretin, 790b
Secukinumab, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1013b
Sedation
for aggressive behaviour, 1243
in intensive care, 212–213, 213b
Retinopathy (Continued)

[[p1422]]
INDEX    1351
Sedatives, misuse of, 1250–1251
75SeHCAT test, 795b
Seizures
brain tumour and, 1183
pregnancy and, 1269, 1270b
stroke and, 1206
syncope versus, 186b
types of, 1153–1154, 1153b
absence, 1154
atonic, 1154
clonic, 1154
focal, 1153, 1154b
generalised, 1154
myoclonic, 1154
tonic, 1154
tonic-clonic, 1154, 1154b
Selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs), poisoning, 227
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 1253b, 1254
poisoning from, 227
Selectivity, 14
Selegiline, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Selenium, 651–652, 779, 779b
for Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 662–663
Selenium sulphide shampoo, 357
Self-harm
in old age, 1240b
patient assessment of, 1244b, 1244f
Self-help and coping strategies, for 
musculoskeletal disease, 1008, 
1008b
Self-injectable adrenaline (epinephrine), 184b
Seminoma, 611
Senescence. See also Age/ageing; Older 
people
immune, 75–76, 77b
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, for variceal 
bleeding, 884f
Sensitisation, 157–158
Sensor-augmented CSII therapy, 741–742, 
741f, 742f
Sensory cortex, 1121
Sensory disturbances, 1140–1141
diabetes. See Diabetic neuropathy
Sensory loss, pattern of, 1141f
Sensory neurons, 156
Sentinel pile, 835
Sepsis, 198–201, 271–272, 271b
acute kidney injury and, 585
cardiomyopathy and, 201
coagulation system and, activation of, 199
denition of, 199b
during dialysis, 597b
lactate and, 199
meningococcal, 1172b
mimics of, 201b
organ damage from, 199, 199f
resuscitation in, 200, 200b
skin and soft tissue infections causing, 
271–272
Septic arthritis, 1025–1027
emergency management of, 1025b
Septic shock, 68, 199b, 210b
Septicaemic plague, 307
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment tool, 218
Sequestration crisis, 960
‘Seroconversion,’ 105
Serological tests, for respiratory disease, 487
Serology
for gastrointestinal infection, 793
for hepatitis B, 886, 888b
for hepatitis C, 889
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies, 
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Serositis, in rheumatoid arthritis, 1029
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), 163b, 
171f
excess in irritable bowel syndrome, 
847–848
Serotonin selective (specic) re-uptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs), 1253b, 1254
Serotonin syndrome, 1254
Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs), 227
Serratia spp., 100f
Sertraline, 1253b
Serum sickness
antivenom, 248
diphtheria antitoxin, 313
schistosomiasis, 339b
Severe combined immune deciency, 75
X-linked, 75
Severe idiopathic constipation, 833
Sex, HIV infection/AIDS and, 365
Sex chromosomes, 38. See also X 
chromosome; Y chromosome
Sex hormone replacement therapy. See also 
Hormone replacement therapy
for hypopituitarism, 695
Sex hormones See individual hormones
Sexual activity, headache and, 1151
Sexual disturbance, 1147–1149
Sexual dysfunction, 1163. See also Erectile 
dysfunction
Sexually acquired reactive arthropathy, 380
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), 369
aetiology of, 372
in children, 372
clinical assessment of, 372
clinical examination of, 370–372
contact tracing for, 376–377
epidemiology of, 375–376
history-taking for, 371b, 372b
identifying, 371b
investigations of, 371b
management goals of, 376b
men who have sex with men, 371b
during pregnancy, 372
presenting problems of, 372–375
prevention of, 376–377, 376b
sexual health and gender identity, 371b
those at particular risk, 371b
viral, 380–383
Sézary syndrome, 1077
Shallow-water blackout, 259
Shampoo, selenium sulphide, 357
Shared decision-making, 9, 11
Shave excision, for skin disease, 1082
Sheehan syndrome, pregnancy and, 1273
Shellsh poisoning, paralytic, 236–237
Sheltered employment, 1253
Shiga-like toxin, 582
Shigella
diarrhoea, 272–273, 275
dysentery/shigellosis, 312
Shigellosis, 312
Shingles. See Herpes zoster
Shivering, 253f
Shock
anaphylactic, 210b
cardiogenic, 202, 210b
causes of, 203f
downward spiral of, 202, 203f
clinical features of, 182b
hypotension and, 195, 196b
hypovolaemic, 210b
neurogenic, 210b
obstructive, 210b
septic, 68, 199b, 210b
Short bowel syndrome, 823. See also 
Intestinal failure
Short stature. See also Growth retardation
in Turner syndrome, 674
Shoulder, pain, 1005, 1005b, 1005f
Shrinking lungs, 539, 539b
Shunts
Blalock-Taussig, 471–472
intracardiac, 396, 400
left-to-right, 394
persistent ductus arteriosus, 468
portosystemic, for variceal bleeding, 884
TIPSS
for ascites, 877
for variceal bleeding, 883
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
stent
for ascites, 877
for variceal bleeding, 883, 884f
SI units, 1310
SIADH. See Syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of ADH
Siberian tick typhus, 317b
Sick euthyroidism, 659
Sick sinus syndrome, 409–410, 410b, 410f
Sickle chest syndrome, 960
Sickle-cell anaemia, 960–962
clinical features of, 960, 961f
epidemiology of, 960–962, 960f
investigations of, 960–961
management of, 961
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
pathogenesis of, 960
in pregnancy, 961b
prognosis of, 962
Sickle-cell nephropathy, 584
Side-effect, denition of, 19
Siderosis, 542–544, 543b
Sigmoidoscopy, 793
amoebiasis, 332
Clostridium difcile infection, 311
familial adenomatous polyposis, 832
for inammatory bowel disease, 838b
radiation enteropathy, 823
schistosomiasis, 340
ulcerative colitis, 838b
Sildenal, 611
Silicosis, 542–543, 543f
Silicotuberculosis, 543
Simple aspergilloma, 526, 526f
Simple diffuse goitre, 664
Simple tandem repeat mutations, 41, 43b
Simulium spp., onchocerciasis, 336
Simvastatin, timing, 31b
Sinemet, 1167
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 
52–53
Single photon emission tomography (SPECT), 
1130
Sinoatrial disease, 410b, 410f, 414b
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 389, 389f
Sinus arrhythmia, 409
Sinus bradycardia, 409
Sinus tachycardia, 409, 409b
Sinusitis. See Rhinosinusitis
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, 910
Sipple syndrome, 700b
SIRS (systemic inammatory response 
syndrome), pancreatitis, 851b
Sister Joseph’s nodule, 818
Sitosterolaemia, 639, 639b
Sixth disease, 281
Sjögren syndrome, 1042, 1042b, 1226–1227
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
Skeletal muscle, 995
Skin
blood vessels and nerves in, 1067–1068
changes in old age, 1068b
of envenomed patient, 240
epidermal appendages of, 1066–1067
examination of
cancer, 129
endocrine disease, 648f
gastrointestinal disease, 782f
function of, 1068, 1068b
functional anatomy and physiology of, 
1066–1068
imaging, 1069
immunobullous disease of, 1106–1108, 
1106b
infestations, 1088–1094
inammatory arthritis in, 1001b
lichenoid eruptions in, 1103
microbiology of, 1069
as physical barrier, 60
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 1039f
systemic sclerosis in, 1041, 1041f
Skin cancer, 1082. See also names of specic 
tumours
non-melanoma, 1083b
pathogenesis, 1082–1083
Skin complications, diabetes mellitus and, 
747b
Skin disease
abnormal pigmentations in, 1077
acute skin failure in, 1077–1078
clinical examination in, 1064–1066
in general medicine, 1111–1112, 1112b
investigation of, 1068–1069
management of, 1078–1082
nail involvement in, 1111
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
phototherapy and photochemotherapy for, 
1079–1080
pigmentation disorders as, 1108–1109
presenting problems in, 1069–1078
terminology in, 1065
treatment of
non-surgical, 1082
surgery for, 1081–1082
systemic, 1080–1081
topical, 1078–1079, 1078b
Skin infections, 1088–1094
bacterial, 1088–1091
fungal, 1092–1093, 1092f
mycobacterial, 1090
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
tropical, 277–278, 278b, 279f
viral, 1091–1092
Skin lesions, 452
benign, 1087–1088
Skin snips, 278b
Skin tags. See Acrochordon
Skin test
asthma, 541
patch tests, 1069
prick tests, 81, 1069
tuberculin, 523, 524f
Skin tumours, 1082–1088
malignant, 1083–1087
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
pathogenesis of, 1082–1083
Skin-prick tests, for allergy, 81
Slapped cheek syndrome, 280–281, 281f
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sleep, 1129
Sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome, 550–551
aetiology of, 550
clinical features of, 550
investigations of, 550–551, 551b, 551f
management of, 551
Sleep disorders, 1159–1160
Sleep disturbance, 1149
Sleep paralysis, 1149
Sleep-disordered breathing, 550–552
Sleepiness. See also Hypersomnolence
Epworth scale, 551b, 1159
persistent, differential diagnosis, 551b
Sleeping sickness, 324–325, 324f. See also
African trypanosomiasis
Small interfering RNA (siRNA), 26b
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, 821–822, 
822b
Small intestine
diseases/disorders of, 819–826
functional anatomy of, 785–788, 785f
infections of, 825
miscellaneous disorders of, 824–825
motility disorders, 825–826
protective function of, 785–788
tumours of, 825
ulceration of, 824, 824b
Small molecule targeted therapies, 945
Small-bowel diarrhoea, HIV-related, 360, 
360b, 360f
Smallpox (variola), 291
Small-vessel vasculitis, 583
Smell, disturbance of, 1145
Smith-Magenis syndrome, genetics, 44b
Smoking
atherosclerosis risk, 425
and autoimmune disease, 78
cannabis, 230
and cardiovascular risk, 592
cocaine, 230
effects on health, 90
familial hypercholesterolaemia, 639b
heart failure and, 406b
lung cancer and, 133
in older people, 1298
peptic ulcer and, 814
urinary incontinence, 608
Smoking cessation
acute coronary syndrome and, 439
in Graves’ ophthalmopathy, 662–663
Snail track ulcers, 377
Snake bites, 222
Snakes, geographical distribution of, 241f
Snoring, 550
SNPs. See Single nucleotide polymorphisms
Social assessment, 1297b
Social deprivation, atherosclerosis risk, 426
Social isolation, psychiatric disorders and, 1240
Social problems, alcohol misuse and, 1249
Social worker, 1301b
Sodium, 617b, 779b. See also
Hypernatraemia; Hyponatraemia
channelopathies, 1198b
depletion, 617
excess, 621b, 621f
homeostasis, 617–623
intake, chronic renal failure, 591
potassium and magnesium, 780
presenting problems of, 619–623
in primary hyperaldosteronism, 687
reabsorption, 560
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1310b
restriction of, for ascites, 876
retention of, 571, 877b
transport, 619, 619f

[[p1423]]
1352     INDEX
Sodium bicarbonate
chronic kidney disease, 591
drug interactions, 23b
salicylate poisoning, 226
in urinary alkalinisation, 224
Sodium calcium edetate, 225b
Sodium chloride. See Saline
Sodium cromoglicate, for allergy, 82
Sodium ipodate, 655
Sodium nitroprusside
aortic dissection, 445
hypertension, 451
phaeochromocytoma, 689
Sodium phosphate, 634
Sodium stibogluconate, 124
Sodium valproate
bipolar disorder, 1254
cluster headache, 1151
for epilepsy, 1155b, 1157b, 1278
pregnancy, 1157, 1158b
neutropenia, 936b
poisoning, 229b
sodium retention and, 877b
status epilepticus, 1138b
Sodium-dependent glucose transporter 
inhibitors, for hypervolaemia, 622
Sodium-potassium pump, 617
SOFA score, 218b
Soft tissue infections, 271–272
necrotising, 272b
Soft tissue release, 1009b
Solar urticaria, 1074b
Solitary plasmacytomas, 977–978
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 834–835
Solvent inhalation, 1250
Somatic hypermutation, 65–66, 66f
Somatic mutations, 49
Somatic symptoms, medically unexplained, 
1240b, 1242–1243, 1243b, 1257b, 
1259f
Somatic syndromes, functional, 1243b
Somatisation disorder, 1256
Somatoform autonomic dysfunction, 1256
Somatoform disorders, 1256–1257
advice for, 1257
prevalence of, 1236b
Somatoform pain disorder, 1256
Somatosensory system, 1128f, 1129
Somatostatin, 785, 790b
Somatostatin analogues, for neuro-endocrine 
tumours (NETs), 691
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), 
795b
Somatostatinoma, 691b
Somnolence, idiopathic hypersomnolence, 
551
Sorbitol, 848
Sotalol, 227
for arrhythmias, 420
South American boty, 342
Space-occupying lesions, HIV-related, 
362–363
Sparganosis, 342
Spastic catch, 1126
Spasticity, 1126
Specialised receptors, 156
Spectinomycin, 114b, 118–119
Spectrophotometry, 616b
Spectroscopy (ICP-MS), 616b
Speech disturbance, stroke and, 1205
Speech therapy, for Parkinson’s disease, 1168
Speech/speech disorders, 1127f, 1128, 
1144–1145, 1144f
assessment of, in psychiatric interview, 
1237
Spermatogenesis, 667f
Spherocytes, 925–926, 931b, 931f
Spherocytosis, hereditary, 956
investigations of, 956, 957f
management of, 956, 957b
Sphincter
anal, 608
bladder, 560
control, 1129
urethral, 101, 608
Sphincter of Oddi, dysfunction of, 918–919
classication of, 919b
pancreatic, criteria for, 919b
Sphincterotomy, endoscopic, in old age, 919b
Sphygmomanometry, 447
Spider bites, 249
Spider naevi, 860
Spiders, envenomation of, 249
Spinal cord, 156, 1125
compression, 1189–1190, 1189b, 1190b, 
1190f
cancer and, 139–141, 140b, 140f
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1030, 1030f
disorders of, 1187–1191
intrinsic diseases of, 1190, 1191b,  
1192f
lesions, sensory loss, 1140
Spinal cord syndrome, 1190b
Spinal epidural abscess, 1175
Spinal muscular atrophy, 1171
Spinal root lesions, 1194
Spinal stenosis, 1189
Spine
assessment of, 991–992
bamboo, 1035f
cervical
imaging of, 1131, 1132f
myelopathy, 1188
radiculopathy, 1187–1188, 1188f
spondylosis, 1187–1188, 1188f
subluxation of, 1030f
disorders of, 1187–1191
lumbar, imaging of, 1131, 1132f
osteoarthritis, 1017, 1017f
thoracic, imaging of, 1131, 1132f
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 43b
Spinocerebellar ataxia, 43b, 1169b
Spiramycin, 326
Spirillum minus, 278b
Spirometry
asthma, 501
COPD, 506
Spironolactone
gynaecomastia, 672b
heart failure, 406
Spleen, 65
characteristics of, 923b
enlarged. See Splenomegaly
examination of, 923b
Splenomegaly, 937, 937b
Splice site mutations, 43f
Splicing, 39
Splinter haemorrhages, 1001b, 1110–1111
Spondylitis, psoriatic, 1036
Spondyloarthritides, 1032–1038, 1033b
Spondyloarthritis, axial, 1033–1035, 1033b, 
1034b, 1034f
Spondylolysis, 1062
Spondylosis
cervical, 1187–1188, 1188f
lumbar, 1188–1189
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 877
Spontaneous breathing trials, respiratory 
support and, 213
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia, 689–691
cause of, 690
clinical assessment of, 690
differential diagnosis of, 690f
investigations of, 690
management of, 690–691
Sporadic fatal insomnia, 1181b
Sporothrix schenckii, 344
Sporotrichosis, 344
Sporozoites, malaria, 320
Spreading depression of Leão, 1150
Spurious full blood count results, from 
autoanalysers, 930, 930b
Sputum, 480
cough, 489
haemoptysis, 492
investigations, 487
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 361
in pulmonary oedema, 480
pulmonary tuberculosis, 361
Squamous carcinoma, 810b
Squamous cell carcinoma, skin, 1083b, 1084, 
1084f
SRS. See Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
SSPE. See Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis
SSSS. See Staphylococcal scalded skin 
syndrome
St John’s wort, drug interactions, 23b
St Vitus dance, 452
Stable angina
advice to patients with, 429b
risk stratication in, 429b
Staging, in lung cancer, 530–531, 531f
Stamping gait, 1143
Stannosis, 542
Staphylococcal food poisoning, 309
Staphylococcal infections, 299–301, 300f
cannula-related, 300, 300b
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, 300–301
skin, 300
staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome, 
301, 301f
wound, 300, 300f
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, 1089, 
1089f
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome, 301, 
301f
Staphylococcus aureus, 102b, 114b, 299
bacteraemia, 270
blood-stream infection, 270f
bronchiectasis, 510
chronic granulomatous disease, 72
fever, 268, 269f
impetigo from, 1088
infections caused by, 300f
infective endocarditis, 463
meningitis, 1172b
pneumonia
bacterial, 361–362
community-acquired, 513b, 515b
skin infections, 300f
vancomycin-resistant, 300
Staphylococcus epidermis, 299
Staphylococcus intermedius, 299
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 299
Starches
hydrolysis, 786
resistant, 312
Stargardt disease, in adolescents, 1230b
Starling’s law, 402, 402f
STAT proteins, 62
Statins, 640
for acute coronary syndrome prevention, 438b
hepatotoxicity of, 905b
for hypertension, 450
Statistics, 9
Status epilepticus, 1137–1138, 1138b, 1158
Steady state, 19
Steatohepatitis, non-alcoholic, 897f
Steatorrhoea, pancreatitis, 854
Steatosis, 906
Stellate cells, 789
Stem cell factor, 924
Stem cells, 924, 925f
plasticity, 924
Stem-cell plasticity, 924
Stenosis
aortic, 387b, 457–458, 458b, 459f
causes of, 458b
Doppler echocardiography for, 395f
investigations of, 458, 459b, 459f
in old age, 460b
lumbar canal, 1189
mitral, 453–455, 454b, 454f
chest X-ray for, 394f
investigations in, 454f, 455b
pregnancy and, 1275
pulmonary, 461–462
renal artery, 580–581, 581b, 581f
spinal, 1189
tricuspid, 460–461
Stents/stenting
aortic dissection, 445
coronary, 430
angina, 430f
graft, 445f
for lung cancer, 531–532
myocardial infarction, 1276
pregnancy and, 1276
renal artery, 565
superior vena cava obstruction, 141
thrombosis, 432b
ureteric, 587
Sterile pyuria, 602
Steroid hormones, pathways of synthesis 
of, 680f
Steroids. See also Corticosteroids
anabolic, 83–84
synthesis, 680f
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 359, 1105
Still’s disease. See also Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
adult, 1044
Stimulant, misuse of, 1250
Stimulation therapies
for cancer pain, 170
for pain, 164–165, 165f
Stings. See also Envenomation
scorpion, 248
Stockings, compression, 568
‘Stokes-Adams’ attacks, 410
Stomach
emptying, 795
functional anatomy of, 784–785, 784f
outlet obstruction, 816, 816b
tumours of, 817–819
ulcer, 812–816
Stomatitis, herpetic, 291f
Stones. See Calculi (stones)
Stool cultures, 793
Stop codons, 40
Storage disorders, 938b
Stratum corneum, 1066
Strawberry tongue, 301, 302f
Streptococcal infections, 301–302, 301b
acute rheumatic fever, 452, 453b
in pregnancy, 280b
tics, 1143
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, 263, 
302
Streptococci, 100f
beta-haemolytic, 100f
group A, 301
group B, 301
Streptococcus anginosus, 101f
Streptococcus constellatus, 101f
Streptococcus intermedius, 101f
Streptococcus mitis, 462–463
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 65, 71b, 114b, 
313, 1271b
in community-acquired pneumonia, 513, 
513f
meningitis, 1172b, 1174b
sepsis, 271b
Streptococcus pyogenes, 101f, 114b
Streptococcus suis, 1172
bacterial meningitis, 1174b
Streptococcus viridans endocarditis, 576
Streptomycin
as antimycobacterial agents, 121
mycetoma, 344
plague, 307
tuberculosis, 93f
Stress
acute reaction, 1255
oxidative, 894f
post-traumatic stress disorder, 1256
Stress echocardiography, 395
Stress electrocardiography, 393
Stress fracture, 1002b
Stress incontinence, 608
in older people, 1306
Stressors, psychiatric disorders and, 1240
Stress-related disorders, 1255–1256
Stretch reex, 1126
Striae, denition of, 1079f
Strictures, endoscopic techniques for 
management. See Endoscopy
Stridor
aortic aneurysm, 443
bronchial obstruction, 529
connective tissue disorders, 539b
hypocalcaemia, 677
inspiratory, 497
laryngeal disorders, 552
tracheal disorders, 553
Stroke, 960, 1206–1214
atrial brillation and, 414–415, 415b
blood tests, 1210
clinical features, 1207–1208, 1208b, 1209f
heat, 254b
HIV-related, 363
investigations, 1208–1210, 1210b
cardiac, 1210
neuroimaging, 1206f, 1208f, 1209, 
1209f, 1210b
vascular imaging, 1210
management, 1211–1214, 1211f, 1212f
antiplatelet agents, 1211
blood pressure, 1211
carotid endarterectomy and arterial 
angioplasty, 1212
coagulation abnormalities, 1211
intracerebral haemorrhage causes of, 
1214
ischaemic stroke, causes of, 1214
rehabilitation, 1212–1214
reperfusion (thrombolysis and 
thrombectomy), 1211, 1211f, 1212f, 
1213f
of risk factors, 1211–1212, 1215b, 
1215f

[[p1424]]
INDEX    1353
supportive care, 1211, 1214b
migraine and, 1150
pathophysiology, 1206–1207
cerebral infarction, 1206–1207
intracerebral haemorrhage, 1207, 
1208b, 1208f
pregnancy and, 1278
risk factors for, 1207b
Stroke medicine, 1201
classication, 1204f
clinical examination, 1202–1204
functional anatomy and physiology, 1204, 
1205f, 1206f
general examination, 1203b
investigations, 1204–1205
blood tests, 1204–1205
brain imaging, 1204–1205, 1206f
cardiac investigations, 1205
lumbar puncture, 1205
vascular imaging, 1204, 1207f
presenting problems, 1205–1206
coma, 1206
headache, 1206
seizure, 1206
speech disturbance, 1205
visual decit, 1205
visuo-spatial dysfunction, 1205
weakness, 1205
rapid clinical assessment of suspected 
stroke, 1203b
Stroke volume, 390
pregnancy and, 1266
Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, 
271b, 334
Strongyloides stercoralis, 276b, 278b, 333, 
540
Strongyloidiasis, 278b, 333–334, 333b
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus 
(SCLE), 1112
Subacute invasive aspergillosis (SIA), 526
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), 
279, 1178
Subacute (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis, 663
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH), 
1214–1216
clinical features, 1214
investigations, 1215, 1215f
management, 1216
rehabilitation, 1216
Subclavian steal, 441
Subclinical hypothyroidism, 659
Subclinical thyrotoxicosis, 654, 654b, 659
Subclinical urethritis, 373b
Subcutaneous administration, 17
Subdural empyema, 1175
Sublingual administration, 17
Substance misuse, 1239b, 1240
prevalence of, 1236b
Substance misuse disorder, 1250–1251
Subtotal thyroidectomy, for Graves’ 
thyrotoxicosis, 661–662, 661b
Subtotal villous atrophy, important causes 
of, 820b
Subungual haematoma, in nails, 1111f
Succinate dehydrogenase, 49b
Sudden death, due to heart failure, 405
Suicide. See also Self-harm
anorexia nervosa, 1258
attempted, 1243
bipolar disorder, 1254
depression, 1253
low mood, 1241
old age, 1240b
risk factors for, 1243b
schizophrenia, 1253
Sulfadiazine
prophylactic, 116b
rheumatic fever, 453
toxoplasmosis, 326, 362–363
Sulfadoxine, and neutropenia, 936b
Sulfamethoxazole, melioidosis, 309
Sulfasalazine (SSZ)
for musculoskeletal disease, 1011, 1011b
prophylactic, 116b
Sulindac, 831
Sulphonamides
mechanism of action, 113b
in pregnancy, 117
Sulphonylureas
effect of hepatic impairment, 32b
effect of renal insufciency, 32b
Sulpiride, 1169
Sumatriptan, for migraine, 1150
Sunburn, 1074f
SUNCT, 1151, 1151b
Sunower cataract, 1229f
Sunitinib, 607
Sunlight, sensitivity to, 1040b
Sunscreens, 1075–1076
photosensitivity, 1074b
Supercial bursitis, 1007b
Superior vena cava, 388f
Superior vena cava obstruction (SVCO), 128
cancer and, 141, 141b, 141f
Superior vena cava syndrome, 443
Supported self-management, for pain, 162
Suppurative pneumonia, 516–517, 517b
Supranuclear palsy, progressive, 1168
Supraventricular tachycardia, 415, 416f
Suramin, for trypanosomiasis, 124
Surfactant, 482
Surgery
for acromegaly, 698
for brain tumours, 1184
for cholecystitis, 916
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 508
for epilepsy, 1157
gastrointestinal
achalasia, 811
haemorrhage, 799
prophylactic, 116b
for lung cancer, 531
for musculoskeletal disease, 1008–1009, 
1009b
osteoarthritis, 1018
osteoporosis, 1053
rheumatoid arthritis, 1031
for Parkinson’s disease, 1168
for primary hyperparathyroidism, 678
for prolactinoma, 697
for psychiatric disorders, 1245
Surrogate endpoints, 35
Suxamethonium, pharmacokinetics, 20b
Swallowing, difculty in. See Dysphagia
Swan neck deformity of ngers, 1029f
Swan-Ganz catheter, 210–211, 211f
Sweat glands, 1066–1067
Sweating, excessive, 263b
Sydenham’s chorea, 452
Symmetrical polyarthritis, 1036
Sympathetic nervous system, sodium 
transport regulation in, 619
Sympathetic pathways, 788–789
Synaptic transmission, 1123
Syncope, 184–186, 398
clinical assessment of, 185–186
congenital heart disease and, 467
differential diagnosis of, 185f
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 797
heat, 254b
initial investigations of, 186
presentation of, 184–186
seizures versus, 186b
Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH 
(SIADH), 624b
Syndrome X, 427
Synergistic gangrene, 272, 272b
Synovectomy, 1009b
Synovial uid, 995, 996f
Synovial joints, 994–995
structure of, 995f
Synovial membrane, 995
Synovitis, pigmented villonodular, 1062
Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist, 
misuse of, 230
Syphilis, 302, 377–379
acquired, 377–378
benign tertiary, 377–378
cardiovascular, 377
classication of, 378b
congenital, 378–379, 378b
early, 377
investigations of, 378
late, 377–378
latent, 377
management of, 378–379
neurosyphilis, 378, 1178–1179, 1179b
in pregnancy, 280b, 378–379
primary, 377, 377f
secondary, 377
rash in, 1071b
serological tests for, 378b
treatment reactions of, 379
Syringomyelia, 1140
Systemic anti-cancer therapy, 146–148
Systemic disease, 801
Systemic glucocorticoids, for musculoskeletal 
disease, 1012
Systemic inammatory response, 198–201. 
See also Sepsis
initiation of, 199
propagation of, 199
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
1038–1044
classication of, criteria for, 1040b
clinical features of, 1038–1040
investigations of, 1040
management of, 1040
pathophysiology of, 1038
pregnancy and, 1275, 1275b
respiratory involvement in, 539
Systemic sclerosis (SScl), 584, 1040–1042, 
1041f, 1112
pregnancy and, 1274–1275, 1275b
respiratory involvement in, 539
Systemic vasculitis, 584, 1220b
Systolic dysfunction, 394
Systolic murmurs, 400, 402b
T
T lymphocytes (T cells), 66, 68f, 927
CD4+, 67
CD8+, 66–67
deciency in, 71b
primary, 75, 76f
Tachycardia, 195
assessment and management of, 195
pathophysiology of, 195
sinus, 409, 409b
supraventricular, 415, 416f
ventricular, 417–418, 417b, 417f, 418f
poisoning, 225b
Tachyphylaxis, 16
Tachypnoea, 193–194, 194f
assessment and management of, 193, 
194f
pathophysiology of, 193–194
Tacrolimus, nephrotoxicity, 599b
Taenia asiatica, 341
Taenia echinococcus, 342
Taenia saginata, 341
Taenia solium, 341, 341f
Takayasu arteritis, 1045
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, 475, 475f
Talaromyces marneffei infection, 346
Tamm-Horsfall protein, 569
Tamoxifen
desmoid tumours, 831
gynaecomastia, 672
Tamponade
balloon, for variceal bleeding, 883, 884f
cardiac, 391
Tamsulosin, 610
Tandem repeat mutations, 41, 43b
Tangent/Goldmann kinetic perimetry, 1222
Tangier disease, 639, 639b
Tanner staging, 1284, 1286f
Tapeworms, 340–342
TB. See Tuberculosis
TBG. See Thyroxine-binding globulin
TBW. See Total body water
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
99mTc-sestamibi scintigraphy, for primary 
hyperparathyroidism, 678, 678f
Team communication, effective, for clinical 
decision-making, 9, 10b
Teenagers, adherence in, 1287–1288
Teichopsia, 1145
Teicoplanin, 114b, 120
Telangiectasia
denition of, 1078–1079
hereditary haemorrhagic, 980
Telomerase, 131
Telomeres, 1298b
Telophase, 41
Temperature, 90
body, 252
cold injury and, 253–254
extremes of, 252–256
heat-related illness and, 254–256, 254b
hypothermia and, 253, 253f
thermoregulation and, 252, 252b, 252f
Temporal coning, 1182, 1182f
Temporal lobes, 1124
clinical manifestations of visual eld loss, 
1225b
functions of, 1124b
Temporary pacemakers, for arrhythmias, 
422, 422f
Tendinitis
adductor, 1006b
bicipital, 1005b, 1005f
Tendon, xanthomas, 639
Tendon reexes, root values of, 1121b
Tendon repairs and transfers, 1009b
Tenecteplase (TNK), 438
Tennis elbow, 1006b
Tenofovir, 116b, 366b
for hepatitis B, 888
Tension-type headache, 1149–1152
Teratogen, 22
Terbinane, 122, 122b
chromoblastomycosis, 344
sporotrichosis, 344
Teriunomide, 1163b
Teriparatide, for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1052
Terlipressin, for variceal bleeding, 883b
Terminal illness. See Palliative care
Terrorism. See Bioterrorism
Testicular tumours, 611
Testis
epididymo-orchitis, 284
undescended, 669
Testosterone
for delayed puberty, 669
puberty and, 1284
reference range of, 1311b
Tetanus, 102b, 1180
prevention of, 1180
treatment of, 1180b
Tetany, 677
Tetrabenazine, 1169
Tetracycline(s), 114b, 120
acne, 1095
adverse effects of, 120
bartonellosis, 319
brucellosis, 303
cholera, 312
drug interactions, 23b
mechanism of action, 113b
pharmacokinetics of, 120
plague, 307
in pregnancy, 117
pyoderma gangrenosum, 1111
relapsing fever, 305
rickettsial fevers, 318
timing, 31b
trachoma, 319
tropical sprue, 821
Tetralogy of Fallot, 471–472, 471f
Tetrodotoxin poisoning, 237
Th1 (T helper) cells, 67
Th2 cells, 67
Th17 cells, 67
Thalamus, 1126
Thalassaemias, 959–960, 962
alpha, 962
beta, 962
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
Thalidomide, sarcoidosis, 538
T-helper lymphocytes, HIV infection/AIDS 
and, 354
Theophylline
asthma, 1271
plasma concentration, 35b
poisoning, 225b, 229b
Therapeutic approach, 29, 29b
Therapeutic drug monitoring, 115–116
Therapeutic efcacy, 14
Therapeutic goal, 29
Therapeutic index, 15f, 16
Thermodilution, for measurement, of cardiac 
output, 396
Thermoregulation, 252, 252b, 252f
Thiabendazole, 125
Thiamin (vitamin B1), 776
Thiazides
adverse effects, 622b
for hypertension, 448
for hypervolaemia, 622, 622b
and hyponatraemia, 624b
Thienobenzodiazepines, 1252b
Thin glomerular basement membrane disease, 
578
Thiopurines, 842
Thioxanthenes, 1252b
3rd nerve palsy, 1148b
Thirst
diabetes insipidus, 699
water homeostasis, 623
Stroke (Continued)

[[p1425]]
1354     INDEX
Thomsen’s disease, 1198b
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis, 555
Thoracic outlet syndrome, 1194b
Thoracoscopy, 487
Thorax, examination of, in respiratory system, 
480
Thought
assessment of, 1237
passivity of, 1251
Threadworm (Enterobius vermicularis), 125
Thrombin, 928f
Thromboangiitis obliterans, 442
Thrombocythaemia, essential, 980
Thrombocytopenia, 938, 938b, 981
HIV-related, 364
pregnancy and, 1278–1279, 1278b
Thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), pregnancy 
and, 1279
Thrombocytosis, 938–939, 939b
Thromboembolism
atrial brillation and, 414–415, 415b
in cancer patients, 142–143
heart failure causing, 405
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
venous, 985–986
causes and consequences of, 986f
factors predisposing to, 985b
management of, 985–986
pregnancy and, 1279, 1279b–1281b
prophylaxis of, 986, 987b
Thrombolytic therapy
for acute coronary syndrome, 438, 438b
for pulmonary embolism, 548
Thrombophilia, 986–989
acquired, 986–989
investigation of, 932b
ophthalmic features of, 1218b
testing in, indications for, 932b
Thromboprophylaxis, in intensive care, 214
Thrombosed prolapsed haemorrhoids, 834f
Thrombosis
deep vein
investigation of, 188, 189f
pregnancy and, 1279
presentation of, 188
pre-test probability of, 189b
in old age, 982b
Thrombospondin (TSP)-1, 132
Thrombotic disorders, 931–932, 932b, 
985–989
Thrombotic microangiopathies, 582–583, 582b
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), 
563, 583, 988
Thrush, 343–344
oral, 805
Thymectomy, myasthenia gravis, 1196b
Thymine, 38
Thymus, 65
Thyroglobulin (Tg), 651–652, 653f
as tumour markers, 136b
Thyroid autoantibodies, 655b
Thyroid carcinoma, ophthalmic features of, 
1219b
Thyroid disease
autoimmune, 657b, 660–663
classication of, 652b
clinical features of, 655b
congenital, 667
investigations of, 651–652
iodine-associated, 663–664
during pregnancy, 658b, 1273
hyperthyroidism as, 1273
hypothyroidism as, 1273
iodine deciency as, 1273
post-partum thyroiditis as, 1273
presenting problems of, 652–660
Thyroid function tests
asymptomatic abnormal, 659
hypothyroidism, 654b
interpretation of, 654b
thyrotoxicosis, 654b
Thyroid gland, 651–667
enlargement of, 659–660, 659b
examination of, 649b
functional anatomy, physiology and 
investigations of, 651–652, 653f, 654b
in old age, 658b
scintigraphy, 656f, 660
ultrasound, 660
Thyroid hormone, 652, 653f
in bone remodelling, 994b
replacement, for hypopituitarism, 695
resistance, 667
Thyroid lump or swelling, 659–660,  
659b
Thyroid neoplasia, 665–667, 665b
Thyroid nodule, solitary, 660
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies, 657
Thyroid storm, 654–655
Thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s, 663
post-partum, pregnancy and, 1273
Riedel’s, 666
subacute (de Quervain’s), 663
transient, 663, 663f
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH;thyrotrophin), 652
and free T4
relationship of, 652, 653f
receptor antibodies (TRAb), 660
reference range of, 1311b
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins, 660
Thyrotoxic crisis, 654–655
Thyrotoxicosis, 652–655
in adolescence, 662, 662b
amiodarone and, 654b, 656f, 664
atrial brillation in, 654
causes of, 654b
clinical assessment of, 652–653, 655b
differential diagnosis of, 656f
factitious, 653–654
goitre and, 652–653, 654b
Graves’ disease and, 652–653, 654b, 
660–663, 661f
management of, 661–662, 661b
investigations of, 653–654, 655b, 656b
iodide-induced, 654b
laboratory abnormalities, 656b
low-uptake, 653–654
management of, 654–655
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
in pregnancy, 658b, 662
subclinical, 654, 654b, 659
T4:T3 ratio in, 653–654
toxic adenoma in, 656f, 665
type I, 664
Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone (TRH), 651f, 
652
Thyroxine (T4), 651f, 652, 653f
reference range of, 1311b
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and, 
relationship of, 652, 653f
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), 652
Tiagabine, 1157b
Tibial compartment syndrome, anterior, 
1060–1063
Tibolone, for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1053
Tic douloureux, 1151
Ticarcillin, 117b
Tick-borne diseases, 304b
babesiosis, 323–324
rickettsial fevers, 316
tularaemia, 308
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 288
Tick-borne encephalitis virus, 299
Tick-borne relapsing fever, 304b, 305
Tics, 1143
Tidal volume (TV), pregnancy and, 1267
Tietze’s syndrome, 179b
Tigecycline, 114b, 120
Tin oxide, 543b
Tinea capitis, 1092–1093, 1092f
Tinea corporis, 1092
rash in, 1071b
Tinea cruris, 1092, 1092f
Tinea incognito, 1092
Tinea pedis, 1092
Tinidazole, 332, 822
Tiroban, 438, 927
Tissue biopsy, in musculoskeletal disease, 
999–1000
Tissue plasminogen activator, 391
TNF inhibitors, pregnancy and, 1271–1272
TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome, 
76–77
TNF receptor-associated proteins (TRAPs),  
62
TNFRSF1A gene, TNF receptor-associated 
periodic syndrome and, 76–77
TNM classication, 135b
Tobramycin
cystic brosis, 512b
dosing interval, 119f
Tocilizumab, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1013, 1013b
α-Tocopherol. See Vitamin E
Tofacitinib
for inammatory bowel disease, 843b
for musculoskeletal disease, 1011b
Tolcapone, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Tolerance, 16
Toll-like receptors, 61
Tolterodine, 1306f
Tongue, strawberry, 301, 302f
Tonic seizures, 1154
Tonic-clonic seizures, 1154, 1154b
Tonsillar coning, 1182, 1183f
Tonsillitis, 286
membranous, 313b
streptococcal, 301, 301b
Tonsils, 65, 922f
Tophi, 1020f
Topical administration, 17
Topical agents, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1010
Topical analgesics, for pain, 163
Topoisomerase II inhibitors, 946b
Torsades de pointes, 418–419, 418b, 418f
Torticollis, 1005b, 1169b, 1170
Total body water (TBW), 617
Total lung capacity, 489b
Total parenteral nutrition, candidiasis, 345
Total thyroidectomy, for medullary carcinoma, 
666
Tourette’s syndrome, 1143
Toxic adenoma, 656f, 665
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 1105, 1105b, 
1105f, 1116b
Toxic megacolon, 839
Toxic pustuloderma, drug-induced, 1116b
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), 1089
staphylococcal, 301, 301f
streptococcal, 263, 302
Toxins
bacterial, 1180–1181
food-related poisoning, 236–237
ciguatera poisoning, 236
paralytic shellsh poisoning, 236–237
scombrotoxic sh poisoning, 237
gastrointestinal decontamination for, 
223–224
plant, 237, 237b
venom, 242, 242b
Toxocara canis, 278b
Toxocariasis, 278b
Toxoplasma gondii, 325–326
life cycle of, 325f
Toxoplasmosis, 325–326
clinical features of, 326, 326f
congenital, 326
investigations of, 326
management of, 326
in pregnancy, 280b
Trace elements, absorption, 786
Tracheal disorders, 553
Tracheal obstruction, 553
Tracheo-oesophageal stula, 553
Tracheostomy, in intensive care, 214, 214b
Trachoma, 319, 319f
Trachyonychia, 1111
Tranexamic acid, 492, 526
Tranquillisers, effect of old age, 32b
Transarterial chemoembolisation, for 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 903
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation, 462, 
463f
Transcription, of DNA, 38–39
Transcription factors, 39
Transdermal administration, 17
Transdermal androgen replacement therapy, 
671b
Transferrin, 1314b
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β1), 
863f
Transfusion medicine
haematology and, 921
key points in, 943b
Transfusion-transmitted infection, 942
Transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 1208
causing sensory loss, 1140
causing visual loss, 1145
Transient thyroiditis, 663, 663f
Transition medicine, adolescent and, 1281
clinical assessment in, 1286–1287
features of, 1287b
clinical presentations in, 1289–1293
diabetes and, 1292
functional anatomy and physiology in, 
1284–1286
cognitive and behavioural changes in, 
1284–1286
endocrine changes in, 1284, 1285f
physical changes in, 1284
gastrointestinal disease and, 1292–1293
inammatory bowel disease and, 
1292–1293
investigations in, 1286, 1287b
neurological disease and, 1290
cerebral palsy in, 1290
epilepsy in, 1290
muscular dystrophy in, 1290
oncology and, 1291
organ transplantation and, 1292
presenting problems in, 1287–1289
adherence as, 1287–1288
high-risk behaviour as, 1288–1289
unplanned pregnancy as, 1289
renal disease and, 1291–1292
respiratory disease and, 1290–1291
cystic brosis in, 1290–1291
rheumatology and bone disease and,  
1293
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis 
in, 1293
hypophosphataemic rickets in, 1293
juvenile idiopathic arthritis in, 1293
osteogenesis imperfecta in, 1293
transition from paediatric to adult health 
services in, 1282–1284
principles of prescribing during, 1283, 
1283b
readiness for, key features in, 1283b
timing of, 1283–1284, 1284f
transition referral letter in, 1287
Transition planning
effectiveness of, 1282–1284
general principles of, 1282–1283, 1282f
impact of, on outcome in diabetes, 1292b
reasons to consider, 1282f
systematic approach to, 1283
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent 
shunt (TIPSS)
for ascites, 877
for variceal bleeding, 883, 884f
Translation, 39–40
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE), 
395
Transplantation
cardiac, 408
graft rejection and, 84–85
investigations in, 85
haematopoietic stem cell, 945–947
for acute leukaemia, 967
allogeneic, 945, 946b
autologous, 945–946
fever after, 270
infections during recovery from, 946b
immunosuppression in
complications of, 85
drugs used in, 85b
of kidney, 596–597
of liver, 911–912
for alcoholic liver disease, 895
complications of, 912
for hepatitis B, 888
for hepatocellular carcinoma, 901–904, 
902f
indications and contraindications for, 
911–912, 911b, 911f
prognosis for, 912
lungs, 499, 500b
organ donation and, 84–85
pre-implantation testing in, 85
renal, 596–597
recipients of, pregnancy and, 1277
transition medicine and, 1292
transplant rejection and, 84–85
classication of, 84b
Transportation, for envenomed patient, 245
Transposition of great arteries, 467b
Transrectal ultrasound scan (TRUS) of 
prostate, 609–610
Transverse myelitis, 1164
Tranylcypromine, 1253b
TRAPS. See TNF receptor-associated periodic 
syndrome
Trastuzumab, 147
Trauma
head, 1187
nails, 1110–1111
Transition medicine, adolescent and 
(Continued)

[[p1426]]
INDEX    1355
Travellers
fever in, 275b, 276b, 277f
health needs, 275b
incubation times and illnesses, 276b
rash, 278b
Traveller’s diarrhoea, 277b
Treadmill, for exercise electrocardiography, 
393
Treatment-related toxicities, 145
Trefoil factor family (TFF) peptides, 785
T-regulatory cells (T regs), 67
Trematodes, 338–340
Tremor, 1141, 1169–1170
causes and characteristics of, 1142b
drug-induced, 1169b
dystonic, 1142b
essential, 1142b, 1169
functional, 1142b
intention, 1126
parkinsonism causing, 1142b
resting, 1139
Trench fever, 318
Trephine biopsy, 930, 932f
Treponema pallidum, 114b, 375
in pregnancy, 372b
Treponema pertenue, 302
Treponema vincentii, 302
Treponemal (specic) antibody tests, 378
Treponematoses, 302. See also Syphilis
endemic, 302
Triamcinolone, 805
Triamterene, 622
Triazoles, 122, 122b
Triceps skinfold thickness, 757f
Trichiasis, 319
Trichinella spiralis, 337
Trichinellosis, 337–338
Trichinosis, 337–338
Trichomonas vaginalis, 372
Trichomoniasis, genital, 374
Trichophyton rubrum, 1092
Trichophyton verrucosum, 1092
Trichuris trichiura (whipworm), 334
Triclabendazole, 341b
Tricuspid regurgitation, 461, 461b
Tricuspid stenosis, 460–461
Tricuspid valve, disease of, 460–461
Tricyclic antidepressants, 1253–1254, 1253b
for neuropathic pain, 170b
for pain, 163b
poisoning from, 226–227, 226b, 227f
Trigeminal (5th cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Trigeminal neuralgia, 1137, 1151
Trigger nger, 1062
Triglycerides
measurement, 637
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Trihexyphenidyl, for Parkinson’s disease, 1167
Triiodothyronine (T3), 651f, 653f
reference range of, 1311b
Trimethoprim
acne vulgaris, 1095
brucellosis, 304b
mechanism of action, 113b
melioidosis, 309
in pregnancy, 117
urinary tract infection, 600–601
Triple X syndrome, 44b
Triptans, 17, 1150
Trismus, 1180
Trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome), 44b
Trisomy 18. See Edwards’ syndrome
Trisomy 21. See Down’s syndrome
Trochanteric bursitis, 1006b
Trochlear (4th cranial) nerve, tests of,  
1121b
Troisier’s sign, 818
Tropheryma whipplei, 101f, 104, 822
Tropical diseases
diarrhoea, 275–276
eosinophilia, 276–277
fever, 275
skin, 277–278
Tropical fever, 275
causes of, 276b
clinical assessment of, 275, 276b
history taking in, 275b
investigations of, 275, 277b
management of, 275, 277f
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, 540
Tropical sprue, 821
Tropical ulcer, 302, 302b
Tropomyosin, 389–390
Troponins
cardiac, 393
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Trousseau’s sign, 633
Truncus arteriosus, 466–467
Trunk, examination of, in musculoskeletal 
system, 990–992
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense infection, 
incubation period of, 108b
Trypanosomiasis
African (sleeping sickness), 324–325, 324f
American (Chagas’ disease), 325
drugs for, 124
Trypsin, 786
Trypsinogen, 788b
Tryptamines, misuse of, 231
Tryptase, 1312b
Tube drainage, intercostal, 554
Tuberculin skin test, 523, 524f
Tuberculoma, 363
Tuberculosis (TB), 314, 518–525, 602, 
1026–1027, 1027f
bone and joint disease in, 520–521
central nervous system disease in, 520
control and prevention of, 523–525
diagnosis of, 522b
epidemiology of, 518–525, 518f
gastrointestinal, 520, 521f
genitourinary disease in, 521
granulomas in, 69
HIV-related
prevention of, 365
therapy for, 366, 366b
incubation period, 108b
investigations of, 521–522, 521f, 522f
lymphadenitis and, 519–520
management of, 522–523, 522b, 523b
miliary, 519
ophthalmic features of, 1219b
pathology and pathogenesis of, 518–519, 
518f
pericardial disease in, 520
pregnancy and, 1271
prognosis for, 525
pulmonary
clinical presentations of, 520b
post-primary, 519, 520b
primary, 519, 519b, 519f, 520b
risk of, factors increasing, 519b
Tuberculous granuloma, 518f
Tuberculous meningitis, 1174, 1174b
HIV-related, 363
Tuberculous pericarditis, 477
Tuberous sclerosis, 1114
Tubular function, isolated defects of, 578–579
Tubular obstruction, drug-induced, 599b
Tubulo-interstitial diseases, 576–577
inherited, 578, 579b
Tularaemia, 308–309
Tumbu y, African, 342
Tumour lysis syndrome, 635
cancer and, 142
Tumour markers, 136b, 137
Tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 62
Tumour suppressor genes, 49
Tumour-induced osteomalacia, 1056
Tumours
adrenal, management of, 684
bone, metastatic, 144
brain, 1183–1185, 1183b, 1183f
clinical features of, 1183–1185
investigations of, 1183, 1184f
management of, 1184–1185
metastatic, 143
prognosis of, 1185
of bronchus, 528–533
of gallbladder and bile duct, 917–918
benign, 919
gastroenteropancreatic neuro-endocrine, 
691, 691b, 692f
gastrointestinal stromal cell, 819
head and neck, 151, 151b
investigations of, 151
management of, 151
pathogenesis of, 151
immunology of, 85–86
of liver, 901–904
benign, 904
primary malignant, 901–904
secondary malignant, 904, 904f
of lungs, 528–533
metastatic, 143, 144f
primary, 528–532
secondary, 532
vascular, 546–550
of mediastinum, 532–533, 533b, 533f
neuro-endocrine, 532b, 691, 691b, 692f, 
825
of oesophagus, 809–810
benign, 809
of pancreas, 855–856
pituitary, 695–696, 1183
of respiratory system, 528–533
skin, 1082–1088
malignant, 1083–1087
pathogenesis of, 1082–1083
of small intestine, 825
of stomach, 817–819
of urinary tract, 606–608
urothelial, 607–608
Tunga penetrans, 342
Tungiasis, 342
Turbidimetry, 616b
Turcot syndrome, 831
Turner syndrome, 674, 675f
genetics of, 44b
Type A (‘augmented’) ADRs, 21
Type B (‘bizarre’) ADRs, 21
Type C (‘chronic/continuous’) ADRs, 21
Type D (‘delayed’) ADRs, 21
Type E (‘end-of-treatment’), 21
Typhoid fever, 308, 308b
Typhus fever
endemic, 317b, 318
epidemic, 317b, 318
incubation period, 108b
scrub typhus, 317–318
Tyrosine, 653f
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, in chronic myeloid 
leukaemia, 968b
U
UDCA. See Ursodeoxycholic acid
UIP. See Usual interstitial pneumonia
UK Faculty of Public Health, 88
UK NHS Pregnancy and Newborn Screening 
Programmes, 92f
Ulceration
aphthous, 805–806, 805b
of small intestine, 824, 824b
Ulcerative colitis
active, 842–843
cancer, 134b
childhood, 846
clinical features of, 837, 838b
complications, 839–840
Crohn’s disease versus, 836b
differential diagnosis, 839b
histology of, 837f
investigations, 840–841
management of, 841, 1293
medical, 844b
surgical, 845–846, 845b
medical therapy, 841–845, 841b
pathophysiology of, 836–837
pregnancy, 846
pseudopolyposis in, 837f
severe, 843–844
Ulcers
amoebic, 332
Buruli, 302–303
Chiclero, 330
dendritic, 290
duodenal, 812–816
gastric, 812–816
genital, 380
legs, 1076–1077
causes of, 1076b, 1076f
clinical assessment of, 1076–1077
due to arterial disease, 1077
due to neuropathy, 1077
due to vasculitis, 1077
due to venous disease, 1076–1077, 
1076f
investigations in, 1077
management of, 1077
leishmaniasis, 331f
oral, 1047f
peptic
complications of, 816
indications for, 815b
in old age, 814b
perforation, 816
prophylaxis for, in intensive care, 214
rodent, 1083
small intestine, 824, 824b
solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 834–835
tropical, 302
Ulnar nerve, entrapment, 1009b, 1193b
Ultraltration, 560, 617
failure, 597b
Ultrasound
for cancer, 134
Doppler. See Doppler ultrasound
echocardiography. See Echocardiography
endoanal, 791
endocrine disease
polycystic ovary, 674f
thyroid, 660
endoscopic, 792
for choledocholithiasis, 916f
for hepatobiliary disease, 868
of gastrointestinal tract, 790–791, 791f
oesophageal cancer, 811f
pancreatitis, 852
for hepatobiliary disease, 867–868
gallstones and, 866f
for musculoskeletal disease, 996–997
synovitis, 997f
for nervous system, 1130b
renal, 564, 565f
for renal artery stenosis, 581
for respiratory disease, 486
for tachypnoea, 193, 194f
of thyroid gland, 660
Ultraviolet radiation
photosensitivity, 1074–1076
skin cancer, 134b
ultraviolet A, 1079–1080
Wood’s light, 1068
Undened primary origin (MUO), metastatic 
malignant disease of, 139
Under-nutrition, 780–781
articial nutrition at the end of life, 772
dementia, nutrition and, 772–773
in hospital, 768–771, 769b, 769f
intestinal failure (‘short bowel syndrome’), 
771–772
starvation and famine, 766–768, 767b, 
768b
Undifferentiated autoimmune connective tissue 
disease, 1043
Unilateral leg swelling, 188–189, 188b
clinical assessment of, 188
initial investigations of, 188, 189b
presentation of, 188–189, 188b
Unmodied (‘soluble’ or ‘regular’) short-acting 
insulin, 738
Upper airway
defences, 483–484
disease of, 550–553
Upper respiratory tract infection, 512
Uracil, 39
Uraemia. See also Renal failure
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 563
Urate, reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
Urate-lowering drugs, indications for, 1021b
Urea, 617b
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1310b
Urea breath test, 795b
Urea cycle, disorders of, 643
Ureidopenicillins, 117
Ureterocele, 604
Ureteropyelogram, retrograde, 607
Ureterovaginal stula, 608
Ureters, 560–561
colic, 602–603
diseases of, 604–606
ectopic, 604
megaureter, 605
obstruction, 605
Urethral discharge, 372–373
Urethral syndrome, 600
Urethritis
chlamydial, 372
gonococcal, 372, 373f
non-specic, 372
subclinical, 373b
Urge incontinence, 608, 1148
in older people, 1306
Uric acid
crystals, 602b
metabolism of, 1019f
Tumours (Continued)
Ulcers (Continued)

[[p1427]]
1356     INDEX
pool, 1019f
reference values, urine, 1313b
Urinalysis
acute kidney injury, 586b
reference range, 1313b
Urinary diversion, 608
Urinary incontinence, 567, 608–609
older people, 608b, 1305–1306, 1306f
Urinary tract, 559f
calculi, 602
clinical examination of, 558–560, 559f
collecting system
diseases of, 604–606
imaging, 565f
congenital abnormalities of, 604–606, 605f
stones, removal of, 604f, 605b
tumours of, 606–608
Urinary tract disease
investigation of, 562–566
presenting problems in, 566–571
Urinary tract infection, 599–602
antibiotic regimens for, 601b
clinical features, 600
investigation of, 600b
management, 600–601
in old age, 600b
pathophysiology, 599–600
persistent or recurrent, 601, 601b
prophylaxis, 601b
risk factors for, 600b
vesico-ureteric reux, 600b
Urine
alkalinisation, 224
investigation of, 562–563
microscopy, 562, 564f
retention, acute, 610
volume, 566. See also Anuria; Oliguria
Urine output, decreased, 198
assessment of, 198
diagnosis and management of, 198
Urography, intravenous. See Intravenous 
urography
Urokinase, 132f
Urolithiasis, 602–604
Urology, 557
Urothelial tumours, 607–608
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), gallstones, 
915b
Urticaria, 1103–1105
causes of, 1104b
clinical features of, 1103–1105, 1104f
drug-induced, 1116b
investigations of, 1104
management of, 1104–1105
ophthalmic features of, 1220b
papular, 337
pathogenesis of, 1104f
solar, 1074b
Ustekinumab
for Crohn’s disease, 842
for inammatory bowel disease, 843b
for inammatory rheumatic disease, 1013, 
1013b
Usual interstitial pneumonia, 536f
UTI. See Urinary tract infection
Uveitis, 1227–1228
aetiology of, 1228b
brucellosis, 303f
HTLV-1, 299
immune recovery, 364
treatment, 306
Weil’s disease, 306
UVR. See Ultraviolet radiation
V
Vaccines/vaccination, 111–112, 112b.  
See also Immunisation
anthrax, 112b
BCG, 524–525
chickenpox, 282
cholera, 112b
diphtheria, 313
guidelines for, 112b
Haemophilus inuenzae type B, 112b
for hepatitis B, 889b
HIV, 368
for human papillomavirus, 382
inuenza, 285
Japanese encephalitis, 299
leprosy, 316
malaria, 323
MMR, 284
mumps, 284
plague, 307
pneumococcal pneumonia, 313
for poliomyelitis, 1177
primary antibody deciencies and, 75
for rabies, 1177
rubella, 280
for SARS-CoV-2, 266, 298b
tetanus, 1180
tick-borne encephalitis, 275b
for tuberculosis, 524–525
types of, 111–112
typhoid, 308
use of, 112, 112b
varicella zoster virus (VZV), 112b, 282, 
284b
yellow fever, 288
Vaccinia virus, 292
VAD. See Ventricular assist devices
Vagina, discharge, 374, 374b, 374f
Vaginosis, bacterial, 372, 374b, 374f
Vagotomy, complication of, in peptic ulcer, 
815–816
Vagus (10th cranial) nerve, tests of, 1121b
Valaciclovir
as anti-herpesvirus agent, 122, 123b
for herpes virus infection, genital, 381
Valganciclovir
for CMV infection, 269–270
herpesvirus infection, 123b
Valproate. See Sodium valproate
Valsartan
heart failure, 407b
hypertension, 448
myocardial infarction, 439
Valvular heart disease, 403
causes of, 451b
infective endocarditis, 462–465
prevention, 465
pregnancy and, 1275
rheumatic, 451–453
risks of non-cardiac surgery, 440, 440b
valve replacement, 462
Valvuloplasty
aortic, 458
mitral, 455
Vancomycin, 114b, 120
for cerebral abscess, 1178b
Clostridium difcile infection, 311
drug eruptions, 1116b
for infective endocarditis, 268
meningitis, 1173b
respiratory disease, 517
therapeutic monitoring, 35b
Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(VRSA), 300
Vandetanib, for medullary carcinoma, 666
Variable rate insulin infusion (VRII), 742b
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD), 
1181, 1181f
Variceal band ligation, 883b
Variceal bleeding, 878f, 879
cirrhosis, 879–881, 880f
management of, 882–884, 883b, 883f, 
884f
prevention of
primary, 882
secondary, 884
Variceal ligation, 793f
for variceal bleeding, 883
Varicella, pneumonia, 513b
Varicella zoster virus, 1176b
Varicella zoster virus (VZV), 282b
after HSCT, 946b
HIV infection, 364
immunisation, 112b, 284b
infection from, pregnancy and, 1271
management and prevention of, 282, 283b
in pneumonia, 513b
in pregnancy, 280b, 1271
stem cell transplantation, 946b
Varicella zoster virus immunoglobulin (VZIG), 
282, 284b
Varices
gastric, 878f
oesophageal, 879f
Varicose veins, 1076
Variegate porphyria, 645b
Variola, 291
Vascular dementia, 1247b
Vascular disease
atherosclerotic. See Atherosclerosis
diabetes, 441b
liver, 908–910
peripheral, 440–442
pulmonary, 546–550
pulmonary embolism, 546–549
pulmonary hypertension, 549–550, 
549b, 549f
renal, 580–583
Vascular endothelial growth factor, 132
Vascular malformations, jejunal bleeding, 793f
Vascular resistance
pulmonary, 402, 408, 469f
systemic, 390–391
Vasculitides, 539–540
Vasculitis, 1044–1047, 1044f, 1111
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, 
1044–1047, 1045f
cerebral, 1148b
cryoglobulinaemic, 1046
cutaneous, 511b
drug-induced, 1116b
leg ulcers due to, 1077
renal artery stenosis, 581
in rheumatoid arthritis, 1029
small-vessel, 583
systemic, 584, 1044b, 1045f
Vasoactive agents, actions of, 210b
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 790b
Vasodilatation, 210b
Vasodilators
for heart failure, 407
for hypertension, 449–450
myocardial infarction, 203b
valvular heart disease, 457
Vasomotor rhinitis, 550
Vaso-occlusive crisis, 960
Vasopressin. See also Antidiuretic hormone
for refractory hypotension, 200–201
Vasopressinase, pregnancy and, 1273
Vasopressors, 210
for variceal bleeding, 883b
VDRL. See Venereal Diseases Research 
Laboratory (VDRL) test
VDRR. See Vitamin D-resistant rickets
Vedolizumab, for inammatory bowel disease, 
843b
Velocardiofacial syndrome, 44b
Venae cavae, 388, 388f. See also Inferior vena 
cava; Superior vena cava
Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory 
(VDRL) test, 378
Venezuelan equine virus, 1176b
Venlafaxine, 1253b
Venom, 242, 242b
of animals, 244b, 245b, 246b
clinical effects of, 243
insect, allergy to, 81
local effects of, 243, 243b
scorpions, 244b, 245b
snakes, 242b, 244b, 245b
spiders, 245b
Venomous animals, 242–243
Venomous hymenopterans, envenomation 
of, 250
Venomous insects, envenomation of, 249–250
Venomous lepidopterans, envenomation 
of, 250
Venomous snakes
envenomation of, 248–249
geographical distribution of, 241f
Veno-occlusive disease, 910
Venous disease, leg ulcers due to, 1076–
1077, 1076f
Venous hypertension, 1076
Venous pulse
distinguishing arterial and, 387b
jugular, 387b
Venous thromboembolism/thrombosis, 
985–986
causes and consequences of, 986f
clinical features, 546–549, 547b
factors predisposing to, 985b
investigations of, 546–548, 547f, 548f
management of, 985–986
anticoagulants, 548
caval lters, 548
thrombolytic therapy, 548
pregnancy and, 548b, 1279, 1279b–1281b
prognosis, 548–549
prophylaxis of, 986, 987b
retinal vein, 447f
Wells score, 189b
Ventilation
airway pressure release, 208
continuous positive pressure, 207
intermittent positive pressure, 207–208
mechanical
ARDS, 202
asthma, 504b
critically ill patients, 212
envenomation, 248
setting, 207, 208f
non-invasive, 207, 509
‘open lung,’ 208
pressure support, progressive reduction 
in, 213–214
respiratory failure, 499
in respiratory system, 483
Ventilation-perfusion matching, 483
hypoxaemia and, 194
in old age, 484b
Ventricles, of heart, 393f
Ventricular aneurysm, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 435, 435f
Ventricular assist devices, 408
Ventricular contractility, reduced, 403b
Ventricular dysfunction, 402–403
Ventricular ectopic beats, 416–417, 417f
Ventricular brillation, 204f, 399f
cardiac arrest, 399
myocardial infarction, 433–434
Ventricular inow obstruction, 403b
Ventricular outow obstruction, 403b
Ventricular premature beats, 416–417, 417f
Ventricular remodelling, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 435, 435f
Ventricular rupture, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 435
Ventricular septal defect, 470–471, 471f
heart murmur, 402b
incidence, 467b
Ventricular septum rupture, in acute coronary 
syndrome, 434
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 420b,  
423
Ventricular tachycardia, 417–418, 417b, 
417f, 418f
poisoning, 225b
Ventricular volume overload, 403b
Ventriculitis, 1175
Ventriculography, left, 396
Verapamil
angina, 429–430, 430b, 438–439
aortic dissection, 445
arrhythmias, 414, 420b, 421
for cluster headache, 1151
hypertension, 448
tachyarrhythmias
atrial brillation, 414
atrial utter, 413
Verocytotoxigenic Escherichia coli, 311f
Verotoxin, 582
Verrucae, 1091
Verruga peruana, 318, 318b
Vertebral fracture, 1002b
Vertebroplasty, 1009b
Vertigo, 1143
benign paroxysmal positional, 1158,  
1159f
in older people, 1304
Very low-density lipoproteins, 636–637
Vesicle, denition of, 1065
Vesico-ureteric reux, 606, 606f
Vesicovaginal stula, 608
Vessel wall abnormalities, 980
Vestibular disorders, 1158–1159
Vestibular failure, acute, 1158–1159
Vestibular neuronitis, 1158
Vestibulitis, 373b
Vestibulocochlear (8th cranial) nerve, tests 
of, 1121b
Vibrio cholerae, 102b, 312
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 312
Vibrio vulnicus, 272
Villous atrophy, 820b
Vinca alkaloids, 946b
Vincristine
bronchial carcinoma, 531
leukaemia, 965b
VIP. See Vasoactive intestinal peptide
VIPoma, 691b
Viral arthritis, 1026
Viral encephalitis, 1175–1176, 1176b
Viral haemorrhagic fevers, 277f, 288–290, 
289b
Uric acid (Continued)
Vaccines/vaccination (Continued)
Vascular disease (Continued)

[[p1428]]
INDEX    1357
Viral hepatitis, 884–891. See also under 
individual hepatitis viruses
acute
clinical features of, 884–885
complications of, 885b
causes of, 884b
chronic, HIV-related, 360
features of, 885b
immunisation, 888b
investigations for, 885
management of, 885
pregnancy and, 1278
transmission, 886b
treatment, 123b
Viral infections, 279–299. See also specic 
infections/infectious diseases
antiviral agents, 122–124, 123b
arthritis, 1026
cancer and, 134b
gastrointestinal, 292
haemorrhagic fevers, 288–290, 289b
immune deciencies and, 71b
nervous system
encephalitis, 1175–1176, 1176b
meningitis, 1171–1172
with neurological involvement, 298–299
respiratory tract, 292–298
pneumonia, 284, 535b
upper, 512
with rheumatological involvement, 299
sexually transmitted, 380–383
of skin, 290–292, 1091–1092
systemic
with exanthem, 279–283
without exanthem, 283–290
TSEs, 1181
Viral load
hepatitis B, 886, 888f
HIV, 886
Viral meningitis, 1171–1172
Viral warts, 1091, 1091f
Virilisation, 672
Virions, HIV, 353–354
Virology
of hepatitis C, 889–890
skin, 1069
Viruses, 99–100
bioterrorism, 108
incubation period, 276b
life cycle, 99f
Visceral leishmaniasis, 327–329, 327f
clinical features of, 327
differential diagnosis of, 328
HIV co-infection, 328–329
investigations of, 327–328, 328f
management of, 328
Vision, 1127–1128, 1127f
double (diplopia), 1145, 1146f
loss, in older people, 1296
Visual acuity, diabetes mellitus, clinical 
examination of people with, 705b
Visual analogue scale, 161b
Visual decit, stroke and, 1205
Visual disorders, 1145–1146
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-
associated vasculitis, 1045f
Graves’ disease, 649b, 662–663, 662f
positive visual phenomena, 1145
Visual disturbance, 1145–1146
Visual evoked potential (VEP) recording, 1134f
Visual elds, confrontation for, 649b
Visual infusion phlebitis (VIP) score, 300b
Visual loss, 1145
Visual pathways, 1127–1128, 1127f
Visual phenomena, 1145
Visuo-spatial dysfunction, stroke and, 1205
Vital capacity (VC), 488f
forced, 484b, 487–488, 488f
Vitamin A (retinol), 773–775
deciency, 775f
Vitamin B1. See Thiamin
Vitamin B2. See Riboavin
Vitamin B3. See Niacin
Vitamin B6. See Pyridoxine
Vitamin B12, 953–954
absorption, 953
deciency, 1191b
causes of, 953–954
management of, 954
neurological consequences of, 953b
neurological ndings in, 953b
pregnancy, 952b
small bowel disease, 954
reference range of, 1314b
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid), 777
Vitamin D, 775
concentrations, seasonal changes in, 1054f
deciency, 1054–1055
older people, 1054–1055
reference range of, venous blood, 
1312b
metabolism of, 1054f
for osteoporosis, 1051b, 1052
osteoporosis prophylaxis, 1052b
reference range of, 1311b
reference range of, venous blood, 1312b
Vitamin D analogues, hypoparathyroidism, 679
Vitamin D-decient osteomalacia, biochemical 
abnormalities in, 998b
Vitamin deciency, in old age, 774b
Vitamin D-resistant rickets (VDRR), 1055–1056
Vitamin E, 776
Vitamin K, 776
antagonists, 948b
supplements, epilepsy in pregnancy, 1158b
Vitamins, 773–778, 774b, 775b. See also
specic vitamins
absorption of, 786
fat-soluble, 773–776, 774b
storage of, liver and, 865
water-soluble, 774b, 776–778
Vitiligo, 138b, 1108, 1108f
VLDL. See Very low-density lipoproteins
Voiding. See Micturition
Volatile substance, poisoning from, 231
Volume of distribution (Vd), 17, 18f
Vomiting, 272–274, 797
causes of, 797f
cyclical vomiting syndrome, 847
functional causes of, 847
palliative care, 171, 171f
peptic ulcer, 816
von Hippel-Lindau disease, 135b, 1185
von Willebrand disease (vWD), 984, 984b
Voriconazole, 122, 122b
aspergillosis, 527
candidiasis, 345
fusariosis, 345
mycetoma, 344
paracoccidioidomycosis, 347
VT. See Ventricular tachycardia
Vulva
chronic pain of, 375
herpetic ulceration of, 381f
schistosomal papilloma, 339
Vulvodynia, 373b
VUR. See Vesico-ureteric reux
W
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia, 976
Warfarin
adverse reactions of, 22b
for atrial brillation, 414
drug interaction of, 23b
indications for, 948b
for older people, 32b, 414b
pharmacodynamic, 23b
pharmacokinetic, 23b
poisoning, 235b
in pregnancy, 548b, 1275
pulmonary embolism, 548b
venous thromboembolism, 548b
Warfarin-like rodenticides, 235b
Warm autoimmune haemolysis, 958
Warts
anogenital, 382
seborrhoeic, 1087
viral, 1091, 1091f
Water
absorption and secretion of, 786, 787f
basic daily requirements of, 620b
depletion, 620. See also Dehydration
distribution of, 617, 617f
excess, 621b
homeostasis, 617, 623–627
reabsorption, 617
renal handling, 623f
restriction of, for ascites, 876
safe, for HIV-related exposure, 365
total body (TBW), 617
Water deprivation test, for diabetes insipidus, 
700b
‘Waterbrash,’ 806–807
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, 685b
Watery/dry eye, 1223
Weakness, 1138–1140, 1139b, 1139f
facial, 1140
ICU-acquired, 215
muscle, 1002–1003, 1003b
stroke and, 1205
Weal, denition of, 1103–1105
Weaning, from respiratory support, 213–214
Weight, and endocrine disease, 648f
Weight control, for musculoskeletal disease, 
1008
Weight gain. See Obesity
Weight loss, 801–803
after gastric resection, 816
anorexia nervosa and, 1257
cancer patients, 150
causes of, 803f
HIV-related, 356, 357f
investigations, 802–803
in palliative care, 171
physiological causes of, 801–803
Weight management, diabetes mellitus and, 
732
Weil’s disease, 305–306
Wells score, 189b
Wenckebach phenomenon, 411f
Wermer syndrome, 700b
Werner syndrome, 41
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 1249
prevention of, 1250
Wernicke’s aphasia, 1144f
Wernicke’s area, 1124
West Nile virus, 299, 1176b
Western blot, 105
Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT), 256, 
256b
Wheezing, asthma, 500
Whipple’s disease, 822–823, 822b
Whipple’s triad, 689–690, 690f
Whipworm (Trichuris trichiura), 334
White blood cells, 927
appearance of, 936f
count
acute fever without localising signs, 
277b
differential, 1314b
high, 935
low, 933–935
formation, 927
polymorphonuclear. See Neutrophils
reference values, 1314b
results of, interpreting, 936b
White eye, 1223–1224
White spirit, poisoning, 235b
Whiteheads, 1094
Whitlow, herpetic, 291f
WHO. See World Health Organization
Whole bowel irrigation, 224
Whole-exome sequencing, 53b
Whole-genome sequencing, 53b
Whooping cough, 512
antimicrobial prophylaxis, 116b
incubation period, 108b
periods of infectivity, 108b
Wickham’s striae, 1103
Wilderness medicine, 252, 252b
Williams’ syndrome, 44b
Wills, living, 1302
Wilm’s tumour, 135b
Wilson’s disease, 907–908, 1168
investigations, 908
Kayser-eischer rings and, 907
liver disease and, 907–908
liver function test (LFT) abnormality in,  
867b
‘Windkessel’ effect, 390–391
Withdrawal effects, 16–17, 16b
Wnt, in bone remodelling, 994b
Wolbachia spp., 335
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, 
415–416, 416f
Wood’s light, 1068
World Health Organization (WHO)
analgesic ladder, 168, 168f
classication of psychiatric disorders, 1236, 
1236b
ICD-10, 1236
Wound dressing, 1079, 1079b
Wound infections
staphylococcal, 300, 300f
tetanus, 1180
WPW syndrome. See Wolff-Parkinson-White 
(WPW) syndrome
Wrist
fracture, 1048f
pain, 1005–1006
Writer’s cramp, 1142
Wuchereria bancrofti infection, 278b, 335, 
335f
X
X chromosome, 38. See also X-linked
abnormalities. See individual conditions
inactivation, 47
Xa inhibitors, 415
Xanthelasma
cholestatic jaundice and, 872b
hyperlipidaemia and, 614f
Xanthomas, 1114
cholestatic jaundice and, 872b
hyperlipidaemia and, 614f
tendon, 639
Xanthomatosis, cerebrotendinous, 639b
Xeroderma pigmentosum, 135b, 1074b
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia, 74–75
X-linked inheritance, 46b, 47
X-rays
for acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
201–202, 201f
of body packers, 231f
cardiovascular system. See Chest 
radiography/X-ray
chest. See Chest radiography/X-ray
for chest pain, 180
for gastrointestinal disease, 789, 790f, 
791b
achalasia, 812f
contrast studies, 789–790
inammatory bowel disease, 839f, 841
hyperparathyroidism, 678
for musculoskeletal disease, 996, 996b
bone fractures, 1048f
bony metastases, 676
Charcot joint, 1061f
chondrocalcinosis, 1022f
osteoarthritis, 1016f, 1017f
osteomalacia, 1055f
osteoporosis, 1048f
Paget’s disease, 1057f
supraspinatus tendon calcication, 
1023f
of nervous system, 1130b
respiratory system. See Chest radiography/
X-ray
of skull, 1131
of spine, 1132f
Y
Y chromosome, 38
microdeletions of, 671
Yaws, 302, 302b
Yellow Card scheme, 22
Yellow fever, 287f, 288, 289b
incubation period of, 289b
vaccination, 288
Yersinia enterocolitica, 311
Yersinia pestis, 307
Yersiniosis, 311
Young syndrome, 484
Z
Zanamivir, 123, 123b, 284–285
Zero-order kinetics, 18
Zidovudine (ZVD)
adverse reactions of
anaemia, 364
neutropenia, 364, 936b
muscle pain/weakness from, 1003b
for onychomycosis, 359–360
Zika virus infection, 290, 1176b
in pregnancy, 280b
Zinc, 779, 779b
reference range of
urine, 1313b
venous blood, 1312b
Zinc phosphide poisoning, 234
Zoledronic acid
bone metastases, 144
for osteoporosis, 1051b
for Paget’s disease, 1057b
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 816–817
Zoonoses
transmission of, 107–108
viral haemorrhagic fevers, 288
Zoster sine herpete, 282
Weakness (Continued)
